ELDRIDGE, IOWA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-25, passed 11-3-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE A: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
1.   CITY CHARTER
      
2.   ADMINISTRATION OF CITY CODE
      
3.   CITY OFFICERS
      
4.   UTILITY BOARD
      
5.   PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
      
6.   COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD
      
7.   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
      
8.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
      
9.   CODE REVIEW BOARD
      
10.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
11.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
12.   BEER LICENSING
      
13.   CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
      
14.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
      
15.   MIDAMERICAN ENERGY GAS FRANCHISE
      
16.   HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
      
17.   TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
      
18.   CONTRACTOR LICENSE
      
19.   MOBILE FOOD UNITS
      
20.   CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 1: CITY CHARTER
Section
   
1.00   Form of government
   
2.00   Powers and duties
   
3.00   Number and term of Council
   
3.01   Change in representation
   
3.02   Effective date
   
3.03   Voting precincts
   
3.04   Effective date
   
4.00   Term of Mayor
   
5.00   Copies on file
§ 1.00 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City of Eldridge, Iowa is the Mayor-Council
form of government.
§ 2.00 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by this
Code, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
§ 2.01. The nomination process for the offices of Mayor and City Council shall
follow the procedure set forth in Iowa Code Chapter 45.1(8a). Elections for
these offices shall be governed by the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 376.6
(2).
§ 3.00 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five council members elected at large, elected for
terms of four years.
§ 3.01 CHANGE IN REPRESENTATION.
   The form of Council representation may be changed by petition and election
as per the provisions of Iowa Code § 372.13(11). The City Council shall
schedule a special election to occur within sixty days of receipt of a valid
petition signed by ten percent (10%) of the eligible electors who voted in the
last regular city election. The petition must conform to the provisions of Iowa
Code § 362.4.
§ 3.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   If a majority of the persons voting at the special election approves the
changed plan, it becomes effective at the beginning of the term following the
next regular city election. If a majority does not approve the changed plan,
the Council shall not submit another proposal to change a plan to the voters
within the next two years.
§ 3.03 VOTING PRECINCTS.
   There shall be established two voting precincts in the city. The voting
precincts shall be described as follows.
Precinct 1
Beginning at the center line of the intersection of North Buttermilk Road and
West Donahue Street, then east along the center line of West Donahue Street to
the center line of the intersection of West Donahue Street and Dammann Drive,
then south and east along the center line of Dammann Drive until Dammann Drive
becomes West Davenport Street, then east along the center line of West
Davenport Street to the center line of the intersection of West Davenport
Street and North Fifth Street, then south along the center line of North Fifth
Street to the center line of the intersection of North Fifth Street and West
LeClaire Road, then east along the center line of West LeClaire Road to the
center line of the intersection of West LeClaire Road and South First Street,
then south along the center line of South First Street to the center line of
the intersection of South First Street and East Lincoln Road, then east along
the center line of East Lincoln Road to the east city limit boundary line, then
north along the east city limit boundary line to the north city limit boundary
line, the west along the north city limit boundary line approximately 2,648.25
feet west of the center line of North Buttermilk Road to a point on the west
city limit line, then south along the west city limit boundary line
approximately 1,330.93 feet to a point on the west city limit boundary line,
then east approximately 2,651.51 feet along the west city limit boundary line
to the center line of North Buttermilk Road, then south along the center line
of North Buttermilk Road to the point of beginning.
Precinct 2.
Beginning at the center line of the intersection of North Buttermilk Road and
West Donahue Street, then east along the center line of West Donahue Street to
the center line of the intersection of West Donahue Street and Dammann Drive,
then south and east along the center line of Dammann Drive until Dammann Drive
becomes West Davenport Street, then east along the center line of West
Davenport Street to the center line of the intersection of West Davenport
Street and North Fifth Street, then south along the center line of North Fifth
Street to the center line of the intersection of North Fifth Street and West
LeClaire Road, then east along the center line of West LeClaire Road to the
center line of the intersection of West LeClaire Road and South First Street,
then south along the center line of South First Street to the center line of
the intersection of South First Street and East Lincoln Road, then east along
the center line of East Lincoln Road to the east city limit boundary line, then
south along the east city limit boundary line to the south city limit boundary
line, then west along the south city limit boundary line to the west city limit
boundary line, then north along the west city limit boundary line to the point
of beginning.
(Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 3.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These precincts shall become effective January 15, 2022.
(Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 4.00 TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
§ 5.00 COPIES ON FILE.
   The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of this Charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
Secretary of the State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the Charter available
at the City Clerk’s office for public inspection.
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION OF CITY CODE
Section
   
1.00   Title
   
2.00   Repealer
   
3.00   Penalties
   
3.01   Misdemeanor
   
3.02   Municipal infraction
   
4.00   Conflicting provisions
   
5.00   Severability
   
6.00   Effective date
   
7.00   Gender
   
8.00   City officers
   
9.00   Terminology; law
   
10.00   References to Iowa Code
   
11.00   General appeal provisions
   
12.00   Amendments
Cross-reference:
   City officers, see
Title A, Chapter 3
   Misdemeanors, see
Title B, Chapter 6
   State criminal codes; adoption of, see
Title B, Chapter 2
§ 1.00 TITLE.
   The name of this code shall be the “Eldridge City Code” and all laws and
amendments which become effective after adoption of this code shall be compiled
as supplements to this code and, upon adoption, shall become part of this code.
§ 2.00 REPEALER.
   All prior ordinances or parts thereof are hereby repealed.
§ 3.00 PENALTIES.
§ 3.01 MISDEMEANOR.
   Unless otherwise provided therein, any person, firm or corporation violating
any of the provisions of this code shall have, upon conviction, committed a
simple misdemeanor, as specified in Iowa Code § 701.8, and shall be subject to
imprisonment for up to 30 days or to a fine of up to $500.
   (A)   Each act of violation and every day upon which violation occurs
constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by any of the provisions of this code shall not subject
such officer or employee to any penalties imposed herein for violation unless a
penalty is specifically imposed.
§ 3.02 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of this code of ordinances, or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under state law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor or a serious
misdemeanor, or if the violation is a simple misdemeanor under Iowa Code
Chapters 690 through 732, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty
as provided herein.
   (A)   Environmental violation.
      (1)   A municipal infraction which is a violation of Iowa Code Chapter
455B or of a standard established by the city in consultation with the State
Department of Natural Resources, or both, is classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this subsection regarding environmental
violations shall not be applicable until the city has offered to participate in
informal negotiations regarding the violation.
      (2)   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products or by a person engaged in such
industrial production or manufacturing in such discharge occurs from September
15 to January 15, shall not be deemed to be a municipal infraction.
   (B)   Penalties. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil
penalties:
      (1)   Standard civil penalties.
         (a)   1.   First offense: $750;
            2.   Second offense of the same chapter of city code by the same
defendant: $1,000; and
            3.   Subsequent offenses: $1,000.
         (b)   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist
constitutes a repeat offense.
      (2)   Special civil penalties.
         (a)   A municipal infraction arising from non-compliance, pretreatment
standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8, by an industrial use,
is punishable by a penalty, but not more than $1,000 for each violation exists
or continues.
         (b)   1.   A municipal infraction classified above as an environmental
violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000 for each
occurrence. However, such an environmental violation is not subject to such
penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
               a.   The violation results solely from conducting an initial
startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation;
               b.   The city is notified of the violation within 24 hours from
the time that the violation begins; and
               c.   The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight hours.
            2.   Each day that a violation exists or is permitted to exist
constitutes a repeat offense.
   (C)   Civil citations.
      (1)   Any officer authorized by the city to enforce this code of
ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal
infraction. The citation will, first, be served by personal service as provided
in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305 or, second, by certified mail addressed to the
defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested
or, third, by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure
1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.301 through
1.311.
      (2)   (a)   A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing
officer and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.
         (b)   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense
has been committed and shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name and address of the defendant;
            2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation;
            3.   The location and time of the infraction;
            4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both;
            5.   The manner, location and time in which the penalty must be
paid;
            6.   The time and place of court appearance; and
            7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   (D)   Alternative relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
chapter does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the
court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not
limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
   (E)   Criminal relief. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for a violation of the code of ordinances or
regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does
it preclude or limit the authority of the city to enforce the provisions of
this code of ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
   (F)   Repeat offenders. A person receiving three enforcement letters for
code violations from an authorized official for the city within a 12-month
period, abated or otherwise, shall have committed a municipal infraction, is
declared a repeat offender, and shall be subject to the standard civil
penalties as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-18-2019; Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 4.00 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If any sections of this code are in conflict with one another, the more
restrictive provision(s) shall apply.
§ 5.00 SEVERABILITY.
   If any chapter, section, provision or part of this code shall be judged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the code as a whole or any chapter, section, provision or part thereof not
judged invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 6.00 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code shall be in effect after its final passage, approval and
publication, as provided by law in Iowa Code Chapter 380.8.
§ 7.00 GENDER.
   All references contained in this code to masculine gender pronouns (he, his,
him) shall include the feminine gender.
§ 8.00 CITY OFFICERS.
   All references in this code to government officials or bodies (e.g., Clerk,
Council) are to those of the city, unless otherwise indicated by definition or
context.
§ 9.00 TERMINOLOGY; LAW.
   The term law, as used in this code, includes provisions of this code and
laws of the state (where applicable).
§ 10.00 REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE.
   References to the Iowa Code shall be to the 2024 code or supplement thereto.
§ 11.00 GENERAL APPEAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any order properly given by any officer of the city acting pursuant to
his or her authority is appealable by the party affected upon written notice to
the ordering officer. Said officer shall give written notice to the appealing
party of a time and place at which the party may appear before the Council for
hearing on the matter, and said notice shall list the specific reason(s) for
the order, penalty, denial of license and the like. At the Council meeting, the
officer shall submit a written report stating the reason(s) for his or her
decision and the Council, after fair hearing, may reverse, amend, remand or
uphold the officer’s decision. Upon commencement of a good-faith appeal, the
order (or penalty and the like) in question shall be suspended until the
Council affirms the order after hearing of the public health or safety is, in
the Council’s determination, endangered. The Council’s decision shall be final
and any further contest of the matter must be pursued through the legal
process.
   (B)   This provision is intended to apply to all chapters within this code
unless the provisions of any chapter are more restrictive upon the city’s
actions.
§ 12.00 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments to this code shall be accomplished in accordance with the
provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 380.
CHAPTER 3: CITY OFFICERS
Section
   
1.00   Mayor
   
2.00   Mayor Pro-Tem
   
3.00   City Council
   
4.00   City Administrator
   
5.00   Department supervisors
   
5.01   Responsibilities
   
5.02   Authority
   
5.03   Roles and expectations
   
6.00   Special provisions
   
7.00   Professional appointments
   
8.00   Appointment process
   
8.01   Effectiveness
 
   This chapter defines the general organization of the city, establishes
various positions and sets forth what is expected from each element of the
total city personnel picture. The role of the Mayor and the City Council, the
key city staff positions and various special appointments are all defined. In
addition to this general definition, other portions of the code prescribe
specific duties and responsibilities. The compensation of all employees and
appointed officers and boards shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of
the City Council.
§ 1.00 MAYOR.
   The Mayor is the chief executive officer of the city. He or she is elected
at large for a four-year term, presides over Council meetings, signs on behalf
of the city and makes sure that Council policies are executed. The compensation
of the Mayor shall be an annual salary as set from time to time by resolution
of the City Council, which shall be paid in semi-annual installments. Among his
or her responsibilities are:
§ 1.01. Facilitation of policy implementation – making sure that the Council’s
intentions are understood and that Council’s goals, objectives and policies are
carried out;
§ 1.02. Presides at Council meetings – making sure that issues are enunciated,
that all viewpoints are fully heard and helps the Council define and take
actions appropriate to the situation;
§ 1.03. Representative of the city to public groups, to other governmental
bodies and to the public at large;
§ 1.04. Directs the business of the Council, including establishing committees,
making key appointments (Chief of Police, Mayor Pro-Tem), proposing other
appointments to the Council and ensuring a sound plan of organization for the
city; and
§ 1.05. Assists the Council in the formulation of goals, policies and
objectives, making use of staff and public inputs as well as his or her own
views as to the needs for Council action.
§ 2.00 MAYOR PRO-TEM.
   The Mayor Pro-Tem is Vice President of the Council. When the Mayor is absent
or unable to act, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall perform the Mayor’s duties, except
that the Mayor Pro-Tem may not appoint, employ or discharge officers or
employees without the approval of the Council. Official actions of the Mayor
Pro-Tem when the Mayor is absent or unable to act are legal and binding to the
same extent as if done by the Mayor. The Mayor Pro-Tem retains all of the
powers of a Council member.
§ 3.00 CITY COUNCIL.
   The city has a five member Council elected at large for four-year staggered
terms. The Council is the body having ultimate responsibility for all of the
affairs of the city. Its specific duties include the definition of city
actions, steps to fund those actions (budgeting), approval of payments, the
exercise of fiscal and management control and as the arbiter of all matters
affecting the city. Each member of the City Council shall be compensated, in an
amount as set from time to time by resolution, for each Council meeting and
Committee of the whole attended, and shall be paid in semi-annual installments.
To fulfill these duties, the Council has the following roles and
responsibilities:
§ 3.01. Governing body - acts on all matters affecting the city;
§ 3.02. Legislative policy making body - develops and passes such ordinances
and resolutions as may be needed to direct and control activities within the
city;
§ 3.03. Develops and approves budgets, thereby appropriating funds for the work
the city is to do;
§ 3.04. Establishes goals and major performance objectives;
§ 3.05. Sets the “tone” of governmental quality and excellence;
§ 3.06. Assists the Mayor and city staff in the accomplishment of their roles,
i.e., works as a part of the overall team rather than just a system of checks
and balances;
§ 3.07. Monitors city performance and service levels;
§ 3.08. Acts as a buffer between the city and its citizens, educating the
public on complex issues and molding and interpreting public opinion; and
§ 3.09. Maintain a far-sighted attitude, recognizing the city is a continuing
entity.
§ 4.00 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Administrator is responsible for the overall direction of all city
activities. He or she develops plans to carry out Council intentions, organizes
the work of departments, develops the staff needed to do the work, sets
priorities and makes sure work is done to high standards of quality and
performance.
   (B)   The Administrator has staff responsibility for finance, planning,
engineering, personnel, public relations, engineering and social services as
well as operations. He or she coordinates the work of the City Attorney and
Engineer as well as that of staff. However, the Administrator is the agent of
the Council and Mayor in all that is done. These responsibilities are
extensions of those of the elected officials and as such are done in close
cooperation and coordination with those officials.
   (C)   The expectations of the Administrator include the following roles:
§ 4.01. Manager and director of city operations, working with the Department
heads;
§ 4.02. Implementor of Council’s policies and programs;
§ 4.03. Provider of feedback to Council regarding goals, programs and
operations;
§ 4.04. Developer of options with respect to problems, policies and programs;
§ 4.05. Sounding board for Council and Mayor;
§ 4.06. “Professional” budget and management systems developer;
§ 4.07. Assistant in clarifying and maintaining roles of Mayor, Council and
Administrator and demander of “excellence” from Council just as Council is a
demander of excellence from city staff;
§ 4.08. Innovator - provides new ideas for improvement of city’s operations and
productivity; and
§ 4.09. Developer and encourager of a working environment designed to achieve
the best results from the efforts of city employees.
§ 5.00 DEPARTMENT SUPERVISORS.
   The City Clerk, Chief of Police and Street Superintendent are considered as
department heads. As such, they have broad operating responsibilities within
their areas of concern. Section
5.02 defines their authority, §
5.01 defines those major responsibilities and § 5.03 deals with their roles and
relationships to other officers and to the city employees.
§ 5.01 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk. The City Clerk is responsible for the operation of
City Hall, collection of revenues, disbursements upon Council approval, proper
accounting for all funds, official records of city proceedings and the
execution of Council resolutions and directions regarding public notices, sales
of bonds and the like.
   (B)   The Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is in charge of the broad
area of public safety/public order. As such, he or she schedules and directs
uniformed officers, coordinates work with other law enforcement agencies, cares
for assigned equipment and enforces the laws of the city and the state.
   (C)   The Street Superintendent. The Street Superintendent is responsible
for the major functions of street maintenance, storm sewer and sanitary sewer
mains and supervises the work of city employees when they are performing work
in those areas. Included in this responsibility is operation of the city garage
and care of city equipment.
§ 5.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Authority. Department supervisors are granted broad authority to carry
out routine operations within the limitations imposed by the budget. Work items
which are not of a recurring nature shall be approved by the Council even when
an appropriation for such work exists.
   (B)   Exceptions. Department supervisors are granted the authority to
approve general engineering costs up to $5,000 for any project directly related
to daily operations or public facility improvement planning with the approval
of the City Administrator.
   (C)   Specific authority. In addition to this general authority, specific
authority is granted these individuals by other sections of this code through
the appointment of these individuals to positions or jobs enumerated in §
5.00 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-17, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 5.03 ROLES AND EXPECTATIONS.
   (A)   Each of these key staff positions is expected to fulfill the following
roles as these relate to the specific areas of responsibility.
   (B)   These include:
      (1)   Positive supervision of city employees - organization of work and
responsibility of the Department in such a way as to make maximum use of the
abilities of other city employees;
      (2)   Responsive, considerate attention to all contacts with city
citizens, including a willingness to assist the public in concerns which may
not be a part of the specific duties of the job;
      (3)   Direct association with the Mayor and Council in securing their
approval when needed and to make it easier for the elected officials to fulfill
their responsibilities;
      (4)   Close coordination with other staff members characterized by the
view toward what an individual department can contribute to the overall benefit
of the city;
      (5)   High performance expectations for the Department Head and for other
employees; and
      (6)   Carefully planned work to make sure resources are efficiently used
and work is done correctly.
§ 6.00 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The following are jobs which are appointments made by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. These appointments may be made of city
employees, members of the Council or Boards/Commissions or may be made of any
city resident.
   (B)   These appointments are:
      (1)   Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   Building Official/Building Inspector;
      (3)   Electrical Inspector;
      (4)   Plumbing Inspector;
      (5)   Heating and air conditioning inspector;
      (6)   Emergency management representative;
      (7)   City arborist; and
      (8)   Assistant/associate appointments to the above and to department
head positions.
§ 7.00 PROFESSIONAL APPOINTMENTS.
   The City Council shall appoint each year at the first meeting in January a
City Engineer, City Attorney and official depository, each of which shall be
fully qualified for such an appointment.
§ 8.00 APPOINTMENT PROCESS.
   In order to be eligible for a board or commission, an individual must reside
in the city and maintain residency within the city limits throughout his or her
term. Failure to reside in the city or maintain residency will result in
ineligibility or vacancy. Vacancies on the city’s various boards and
commissions shall be filled through the following process.
   (A)   The public shall be informed of the vacancy by published notice.
   (B)   Applicants will be given two weeks to submit their name to the City
Clerk for consideration.
   (C)   Applicants are required to reside in the city at the time of
application and maintain residency within the city limits throughout their
term.
   (D)   The Mayor will interview candidates.
   (E)   The Mayor will present a biography of the preferred candidate at
meeting of the committee of whole.
   (F)   The Council shall have the option of meeting the candidate.
   (G)   The Mayor will nominate the desired applicant for Council approval.
   (H)   The appointment process should be complete within a 30-day time
period.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 2-19-2024)
§ 8.01 EFFECTIVENESS.
   Effective upon passage of this chapter, the terms for the Park Board shall
expire on the last day of February instead of the last day of December. The
terms of all persons serving on the Park Board and Utility Board at the time of
passage of this chapter shall have their term extended two months to the last
day of February of the year following that year in which their term was set to
expire.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 2-19-2024)
CHAPTER 4: UTILITY BOARD
Section
   
1.00   Establishment and purpose
   
2.00   Method of appointment of the Board
   
2.01   Appointment
   
2.02   Electric and Water Utility Board
   
2.03   Chairperson
   
2.04   Annual report
   
2.05   Accounts
   
3.00   Administration
   
3.01   Establishing rules
   
3.02   Removal
   
3.03   Employees and officials ineligible
   
3.04   Secretary
   
3.05   Shared equipment cost
   
3.06   Compensation of employees
   
3.07   Compensation of Board
Cross-reference:
   Gas franchise, see
Title A, Chapter 15
   Public works provisions, see
Title C
§ 1.00 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is hereby created an administrative agency to be hereinafter
known as the City Electric and Water Utility Board.
   (B)   The purpose of the City Electric and Water Utility Board is to provide
for the orderly management of municipal utilities in the city.
   (C)   The management and control of the waterworks and the electric light
and power plant of the city shall be from the effective date of this code,
under the management and control of the Board.
§ 2.00 METHOD OF APPOINTMENT OF THE BOARD.
§ 2.01 APPOINTMENT.
   The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
§ 2.02 ELECTRIC AND WATER UTILITY BOARD.
   The City Electric and Water Utility Board shall have five members. The
appointments shall be on a staggered basis, and the terms shall be for six
years. The initial staggering shall be as follows.
   (A)   The term of the member serving until January 1, 2003 shall remain
unchanged.
   (B)   The term of the member appointed January 2, 2000 shall expire on
January 1, 2003.
   (C)   The term of the member appointed January 2, 2001 shall expire on
January 1, 2006.
   (D)   The term of the member appointed January 2, 2002 shall expire on
January 1, 2006.
   (E)   The initial term of the fifth member shall expire January 1, 2007.
§ 2.03 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Board shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over the Board
meetings. That term shall be established by the Board.
§ 2.04 ANNUAL REPORT.
   An annual report of all receipts and expenditures shall be made to the City
Council at the close of each fiscal year by the Board.
§ 2.05 ACCOUNTS.
   The Board shall establish a separate account or accounts for the purpose of
the municipal utilities under its jurisdiction. Money may be paid out of said
account only at the direction of a majority of the Board.
§ 3.00 ADMINISTRATION.
§ 3.01 ESTABLISHING RULES.
   The Electric and Water Utility Board shall establish such rules, bylaws and
procedures as are consistent with the Iowa Code.
§ 3.02 REMOVAL.
   Board members may be removed for cause by the Council upon written notice of
charges to that member and after public hearings.
§ 3.03 EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS INELIGIBLE.
   No city employee or official shall be eligible for Board membership.
Employees and elected officials shall remain ineligible for six months after
leaving city employment or leaving office.
§ 3.04 SECRETARY.
   The Board shall appoint or employ a secretary. If the Secretary is employed
and is someone other than a Board member, he or she shall have no vote. The
Board shall set the Secretary’s compensation.
§ 3.05 SHARED EQUIPMENT COST.
   The cost of shared equipment shall be allocated between the city and the
Utility Board according to proportional use.
§ 3.06 COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   The compensation of employees who work for both the city and the Utility
Board shall be set by resolution by the Board.
§ 3.07 COMPENSATION OF BOARD.
   The compensation of Board members shall be set by the City Council by
resolution.
CHAPTER 5: PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
Section
   
1.00   Establishment and purpose
   
2.00   Powers and responsibilities
   
3.00   Administration of Park and Recreation Board
   
3.01   Qualifications of members
   
3.02   Term of office
   
3.03   Chairperson
   
3.04   Removal of members
   
4.00   Meetings
   
5.00   Budget
   
6.00   Bonds
   
7.00   Accumulations of funds
   
8.00   Salaries
§ 1.00 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A park and recreation board for the city is hereby created. Its general
responsibilities shall be to advise the Council on the needed facilities to
provide open space such as parks, playgrounds and community facilities for
other forms of recreation. It shall plan and oversee city programs, and
encourage other programs for the leisure of the city’s residents. It shall
maintain and operate any such facilities under its control, keeping a budget,
hiring employees and purchasing necessary equipment.
§ 2.00 POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Park and Recreation Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 2.01. Promote community involvement and actively seek input in the planning,
operation and participation of the Parks and Recreation Board;
§ 2.02. Allow for an orderly growth, acquisition and development of the
physical and natural resources, and to utilize the natural characteristics of
the land, when evaluating its potential for Parks and Recreation purposes;
§ 2.03. More effectively coordinate the parks and recreation with other city
departments, organizations and schools to improve the overall service to the
community;
§ 2.04. Offer comprehensive, quality recreational programming aimed at
satisfying the needs of varying age levels, physical abilities and special
interests;
§ 2.05. Maintain and improve the appearance and safety of our parks and
facilities at the highest level of available resources;
§ 2.06. Provide efficient and effective leadership and coordination for quality
recreational and leisure activities for the community;
§ 2.07. Form partnerships with other public or private organizations, which
will expand human and financial assets for the community and encourage people
to volunteer their time and talents to enhance the city’s neighborhoods and
parks;
§ 2.08. To provide for the employment and compensation of Park and Recreation
employees for the operation of the facilities and to purchase recreational
equipment to be installed in said areas. The Park and Recreation Board is not
authorized to pledge the credit or tax powers of the city; and
§ 2.09. To draft rules and regulations concerning the use of the parks and
present such rules and regulations to the City Council. All rules and
regulations must be adopted by ordinance by the City Council.
§ 3.00 ADMINISTRATION OF PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of five members and a Secretary-
Treasurer.
§ 3.01 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   In order for a party to be qualified to serve on the Board, the individual
must be residing in the city.
§ 3.02 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Five members of the Board shall have full voting powers. Said members are to
be appointed by the City Council. Appointments shall be made on a staggered
basis, and the terms shall be for five years.
§ 3.03 CHAIRPERSON.
   The members of the Park and Recreation Board shall elect a chairperson on
the first annual meeting of each year. Said Chairperson shall be the liaison
officer between the Council and the Park and Recreation Board. In addition, the
Board shall elect a Chairperson Pro-Tem from the four remaining members.
§ 3.04 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Any Committee member who misses more than two regularly scheduled (or
special) Park and Recreation meetings during a quarter shall be subject to
removal for cause by the City Council. A quarter shall be defined as July
through September, October through December, January through March and April
through June.
   (B)   A Committee member subject to removal for cause shall receive notice
of the reasons for removal at least five days prior to the Council’s vote on
removal and shall be afforded an opportunity to show why he or she should not
be removed. Removal for cause shall occur upon a resolution, stating the reason
for the removal followed by a majority vote of the City Council. The removal is
effective upon the vote.
§ 4.00 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The meetings of the Park and Recreation Board shall be held on the
second week of each month in the City Hall. All such meetings shall be open to
the public, as required by the state law. Special meetings may be called by
three or more members or by the Chairperson, or requested by the City Council.
   (B)   Three or more of the appointed representatives for the purposes of
conducting a meeting constitute a quorum; said representatives do not include
the Secretary-Treasurer.
§ 5.00 BUDGET.
   The Board members should submit a proposed yearly operating budget prior to
February 1 to the City Council for approval so that the Board’s budget may be
included in the city’s budget. Income from government grant(s), donation(s) or
bequest(s) shall be available only for capital improvements or other uses
specified in the grant(s), donation(s) or bequest(s).
§ 6.00 BONDS.
   In the event that a bond issue is to be used in connection with the
improvements contemplated herein, the issue must be approved as provided by
state law. It is further agreed that all street, police and utility expenses,
not including capital improvements, in connection with the operation of the
park system therefor shall be part of the city’s General Expense Fund. All
records in connection with the operation of the Park Board shall be kept by the
Secretary-Treasurer separately from the city’s accounts. Quarterly reports of
the operation of the Board shall be submitted to the Council for approval.
§ 7.00 ACCUMULATIONS OF FUNDS.
   The Park and Recreation Board shall not accumulate any sums derived from
taxation in excess of 25% of the succeeding year’s budget. Any donations or
bequests not designated to particular projects should be utilized within two
years of the receipt of same. If, in fact, the funds derived from donations or
bequests are not used as set forth herein, said money shall be payable in trust
to a local banking institution, and distributed by its trust officer for those
purposes as set forth in §
2.00 of this chapter.
§ 8.00 SALARIES.
   The salaries of the members of the Park and Recreation Board and its
Secretary-Treasurer shall be set by the City Council by resolution. In the
event any member of the Board shall be required to travel outside the limits of
the city on official Park Board business, he or she shall be compensated for
expenses incurred. Expenses so incurred shall be included and projected in the
annual Park and Recreation Board budget.
CHAPTER 6: COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD
Section
   
1.00   Establishment and purpose
   
2.00   Powers and responsibilities
   
2.01   Operation of the community center
   
2.02   Employees and equipment
   
3.00   Administration of Community Center
   
3.01   Term of office
   
3.02   Chairperson
   
3.03   Removal of members
   
4.00   Meetings
   
5.00   Budget
   
6.00   Bonds
   
7.00   Salaries
§ 1.00 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A community center board for the city is hereby created. Its general
responsibilities shall be to:
   (A)   Maintain and operate the Eldridge Community Center;
   (B)   Keep a budget;
   (C)   Hire employees; and
   (D)   Purchase necessary equipment.
§ 2.00 POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Community Center Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 2.01 OPERATION OF THE COMMUNITY CENTER.
   The responsibility for the operation, upkeep and development of the
Community Center; and
§ 2.02 EMPLOYEES AND EQUIPMENT.
   To determine the employment and compensation of employees for the operation
of the facility and to purchase equipment to be installed in the Community
Center. The Community Center Board is not authorized to pledge the credit or
tax powers of the city.
§ 3.00 ADMINISTRATION OF COMMUNITY CENTER.
   The Community Center Board shall consist of five members.
§ 3.01 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Five members of the Board shall have full voting powers. Said members are to
be appointed by the City Council. Appointments shall be made on a staggered
basis and the terms shall be for four years.
§ 3.02 CHAIRPERSON.
   The members of the Community Center Board shall elect a chairperson on the
first annual meeting of each year. Said Chairperson shall be liaison officer
between the Council and the Community Center Board. In addition, the Board
shall elect a Chairperson Pro-Tem from the four remaining members.
§ 3.03 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Any Community Center Board member who misses more than two regularly
scheduled (or special) meetings during a quarter shall be subject to removal
for cause by the City Council. A quarter shall be defined as July through
September, October through December, January through March and April through
June.
   (B)   A Board member subject to removal for cause shall receive notice of
the reasons for removal at least five days prior to the Council’s vote on
removal and shall be afforded an opportunity to show why he or she should not
be removed. Removal for cause shall occur upon a resolution, stating the reason
for the removal followed by a majority vote of the City Council. The removal is
effective upon the vote.
§ 4.00 MEETINGS.
   The meetings of the Community Center Board shall be held on the second
Wednesday of each month at a place designated by the Board. All such meetings
shall be open to the public, as required by state law. Special meetings may be
called by three or more members or by the Chairperson, or requested by the City
Council. Three or more of the appointed representatives for the purposes of
conducting a meeting constitute a quorum.
§ 5.00 BUDGET.
   The Community Center is intended to be an Enterprise Fund of the city, and
as such, the proceeds of the Center shall be kept separate and distinct from
the other funds of the city. Board members should submit a proposed yearly
operating budget prior to January 15 to the City Council for approval so that
the Board’s budget may be included in the city’s budget. Income from all
sources shall be included in the budget estimate. All bills of the Community
Center shall be submitted to the City Clerk to be drawn against the funds of
the Community Center. All proceeds of the Center shall be submitted to the City
Clerk who shall credit the proceeds to the Community Center account and deposit
them with an approved financial institution.
§ 6.00 BONDS.
   In the event that a bond issue is to be used in connection with the
improvements contemplated herein, the issue must be approved as provided by
state law. It is further agreed that all street, police and utility expenses,
not including capital improvements, in connection with the operation of the
Community Center, therefore shall be part of the city’s General Expense Fund.
§ 7.00 SALARIES.
   The salaries of the members of the Community Center Board shall be set by
the City Council by resolution. In the event any member of the Board shall be
required to travel outside the limits of the city on official community center
business, he or she shall be compensated for expenses incurred. Expenses so
incurred shall be included and projected in the annual Community Center budget.
CHAPTER 7: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
   
1.00   Members
   
2.00   Comprehensive plan
   
3.00   Removal from Commission
   
4.00   Notice of removal
§ 1.00 MEMBERS.
   There shall exist in the city a planning and zoning commission composed of
seven residents of the city who shall be qualified, by knowledge and
experience, to act in matters pertaining to the development of city planning
and zoning.
§ 2.00 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare a comprehensive plan of the
city to promote the welfare of its residents in a manner consistent with the
police power granted to the cities in the Iowa Code and such Commission shall
make recommendations to the City Council for changes or modifications to the
city plan. (Also see
Title D, Chapter 2, §§
10 through
19.)
§ 3.00 REMOVAL FROM COMMISSION.
   Any Planning and Zoning Commission member who misses more than two regularly
scheduled (or special) meetings during a quarter shall be subject to removal
for cause by the City Council. A quarter shall be defined as July through
September, October through December, January through March and April through
June.
§ 4.00 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   A Commission member subject to removal for cause shall receive notice of the
reasons for removal at least five days prior to the Council’s vote on removal
and shall be afforded an opportunity to show why he or she should not be
removed. Removal for cause shall occur upon a resolution, stating the reason
for the removal followed by a majority vote of the City Council. The removal is
effective upon the vote.
CHAPTER 8: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section
   
1.00   Members
   
2.00   Appointment and removal
   
3.00   Powers
   
4.00   Removal from Board
   
5.00   Notice of removal
§ 1.00 MEMBERS.
   There shall exist in the city a board of adjustment composed of five
citizens of the city. A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be persons representing the public at large and shall not be involved in
the business of purchasing or selling real estate. One member of the Board
shall be a member of the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 2.00 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of five years, excepting
that when the Board shall first be created, one member shall be appointed for a
term of five years, one for a term of four years, one for a term of three
years, one for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. The Board
shall not carry out its business without having three members present. Members
shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges
and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of
any member whose term becomes vacant.
§ 3.00 POWERS.
   The powers of the Board shall be as set forth in
Title D, Chapter 2, § 12A.00.
§ 4.00 REMOVAL FROM BOARD.
   Any Board of Adjustment member who misses more than two regularly scheduled
(or special) meetings during a quarter shall be subject to removal for cause by
the City Council. A quarter shall be defined as July through September, October
through December, January through March and April through June.
§ 5.00 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   A Board member subject to removal for cause shall receive notice of the
reasons for removal at least five days prior to the Council’s vote on removal
and shall be afforded an opportunity to show why he or she should not be
removed. Removal for cause shall occur upon a resolution, stating the reason
for the removal followed by a majority vote of the City Council. The removal is
effective upon the vote.
CHAPTER 9: CODE REVIEW BOARD
Section
   
1.00   Members
   
2.00   Appointment and removal
   
3.00   Purpose
   
4.00   Powers
   
5.00   Removal from Board
   
6.00   Notice of removal
§ 1.00 MEMBERS.
   There shall exist in the city a code review board composed of nine members.
The membership of the Board shall be comprised of a mixture of people from the
various building trades, engineering disciplines and the public at large.
§ 2.00 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of five years, excepting
that when the Board shall first be created, three members shall be appointed
for a term of five years, three members for a term of four years and three
members for a term of three years. The Board shall not carry out its business
without having five members present. Members shall be removable for cause by
the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term
becomes vacant.
§ 3.00 PURPOSE.
   The Board shall act in the following capacities:
   (A)   To advise the City Council on the adoption of the various model
building codes;
   (B)   To review the various contractor licenses; and
   (C)   To review requests for interpretation of the various adopted model
building codes and to render decisions on appeals to interpretations of the
adopted construction codes.
§ 4.00 POWERS.
   More detail on the powers of the Board shall be found in
Title C, Chapter 8.
§ 5.00 REMOVAL FROM BOARD.
   Any Code Review Board member who misses more than two regularly scheduled
(or special) meetings during a quarter shall be subject to removal for cause by
the City Council. A quarter shall be defined as July through September, October
through December, January through March and April through June.
§ 6.00 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   A Board member subject to removal for cause shall receive notice of the
reasons for removal at least five days prior to the Council’s vote on removal
and shall be afforded an opportunity to show why he or she should not be
removed. Removal for cause shall occur upon a resolution, stating the reason
for the removal followed by a majority vote of the City Council. The removal is
effective upon the vote.
CHAPTER 10: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   License required
   
3.00   Businesses covered and excluded
   
4.00   Insurance
   
5.00   Not transferable or assignable
   
6.00   Revocation
   
7.00   Annual report
   
8.00   Appeal
   
9.00   Operation without a license prohibited
   
10.00   Applicability
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health and welfare of
the citizens of the city by regulating the public or semi-public premises
within the city.
§ 2.00 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, any business located within the city must
possess a business license issued by the city.
§ 3.00 BUSINESSES COVERED AND EXCLUDED.
   The businesses required to be licensed hereunder include, but are not
limited to, any individual, partnership, association or corporation engaged in
the sale of goods, services or adult entertainment, whether at retail or
wholesale, done for the purpose of pecuniary profit or engaged in the
maintenance of any premises for use as an office, garage, warehouse,
manufacturing, assembly or processing facility for the use of the public or by
employees of the business. Business licenses are not required for traditional
neighborhood activities that are not publicly promoted and that are on a small
scale, such as baking, ironing, sales of handicrafts, newspaper carriers,
cosmetic products and the like; nor are business licenses required for sales or
service businesses that do not store, warehouse or make deliveries within the
corporate limits of the city.
§ 4.00 INSURANCE.
   The license herein required shall be obtained from the City Clerk upon
completion of an application form and approval thereof by the City Clerk and
Mayor. Before issuance of the license, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the
Building Inspector shall have certified that the business complies with all
applicable zoning and building code regulations. The application shall be
accompanied by payment of a $10 fee.
§ 5.00 NOT TRANSFERABLE OR ASSIGNABLE.
   Any business license issued hereunder is not transferable or assignable. A
new business license shall be obtained upon any change in the location,
ownership, name or nature of the business.
§ 6.00 REVOCATION.
   A business license may be revoked by the Mayor if, in his or her judgment,
any business conducted or to be conducted under and by virtue of a license is
or will be detrimental to the public health or morals or liable to lead to the
violation of any ordinance or law, or provoke a breach of the peace, or if any
licensee or any of his or her agents makes any false or misleading statements
or representations in the furtherance of the business conducted under said
license or violates any ordinance or law in the conduct of the business for
which such license is issued.
§ 7.00 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Before July 1 of each year, each licensee shall complete and file with the
City Clerk a report on a form provided by the Clerk. The information required
on the annual report shall include, at a minimum, the following: name(s),
address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owners of the business, of the
business itself and of the person to contact in case of emergency, as well as a
description of the nature of the business. No fee shall be required for filing
the annual report. Failure to file the annual report shall be grounds for
revocation of the business license.
§ 8.00 APPEAL.
   Any person objecting to the issuance, non-issuance or revocation of a
business license will be heard at a meeting of the City Council. The Council
shall review the matter and make a final decision.
§ 9.00 OPERATION WITHOUT A LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any business for which a
license is required by this chapter without first having obtained the necessary
license or licenses. Any person, firm or corporation who conducts a business
without first procuring a license is guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
§ 10.00 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all licenses applied for or renewed after the
effective date of the ordinance incorporated herein this chapter. This chapter
shall further apply to all businesses which are required to be licensed but
which are not licensed as of the effective date of this chapter or which begin
doing business in the city after the effective date of the ordinance
incorporated herein this chapter.
CHAPTER 11: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   License required
   
3.00   License - application
   
4.00   License - issuance
   
5.00   License - fees
   
6.00   License - bond
   
7.00   Duplicate and individual licenses, when required
   
8.00   License - display
   
9.00   Charitable and non-profit organizations
   
10.00   Exemptions
   
11.00   Denial or revocation of license - procedure
   
12.00   Sales regulations
   
13.00   Penalty
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person carrying or transporting goods or merchandise who sells
or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house
to house or upon the public street.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who solicits, or attempts to solicit, from house to
house or upon the public street an order for goods or merchandise to be
delivered at a future date.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm or corporation who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business, intending to remain in business
in the city for less than one year, and, in the course of such business, hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever. Temporary association
with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such
transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer shall not exempt any person, firm or
corporation from being considered a TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
§ 2.00 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling, soliciting or in
the business of a transient merchant in this city without first obtaining a
license as provided in this chapter.
§ 3.00 LICENSE - APPLICATION.
   An application for a license under this chapter shall be made with the City
Police Chief, or his or her authorized representative, and shall give the
following information:
   (A)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed it will
be carried on in the city and the local address or addresses of such person or
persons while engaged in such business;
   (B)   The name and permanent address of the applicant; whether such person
will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee and the credentials
establishing such relationship; the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a
corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated;
   (C)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business and the length of time during which it is proposed said
business shall be conducted;
   (D)   A statement of the nature and character of the tangible personal
property or service to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the
city; whether the goods are new, damaged or rejects; whether the same are
proposed to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, or at auction, or by
direct sale, or by taking orders for future deliveries; where the goods or
property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods
or products are located at the time said application is filed;
   (E)   The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, where applicant within three years preceding the date of said
application peddled, solicited or conducted a transient business, stating the
nature thereof and giving the post office box number and street address of any
building or office in or from which said business was conducted;
   (F)   Whether or not the applicant or the person having management or
supervision of the applicant’s business has been convicted of a felony within
the five years immediately preceding the date of the application or of the
violation of any laws or ordinance relating to the same or similar business
proposed to be conducted by the applicant, the nature of such offense and the
punishment therefor;
   (G)   Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under this
chapter which has been denied;
   (H)   Whether the applicant has ever held a license under this chapter which
has been revoked;
   (I)   A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant’s
age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, social security number, driver’s
license number and state issued, a photograph of the applicant and the right
thumbprint of the applicant; and
   (J)   (1)   If the applicant’s business is to be conducted through
employees, the application shall include the information specified at divisions
(E) through (I) above, inclusive, for each employee who will be conducting
applicant’s business in this city as well as the name and address of each such
employee; and
      (2)   A non-refundable fee of $5 shall be paid at the time of filing such
application to cover the cost of investigating the facts set forth therein.
§ 4.00 LICENSE - ISSUANCE.
   If the Chief of Police finds the application is made out in conformance with
this chapter and the facts stated therein are correct, he or she shall issue,
within ten days and upon the posting of a bond as required by this chapter, a
license and charge a fee therefor, as determined by this chapter. The license
issued hereunder shall not be transferrable. There shall be no refund of the
license fee.
§ 5.00 LICENSE - FEES.
   Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay a license fee in
accordance with the following schedule:
   (A)   For one day: $10; for each additional day: $2;
   (B)   For one month: $50;
   (C)   For six months: $100;
   (D)   For one year: $150; and
   (E)   For duplicate license: $2.
§ 6.00 LICENSE - BOND.
   Before a license under this chapter shall be issued, each applicant shall
post a bond of $100 with the Chief of Police. Such bond shall be conditioned
that the applicant shall comply with the provisions of all the ordinances of
the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of
goods, subscriptions, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature,
including foodstuffs, or for services, including advertising, and will pay all
judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of ordinances or
statutes or any of them together, with all judgments and costs that may be
recovered against said applicant by any person or persons for damage growing
out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person who transacts
such business with the applicant, whether said misrepresentation or deception
was made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees,
either at the time of making the sale, or the solicitation of the sale, or
through any advertisements of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated
with reference to the subject matter of such sale or any part thereof. Action
on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved
person. Such bond shall be further conditioned to indemnify and pay the city
for any penalties or costs occasioned by the enforcement of this chapter and
shall not be retired until after a lapse of one year from the expiration of
each license.
§ 7.00 DUPLICATE AND INDIVIDUAL LICENSES, WHEN REQUIRED.
   A license under this chapter may be issued to a person carrying on the
business of solicitor, peddler or transient merchant in this city through
employees. Such employees shall carry a duplicate license issued to the
employee, which license shall be obtained at the office of the Chief of Police
upon compliance with the requirements of the chapter. If the business of
solicitor, peddler or transient merchant in this city is carried on through
agents who are not employees, or by consignees, or by an unincorporated firm or
association, each person so conducting the business in this city shall be
required to have a separate license, but not post a separate bond if one is
posted by the corporation.
§ 8.00 LICENSE - DISPLAY.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall, at all times while doing business in this
city, keep in his or her possession the license provided for by this chapter
and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as
evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient
merchant shall display publicly the license in his or her place of business.
§ 9.00 CHARITABLE AND NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   Resident school, Girl Scout, Boy Scout and other such organizations
shall be exempt from the application of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   A religious, charitable, patriotic, social service, civic or
political non-profit organization, other than those set forth in division (A)
above, shall receive a license for activities regulated under this chapter
where its authorized representative volunteers to undertake such activities
without remuneration and where the entire proceeds of the activities will go to
the organization and not for private profit.
      (2)   The organization shall file the information required for a license
under this chapter in the office of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall issue, free of charge and without bond, a license for the requested
activity which shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed on or
before the expiration date.
§ 10.00 EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the
duty of applying for a license under this chapter:
   (A)   Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of resale;
   (B)   Persons selling or distributing newspapers;
   (C)   Persons selling tangible personal property or services to business
enterprises;
   (D)   Persons who sell, at their permanent residence in the city, works of
art or craft made or created by such person or a member of each such person’s
immediate family;
   (E)   Persons licensed by the state to sell real estate or insurance or
licensed as transient vendors of drugs;
   (F)   Persons selling or distributing livestock feeds, as defined by the
laws of the state;
   (G)   Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or services
through a permanent business licensed through the city;
   (H)   Persons selling or distributing fresh fruit or vegetables cultivated
by such person;
   (I)   Persons conducting and selling admissions to or for theatricals,
shows, rides, sports and games, concerts, circuses, carnivals or any other
public amusement where no sales of other products are involved and such sales
are made on the premises where the event is to be conducted;
   (J)   Persons selling tangible personal property at a garage, basement or
yard sale held at one of the persons’ premises; and
   (K)   Persons selling food and beverages at a food establishment regulated
pursuant to the Iowa Code.
§ 11.00 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE - PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Denial of license. The Chief of Police may deny, within ten days, a
license to any applicant who has:
      (1)   Held a license under this chapter that has been revoked within two
years of the date of the present application;
      (2)   Failed to make a complete, truthful application; and
      (3)   During the past two years, a history of:
         (a)   Fraudulent applications of similar licenses;
         (b)   Misrepresentation of the quality of merchandise or services
offered for sale; and
         (c)   Crimes involving personal property.
   (B)   Revocation of license. The Chief of Police may revoke any license
issued under the provisions of this chapter by sending a notice of revocation
by certified mail to the holder at his or her last known address, return
receipt requested, or by personal service on the license holder or its officers
for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Information showing the license was erroneously issued initially;
      (2)   For any violation of the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   For any violation of any city or state law regulating the sales
activities of the license holder; and
      (4)   For making any fraudulent statement in connection with the
application for a license under this chapter.
   (C)   Hearings.
      (1)   The license shall stand denied or revoked, unless, within five days
after denial or receipt of the notice of revocation from the Chief of Police,
the license applicant or holder files a written request for a public hearing on
the Police Chief’s action. The public hearing shall be conducted before the
Public Safety Committee of the City Council which shall forward to the full
City Council a recommendation on whether a license should be denied, reinstated
or revoked, as the case may be. The City Council may order the license issued
or reinstated either conditionally or unconditionally, or revoke the license.
      (2)   Ten days’ notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall
be given to the license applicant or holder, who shall have an opportunity to
appear before the Committee and present any evidence or arguments he or she may
have why the action taken by the Chief of Police should not be approved by the
City Council.
§ 12.00 SALES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in activities regulated under this chapter on
public property without first procuring special authorization from the City
Council.
   (B)   No person shall shout or use any sound device upon any of the public
places of the city or upon any private premises in said city where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being
plainly heard from the public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which such person proposes to
sell.
   (C)   No person shall engage in business under this chapter in defiance of
any notice exhibited at a residence or business indicating that peddlers or
solicitors are not welcome or are not invited.
   (D)   No person shall engage in the activities regulated under this chapter
from door-to-door, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on any weekday or
Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
   (E)   A written receipt for all orders taken within the city shall be given
to the customer, which receipt shall be signed by the person making the sale
and shall set forth a brief description of the goods, wares, merchandise or
service or services ordered; the total purchase price thereof; and the amount
of the down payment received from the purchaser.
§ 13.00 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or a fine not
exceeding $100.
   (B)   Each sale or solicitation of a sale made without a license or bond in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 12: BEER LICENSING
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   License or permit - eligibility
   
4.00   Conditions for approval of license or permit - premises
   
4.01   Premises that do not conform
   
4.02   Interior access
   
4.03   Class “B” locations
   
4.04   Tables and seats
   
4.05   State liquor store locations
   
5.00   Beer permits - classes
   
5.01   Class “B”
   
5.02   Class “C”
   
6.00   Liquor licenses - classes
   
6.01   Class “A”
   
6.02   Class “B”
   
6.03   Class “C”
   
6.04   Retail wine permits (class “B”)
   
7.00   Prohibited interest
   
8.00   Separate locations - beer and wine permits
   
9.00   Application: contents, bond
   
10.00   Investigation of applicant
   
11.00   Simplified application for renewal
   
12.00   Proof of financial responsibility
   
13.00   License and permit fees
   
14.00   Nature of license or permit
   
15.00   Action by Council
   
16.00   License or permit - expiration - seasonal and short-term
   
17.00   Refunds
   
18.00   Transfers
   
19.00   Prohibited sales and acts
   
20.00   Advertising signs prohibited
   
21.00   Suspension and revocation
   
22.00   Effect of revocation
   
23.00   Appeal and hearing
   
24.00   Consumption in public places - intoxication
   
25.00   Persons under legal age
   
26.00   Penalties
   
26.01   Penalty
   
26.02   Conviction
   
26.03   Penalty assessment
   
27.00   Beer on Sunday
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide administration of licenses and
permits and local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale and
consumption of beer wine and liquor and for the protection of the safety,
morals and general welfare of this community.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by state law, such
definitions shall apply to their use in this chapter and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, shall have the following
meanings.
§ 2.01. CLUB. Any non-profit corporation or association of individuals, which
is the owner, lessee or occupant of a permanent building or part thereof,
membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues and is not operated
for a profit other than such profits as would accrue to the entire membership.
§ 2.02. COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business which is, at all times,
equipped with sufficient tables and seats to accommodate 25 persons at one
time, and the licensed premises of which conform to the chapters of this city.
§ 2.03. GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment, the principal business of which
consists of the sale of food or food products for consumption off the premises.
The volume of sales of all other items, commodities and materials shall be
included with the volume of sales of beer, and sales of beer shall not equal or
exceed 50% of the dollar volume of all sales made by the establishment to meet
the test that food sales must be the principal business thereof.
§ 2.04. HOTEL or MOTEL. A premises licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture and regularly or seasonally kept open in a bona fide manner for the
lodging of transient guests, and with 20 or more sleeping rooms.
§ 2.05. LEGAL AGE. The age specified by current state law.
§ 2.06. PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER. Any person who meets all of the
following requirements.
   (A)   He or she has such financial standing and good reputation as will
satisfy the City Council and the Director that he or she will comply with the
Iowa Beer and Liquor Control Act, being Iowa Code Title IV, Chapter 123, and
all other laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to his or her operations
under state law.
   (B)   He or she does not possess a federal gambling stamp.
   (C)   He or she is not prohibited by the provisions of §
22.00 of this chapter from obtaining a liquor license, wine permit or beer
permit.
   (D)   He or she is citizen of the United States and a resident of the state,
or licensed to do business in the state in the case of a corporation.
   (E)   He or she has not been convicted of a felony. However, if his or her
conviction of a felony occurred more than five years before the application for
a license or permit, and if his or her rights of citizenship have been restored
by the Governor, the Director may determine that he or she is a person of good
moral character not withstanding such conviction.
   (F)   If such person is a corporation, partnership, association, club or
hotel or motel, the requirements of this subsection shall apply to each of the
officers, directors and partners of such person and to any person who directly
or indirectly owns or controls 10% or more of any class of stock of such person
or has an interest of 10% or more in the ownership or profits of such person.
For the purpose of this subsection, an individual and his or her spouse shall
be regarded as one person.
§ 2.07. PHARMACY. A drug store in which drugs and medicines are exposed for
sale and sold at retail, or in which prescriptions of licensed physicians and
surgeons, dentists or veterinarians are compounded and sold by a registered
pharmacist.
§ 3.00 LICENSE OR PERMIT – ELIGIBILITY.
   Upon meeting the requirements imposed by state law and the ordinances of the
city, a person who is of good moral character may apply for a liquor control
license, a wine permit or a beer permit. In the case of a club, corporation or
partnership, the officers of the club or corporation and the partners of a
partnership shall be persons of good moral character, as defined by state law
and this chapter.
§ 4.00 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT - PREMISES.
   An applicant for a license or permit, as a further condition for approval,
must give consent, in writing on the application, that members of the Fire,
Police and Health Departments and the Building Inspector may enter upon the
premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of state
law and city ordinances.
§ 4.01 PREMISES THAT DO NOT CONFORM.
   No license or permit shall be approved for premises which do not conform to
all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions and health and fire regulations.
§ 4.02 INTERIOR ACCESS.
   No licensed premises shall have or maintain any interior access to
residential or sleeping quarters, unless permission is granted by the
Department in the form of a living quarters permit.
§ 4.03 CLASS “B” LOCATIONS.
   The premises for which a class “B” beer permit or a class “B” retail wine
permit is sought must be located within a commercial district or an area now or
hereafter zoned as commercial and must conform to the zoning requirements of
the city.
§ 4.04 TABLES AND SEATS.
   The premises covered by a class “B” beer permit shall, at the time of the
application and thereafter, continue to be equipped with sufficient tables and
seats to accommodate 25 persons at one time.
§ 4.05 STATE LIQUOR STORE LOCATIONS.
   No state liquor store shall be located within 300 feet of a public or
private educational institution, unless a lesser distance is specifically
authorized by ordinance.
§ 5.00 BEER PERMITS – CLASSES.
   Beer permits shall be classed as follows.
§ 5.01 CLASS “B”.
   A class “B” beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for
consumption on or off the premises.
§ 5.02 CLASS “C”.
   A class “C” beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for
consumption off the premises only. Such sales shall be in original containers
only. No class “C” permit shall be issued to any person except the owner or
proprietor of a grocery store or pharmacy.
§ 6.00 LIQUOR LICENSES - CLASSES.
   Liquor control licenses shall be classed as follows.
§ 6.01 CLASS “A”.
   A class “A” liquor control license issued to a club shall authorize the
holder to purchase alcoholic liquors from the Department only, wine from the
Department or from class “A” wine permittees and native wines from native wine
manufacturers, and to sell the same to bona fide members and their guests by
the individual drink for consumption on the premises only.
§ 6.02 CLASS “B”.
   A class “B” liquor control license issued to a hotel or motel shall
authorize the holder to purchase alcoholic liquors from the Department only,
wine from the Department or from class “A” wine permittees and native wines
from native wine manufacturers, and to sell the same to patrons by the
individual drink for consumption on the premises only; however, beer may also
be sold for consumption off the premises. Each such license shall be effective
throughout the premises described in the application.
§ 6.03 CLASS “C”.
   (A)   A class “C” liquor control license issued to a commercial
establishment must be issued in the name of the individual or individuals who
actually own the entire business and shall authorize the holder to purchase
alcoholic liquors from the Department only, wine from the Department or from
class “A” wine permittees and native wines from native wine manufacturers, and
to sell the same to patrons by the individual drink for consumption on the
premises only; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the premises.
   (B)   A special class “C” liquor control license may be issued and shall
authorize the holder to purchase wine from the Department or from class “A”
wine permittees only, and to sell wine and beer to patrons by the individual
drink for consumption on the premises only; however, beer may also be sold for
consumption off the premises. The license issued to holders of a special class
“C” license shall clearly state on its face that the license is limited.
§ 6.04 RETAIL WINE PERMITS (CLASS “B”).
   A person holding a class “B” wine permit may sell wine at retail for
consumption off the premises. Wine shall be sold for consumption off the
premises in original containers only. A person holding such a permit may
purchase wine for resale only from the Department or from a person holding a
class “A” wine permit.
§ 7.00 PROHIBITED INTEREST.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be either directly or
indirectly interested in more than one class of beer permit.
§ 8.00 SEPARATE LOCATIONS – BEER AND WINE PERMITS.
   Every person holding a class “B” or class “C” beer permit or class “B” wine
permit having more than one place of business where such beer or wine is sold
shall be required to have a separate permit for each separate place of
business, except as otherwise provided by state law.
§ 9.00 APPLICATION: CONTENTS, BOND.
   A verified application for the original issuance or the renewal of a liquor
control license or wine or beer permit shall be filed at such time in such
number of copies, and in such form as the Department shall prescribe. The
application shall be accompanied by the required fee and bond and be filed with
the Council for approval or disapproval. The bond to be submitted shall be in a
form prescribed by the Department and in the amount specified by Iowa Code §
123.130(1) for liquor control licenses; Iowa Code §§ 123.127(2) and 123.30 for
beer permits; and Iowa Code § 123.176(3) for class “B” wine permits.
§ 10.00 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of an original application for a license or permit, the City
Clerk shall forward the same to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct an
investigation and submit a written report on the applicant as to the truth of
the facts averred in the application and a recommendation to the Council as to
the approval of the license or permit. It shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector and the Fire Chief to inspect the premises to determine conformance
with the requirements of the city. No license or permit shall be approved until
or unless the such approving reports have been filed with the Council.
§ 11.00 SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL.
   Upon receipt of an application for the renewal of a license or permit, the
City Clerk shall forward the same to the Chief of Police who shall conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred
in the application and a recommendation to the Council as the approval of the
license or permit.
§ 12.00 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Every licensee and permittee shall furnish proof of financial responsibility
either by the existence of a liability insurance policy or by posting bond in
such an amount determined by the Department.
§ 13.00 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
   The city hereby adopts the fees for licenses and permits set forth in the
Iowa Beer and Liquor Control Act, Iowa Code Chapter 123.
§ 14.00 NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   A license or permit is a purely personal privilege and is revocable
for cause. It does not constitute personal property nor is it subject to
attachment and execution nor is it alienable nor assignable, and, in any case,
it shall cease upon the death of the permittee or licensee. However, the
Department and the Council may, in their discretion, allow the executor or
administrator of a permittee or licensee to operate the business of the
decedent for a reasonable time not to exceed the expiration date of the permit
or license.
   (B)   Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant
and no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use
same.
§ 15.00 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   Action taken by the City Council shall be so endorsed on the application and
thereafter, the application, fee and bond shall be forwarded to the Department
for such further action as is provided by law.
§ 16.00 LICENSE OR PERMIT - EXPIRATION - SEASONAL AND SHORT-TERM.
   All licenses and permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall expire
one year from date of issuance. Six- or eight-month seasonal licenses or
permits may be issued for a proportionate part of the license or permit fee. No
seasonal license or permit shall be renewed except after a period of two
months. Seasonal licensing and 14-day licenses and permits shall be only as
permitted by state law and regulation.
§ 17.00 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Any such licensee or permittee, or his or her executor, administrator
or any person duly appointed by the court to take charge of and administer the
property or assets of the licensee or permittee for the benefit of his or her
creditors, may voluntarily surrender such license or permit to the Department.
When a license or permit is surrendered, the Department shall notify the city
and the Department, or the city shall refund to the person so surrendering the
license or permit a proportionate amount of the fee received, as set forth in
Iowa Code § 123.38. No refund shall be made, however, for a license or permit
surrendered more than nine months after issuance, and no refund shall be made
if there is, at the time of said surrender, a complaint filed with the
Department or the city, charging violation of this chapter or the provisions of
Iowa Code Chapter 123. If, upon a hearing on a complaint, a license or permit
is not revoked or suspended, then the licensee or permittee shall be eligible
to receive a refund as provided herein upon surrender, but if the license or
permit is revoked or suspended upon such hearing, there shall be no entitlement
to a refund of any portion of the license or permit fee.
   (B)   No refund shall be made for seasonal licenses or permits.
§ 18.00 TRANSFERS.
   The Council will, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee to
transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the city;
provided that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have been
eligible for a license or permit in the first instance and such transfer will
not result in the violation of any law or ordinance.
§ 19.00 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   No person or club holding a license or permit nor agents or employees of the
same shall do any of the following:
§ 19.01. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer;
§ 19.02. Sell or dispense any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in the premises
covered by the license or permit, or permit the consumption thereon between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday, and between the hours of 2:00
a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, Sunday sales
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight may be made if the proper
license or permit therefor has been obtained;
§ 19.03. Sell alcoholic liquor, wine or beer to any person on credit, except
with a bona fide credit card. This provision shall not apply to sales by a club
to its members nor to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests;
§ 19.04. Employ any person under the age of 18 years in the sale or serving of
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold;
§ 19.05. Sell, give or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to
any person knowing, or having reasonable cause to believe, such person to be
under legal age, or permit any such person to consume any alcoholic beverage,
wine or beer;
§ 19.06. In the case of a retail beer or retail wine permittee, knowingly
allowing the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer,
wine or any other beverage in or about the place of business;
§ 19.07. Keep, or allow to be kept, gambling devices of any kind or description
on the premises or place of business of the license or permit holder, except as
allowed by state law; and
§ 19.08. Re-use for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate by the addition of any substance the contents or remaining contents
of original package of an alcholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any
original package which has been so reused or adulterated.
§ 20.00 ADVERTISING SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No signs or other matter advertising any brand of beer or wine shall be
erected or placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a licensee or
permittee authorized to sell beer or wine at retail. This section does not
prohibit the use of signs or other matter inside a fence or similar enclosure
which wholly or partially surrounds the licensed premises.
§ 21.00 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   A license or permit may be suspended for a period up to one year, or
revoked, following notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 21.01. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such
license or permit;
§ 21.02. Violation of any of the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 123;
§ 21.03. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under
a class “A”, class “B” or class “C” liquor control license, or any beer permit
or class “B” retail wine permit which change was not previously reported to and
approved by the city and the Department;
§ 21.04. An event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving
such license or permit when originally issued;
§ 21.05. Any sale, hypothecation or transfer of such license or permit; and
§ 21.06. The failure or refusal on the part of any licensee or permittee to
render any report or remit any taxes to the Department.
§ 22.00 EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Any licensee or permittee whose license or permit is revoked shall not
thereafter be permitted to hold a license or permit in the city for a period of
two years from the date of such revocation. The spouse and business associates
holding 10% or more of the capital stock or ownership interest in the business
of a person whose license or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a
license or permit, and no license or permit shall be issued which covers any
business in which such person has a financial interest for a period of two
years from the date of such revocation. If a license or permit is revoked, the
premises which had been covered by such license or permit shall not be
relicensed for one year.
§ 23.00 APPEAL AND HEARING.
   The right of appeal to the Hearing Board established by Iowa Code Chapter
123 shall be afforded to a licensee or permittee whose license or permit has
been suspended or revoked. Any applicant who feels aggrieved by a decision of
the Director or city disapproving, suspending or revoking issuance of a license
or permit may, provided a right to appeal to the Hearing Board as provided by
state law has been exercised, appeal from said decision within ten days to the
District Court of the county where the premises covered by the application are
situated. The city may appeal a decision of the Hearing Board within ten days
to the District Court of the county where the premises covered by the
application are situated.
§ 24.00 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES - INTOXICATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways or in any public place, except
premises covered by an appropriate license or permit, and except as authorized
under
Title B, Chapter 6, and no person shall be intoxicated or simulate intoxication
in a public place.
§ 25.00 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to
be under legal age, and no person or persons under legal age shall individually
or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in his, her or their possession
or control, except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a
person under legal age within a private home or with the knowledge and consent
of the parent or guardian for beverage or medicinal purposes or administered by
either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent
that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine and beer
during the regular course of his or her employment as provided by state law.
§ 26.00 PENALTIES.
§ 26.01 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $100 or to imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 26.02 CONVICTION.
   The conviction of any licensee or permittee for a violation of any of the
provisions of §§
1.00 to
6.00, inclusive, or §
19.00 of this chapter shall, subject to §
26.03 of this chapter, be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the
license or permit by the Department or the city. However, if any licensee or
permittee is convicted of any violation of Iowa Code § 123.49(2)(a), (d) or
(e), or if any permittee is convicted of a violation of Iowa Code § 123.49(2)
(a), the license or permit shall be revoked and shall immediately be
surrendered by the holder, and the bond of the license or permit holder shall
be forfeited to the Department.
§ 26.03 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.
   If any licensee, permittee or employee of a licensee or permittee shall be
convicted of a violation of §
19.05 of this chapter, or if a permittee shall be convicted of a violation of §
19.06 of said chapter, the city shall, in addition to the other penalties fixed
for such violations by §
26.00 of this chapter, assess a penalty as follows.
   (A)   Upon a first conviction, the violator’s license or permit shall be
suspended for a period of 14 days.
   (B)   Upon a second conviction within a period of two years, the violator’s
license or permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   (C)   Upon a third conviction within a period of five years, the violator’s
license or permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   (D)   Upon a fourth conviction within a period of five years, the violator’s
license or permit shall be revoked.
§ 27.00 BEER ON SUNDAY.
   Any club, hotel, motel or commercial establishment holding a liquor control
license for whom the sale of goods and services other than alcoholic liquor,
wine or beer constitutes 50% or more of the gross receipts from the licensed
premises may sell and dispense alcoholic liquor, wine and beer to patrons on
Sunday for consumption on the premises only. For this privilege, the liquor
control license fee of the applicant shall be increased by 20% of the regular
fee prescribed for the license and the privilege shall be noted on the liquor
control license.
CHAPTER 13: CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
1.00   Authority to administer and enforce
   
2.00   Opportunity for consideration
   
3.00   Filing with the FCC
   
4.00   Notice of change
   
5.00   Cable Official
   
6.00   Controlling provisions
   
7.00   Unconstitutionality
§ 1.00 AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE.
   The City of Eldridge (herein called “the city”) has the legal authority to
administer and shall enforce against any non-municipally owned cable television
system operator, as permitted therein, the provisions of part 76, subpart N of
the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.900 et seq., as they
currently read and hereafter may be amended, which are herewith incorporated by
reference.
§ 2.00 OPPORTUNITY FOR CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   Any rate regulation conducted under §
1.00 of this chapter shall provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration
of the view of any interested party, including, but not limited to, the city or
its designee, the cable operator, subscribers and residents of the franchise
area.
   (B)   In addition to all proceedings, and in order to provide for such
opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, the city
shall take the following actions.
      (1)   The city shall publish, as provided in the Iowa Code § 362.4, and
shall mail, by certified mail, to the cable operator, a notice of the intent to
conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or charges for
equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the FCC.
      (2)   Said notice shall state, among other things, that cable television
rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the rate review
in question; that any interested party has a right to participate in the
proceedings; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding, explaining
how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any such views;
that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable television rates in
question will be governed by the FCC Rules and Regulations; and that the
decision of the city is subject to review by the FCC.
      (3)   The city shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or
not the rates or proposed rate increase are reasonable. The city may delegate
the responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified and eligible
individual(s) or entity. If the city, or its designee, cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
notice accordingly.
      (4)   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the city may
require additional information from the cable operator that is reasonably
necessary to determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and
equipment charges. Any such additional information submitted to the city shall
be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of an affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry. The city may request
proprietary information; provided that the city shall consider a timely request
from the cable operator that said proprietary information shall not be made
available for public information, consistent with the procedures set forth in
47 C.F.R. § 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. Furthermore, said
proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of determining the
reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate level based on
a cost-of-service showing submitted by the cable operator. The city may
exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable to administrative
proceedings under the laws of the state and of the city to discover any
information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding, including, but not
limited to, subpoena, interrogatories, production of documents and deposition.
      (5)   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the city shall
adopt and release a written decision as to whether or not the rates or proposed
rate increase are reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy,
including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription and refunds.
      (6)   The city may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or other
sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for charging
an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
      (7)   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the city’s decision may
be reviewed only by the FCC.
      (8)   The city shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the
course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to
exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the Communications Act of 1934,
being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq., as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations.
Any information submitted to the city shall be verified by an appropriate
official of the cable television system supervising the preparation of the
response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of an affidavit or under
penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best
of that person’s knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable
inquiry.
§ 3.00 FILING WITH THE FCC.
   The city shall file with the FCC the required certification form (FCC Form
328) on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as appropriate. Thirty days
later, or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the city shall notify the cable
operator that the city has been certified by the FCC and that it has adopted
all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service tier cable
television rates and equipment charges.
§ 4.00 NOTICE OF CHANGE.
   With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations, and
over which the city is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the cable
operator shall give notice to the city of any change in rates for the cable
programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers and any changes in the nature of the
services provided, including the program services included in the tier or
tiers, and any changes in the nature of the services provided, including the
program services included in the tier or tiers. Said notice shall be provided
with five business days after the change becomes effective.
§ 5.00 CABLE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The city may delegate its powers to enforce this law to municipal
employees or officers (“Cable Official”).
   (B)   The Cable Official will have the authority to:
      (1)   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      (2)   Issue subpoenas;
      (3)   Examine witnesses;
      (4)   Rule upon questions of evidence;
      (5)   Take or cause depositions to be taken;
      (6)   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this law;
      (7)   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous
conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
      (8)   Hold conferences for, the settlement or simplification of the
issues by consent of the parties; and
      (9)   Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in
conformity with this law.
§ 6.00 CONTROLLING PROVISIONS.
   If any ordinances or parts of ordinances are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling.
§ 7.00 UNCONSTITUTIONALITY.
   If any section, provision or part of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this
chapter as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
CHAPTER 14: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Section
   
1   Definitions
   
2   Granting of authority
   
2.1   Franchise
   
2.2   Street and right-of-way use not exclusive
   
2.3   Installment of equipment
   
2.4   Accurate records to be kept by grantee
   
3   Taxes
   
4   Insurance
   
4.1   General insurance
   
4.2   Workers’ compensation
   
4.3   Automobile insurance
   
4.4   Notification of cancellation
   
4.5   Further indemnification
   
5   Hold harmless
   
6   Assignment
   
7   Insolvency of the grantee
   
8   Grantor to assume control
   
9   Default of grantee
   
9.1   Hearing
   
9.2   Force majeure
   
10   Termination
   
11   Compliance with applicable laws
   
12   Installation and maintenance of property of the grantee
   
12.1   Construction; permits; supervision; approval
   
12.2   Emergency repairs
   
12.3   Barriers; lighting
   
12.4   Temporary relocation
   
12.5   Permanent relocation
   
13   Interference
   
14   Installation of cables
   
14.1   Grantee to locate buried services
   
15   Restoration of ground surface
   
16   Tree trimming
   
17   Installation and maintenance of subscriber terminals in city buildings and
schools
   
17.1   Additional educational loop to be provided
   
18   Telecast of educational activities
   
19   Change in channel array
   
20   Subscriber rates, installation charges, and other charges
   
20.1   Compliance with “Cable Act”
   
20.2   Compliance with other federal, state and local laws
   
20.3   Regulation by grantor
   
20.4   Notice of rate changes
   
20.5   Rate or service discrimination; special classifications
   
20.6   Existing rates
   
21   Service agreements
   
22   Franchise fees
   
22.1   Payments
   
22.2   Non-waiver
   
22.3   Conditions of acceptance
   
22.4   Reporting
   
23   Network technical requirements
   
23.1   FCC changes in standards
   
23.2   Testing and conformance
   
23.3   Additional tests and inspection
   
23.4   Technical records
   
23.5   Existing technical requirements attached
   
24   Geographical area of service
   
24.1   Conditions requiring extension of service
   
24.2   Non-mandatory extension of service permitted
   
24.3   Provision of service
   
25   Service and repair standards
   
25.1   Repair capability
   
25.2   Notice
   
25.3   Repair procedure
   
25.4   Refund for outage
   
25.5   Complaint policy
   
25.6   Customer standards
   
25.7   Present Federal Communications Commission standards
   
26   Privacy
   
26.1   Monitoring
   
26.2   Subscriber lists or information
   
26.3   Protection of privacy
   
27   Non-discrimination
   
28   Open books and records
   
29   Written notice
   
30   Severability
   
31   Prior inconsistent ordinances
   
32   Certification
   
33   Consent
   
34   Crimes and penalties
   
34.1   Injury to property of the grantee
   
34.2   Intercepting signals of the grantee
   
34.3   Penalty
   
35   Term of franchise
 
   An ordinance regulating cable television systems within the city granting an
extension of a non-exclusive franchise to Cox Cable Quad Cities, Inc., formerly
known as Quint Cities Cablevision, Inc., a Delaware corporation, regulating the
use thereof; setting forth conditions accompanying the granting of cable
television franchises; providing for operational standards; establishing
conditions for the use of city streets, alleys, sidewalks, bridges and other
city-owned rights-of-way and city-owned property, as well as granting any right
the city may have for the use of public utility easements to franchisees;
establishing criterion relevant for the charging of rates and setting forth
city franchise fees; and providing for criminal violations as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory,
and not merely directive or indicative. The word may is permissive and
indicative, and not mandatory.
§ 1.1. ANALOG. Pertaining to signals in the form of continuously-varying
physical quantities.
§ 1.2. AUDIO. Relating to sound or its reproduction; used in the transmission
or reception of sound.
§ 1.3. BASIC CABLE SERVICE. The minimum-level service of multiple-channel
service which may include the retransmission of local television and must carry
signals, including educational access channels, transmitted to subscribers
connected to the cable system.
§ 1.4. BROADCAST. Over-the-air transmission by a standard FCC-authorized radio
or television station to a multiplicity of receivers.
§ 1.5. CABLE.
      (1)   Used synonymously with “cable television”; and
      (2)   One or more electrical or optical conductors found within a
protective sheath.
§ 1.6. CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Pub. Law No. 98-
549 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.)), as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (Pub. Law No. 102-385).
§ 1.7. CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. The level of service as defined as cable
programming service by the grantee in accordance with FCC guidelines and
regulations.
§ 1.8. CABLE SERVICE. Any video or radio service provided by the cable operator
using the cable system.
§ 1.9. CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. The complete system in a
physical sense; the antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links,
satellite links and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities
and plant designed and constructed for the purpose of receiving or producing,
amplifying, storing, processing and distributing audio, video, digital, analog,
control or other forms of electronic or electric signals to and/or from
subscribers or others as herein provided, capable of providing a wide range of
broadband telecommunications services. See CABLE TELEVISION below.
§ 1.10. CABLE TELEVISION. A communications technology in which multiple
television, audio, digital, control, analog and other electrical signals are
transmitted through a cable system to and/or from single or multiple locations.
§ 1.11. CHANNEL. A signal path of specified bandwidth for conveying
information. Usually a band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum
which is capable of carrying one standard NTSC audio-video-color television
signal; at present, a spectrum of six mhz, usually as specified by a television
channel-assignment system.
§ 1.12. CITY. The City of Eldridge, Iowa, a municipal corporation of the State
of Iowa, and all of the territory within its present and future corporate
boundaries.
§ 1.13. CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST. The ownership or voting control of 50%
or more of the issued outstanding shares of grantee or any parent of grantee;
the ability to elect a majority of the board of directors of grantee or any
parent of grantee.
§ 1.14. CONVERTER (FOR TV RECEIVER). An electronic device which changes cable
service channels to a channel which can be received by the subscriber’s
television set by use of an appropriate channel selector, which permits the
subscriber to view all unmodified tv signals delivered at the designated
location.
§ 1.15. DIGITAL SIGNALS. Signals and information transmitted in the form of
individual electronic pulses.
§ 1.16. DROP. The line from the feeder cable to the subscriber’s television or
converter.
§ 1.17. DWELLING UNIT. Any building used as a domicile or living quarters.
§ 1.18. FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
§ 1.19. FEEDER CABLES (FEEDER LINES). The cables that take signals from the
trunk to the subscriber area and to which drops are attached.
§ 1.20. FIBER OPTICS. The technology of modulating and guiding fine beams of
light through hair-thin glass fibers as communications paths.
§ 1.21. FRANCHISE. The formal document which authorizes a specific grantee
(cable operator) to construct, own and operate a cable system in the area
defined by, and pursuant to the terms and conditions of, this chapter.
§ 1.22. FRANCHISE FEE. The fee paid by the grantee to the grantor in
consideration of the use of public streets and the cost of regulation of the
cable system, handling public complaints and other public matters and
administration of this chapter and franchise.
§ 1.23. GRANTEE. The person or organization granted a franchise pursuant to
this chapter; any successor to that entity in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 1.24. GRANTOR. The governmental entity granting a franchise pursuant to this
chapter. When used in regulatory and reporting contexts, GRANTOR shall mean
grantor’s executive officers.
§ 1.25. GROSS REVENUES. All revenues received by the grantee from the provision
of cable service within the territorial limits of the grantor, but excluding
bad debt, taxes and fees paid to any government agency.
§ 1.26. HEAD-END. The control center of a cable television system; the
electronic processing center through which broadcast, cablecast, satellite and
other signals are electronically translated or modified and combined for
distribution throughout the entire cable system.
§ 1.27. OUTLET. A cable television connection terminal in a structure which is
used for the purpose of connecting a television receiver or other subscriber
terminal to the cable system.
§ 1.28. PARENT. (When used in reference to grantee) any person holding direct
or indirect ownership control of grantee.
§ 1.29. PREMIUM SERVICE. Optional additional programming provided to
subscribers on a per program or per channel basis, including groups of channels
carrying such programming.
§ 1.30. PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS. Designated channel(s) allocated for free-
expression, non-commercial and non-discriminatory use by any member or members
of the public at no charge for channel time.
§ 1.31. PUBLIC NOTICE. An announcement to the community of some action planned
by the grantor, or its designee, in respect to cable service or the franchises,
may be accomplished by bulletin, newspaper, radio or tv broadcast, or other
means, including announcements on the cable system, to ensure that all
community members can be made aware of the event.
§ 1.32. SCRAMBLE. To make a signal unintelligible, except to authorized
terminals.
§ 1.33. STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by grantor
for the purpose of public travel, communications, alarm, street lighting, power
distribution or other public use, and shall include such other easements or
rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by grantor.
§ 1.34. SUBSCRIBER. Any person legally receiving within the territorial limits
any of the cable services of grantee.
§ 1.35. TECHNICAL STANDARDS. Those standards specified by the FCC in accordance
with the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
being Pub. Law No. 102-385, said rules being propagated effective June 30,
1992, and complied with by December 30, 1992; and which may be subsequently
amended by the rule-making authority granted to the FCC.
§ 1.36. TERRITORIAL LIMITS. The geographical limits of the City of Eldridge,
Iowa.
§ 1.37. TIER (TIERED SERVICE). Different packages of programs and services on
cable systems for different prices.
§ 1.38. TRANSFER. The disposal, directly or indirectly, voluntarily or
involuntarily, by any method, including gift, assignment, sale, merger,
consolidation, acquisition, bankruptcy, receivership or otherwise, of the
ownership or control of grantee, of the system or the franchise in whole or in
part.
§ 1.39. TRUNK or TRUNKLINE. The primary cable leading from the head-end of the
cable distribution system to the various points where feeder lines are tapped
off to distribute signals to drops.
§ 1.40. UNIT. A building occupied by one or more persons as a dwelling.
§ 1.41. VIDEO. Visual electronic information; a picture signal.
§ 1.42. Other definitions: Any term defined in FCC and/or other applicable
rules and regulations or statutes as of the effective date of the franchise,
but not included in the foregoing list, shall be incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth in full, and shall be defined as it appears in such
rules and/or regulations or statutes. If not so defined, or not defined herein,
words and terms shall be given their ordinary and usual meanings as defined in
standard reference works, precedent; in the event of conflict between any of
the definitions herein and any definitions contained in any other ordinance,
the definitions herein shall take precedent.
§ 2 GRANTING OF AUTHORITY.
   The grantee shall have the right to use the streets and other public
property within the city, including easements granted to the city and the
public and/or public utilities, and, with the written consent of the owner
thereof, private property within the city, in furtherance the operations of a
cable television system subject, however, to the following.
§ 2.1 FRANCHISE.
   The franchise granted by the grantor and accepted by the grantee pursuant to
this chapter shall provide to the grantee the non-exclusive right, privilege
and authority to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the
territorial limits for the term specified in the franchise.
§ 2.2 STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY USE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   For the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a cable system in
the territorial limits, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, relocate, reconstruct, remove and retain in, on, over, under, upon,
across and along the street within the territorial limits such lines, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, false manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant
to the operation of the cable system; provided that all applicable permits are
applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other local codes and ordinances
are otherwise complied with, subject to state law, the right to use and occupy
the streets and rights-of-way for the purpose set forth herein is not
exclusive. The grantor reserves the right to grant one or more additional
franchises or other authorizations for similar use and on substantially
identical terms to any other person at any time. The grantee shall comply with
all applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances, regulations and
codes.
§ 2.3 INSTALLMENT OF EQUIPMENT.
   The grantee shall not install its cable system on private property without
first securing written permission of the owner or tenant in possession of such
property, or the written permission of the holder of any non-public easement
for utility lines or similar purposes, and in accordance with law. Upon
request, the grantee shall inform owners and tenants of the functions of all
equipment installed on private property.
§ 2.4 ACCURATE RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY GRANTEE.
   The grantee shall make and keep, at all times, at the principal office of
the grantee, a full and complete set of plans showing the exact location of all
cable system equipment installed on or in the streets and other public or
private places of the grantor. The grantee shall also maintain a set of network
“as built” maps drawn to scale showing all cable system facilities installed.
Subscriber drops need not be shown.
§ 3 TAXES.
   The grantee shall pay all real estate taxes, special assessments, personal
property taxes, license fees, permit fees and other charges of a like nature
and general applicability which may be taxed, charged, assessed, levied or
imposed upon the property of the grantee and upon any services rendered by the
grantee.
§ 4 INSURANCE.
   The grantee shall, at all times during the term of the franchise, carry and
require its contractors to carry:
§ 4.1 GENERAL INSURANCE.
   Insurance in such forms and in such companies as shall be reasonably
approved by the grantor to protect the city and the grantee from and against
any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation and maintenance of
any structure, equipment or appliance in connection with the cable system. The
amount of such insurance shall be not less than $1,000,000 combined single
limit with a $3,000,000 umbrella, naming both the grantee and the grantor, its
officers, agents and employees as additional insureds;
§ 4.2 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.
   Workers’ compensation insurance, as provided by the laws of the state, as
amended;
§ 4.3 AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE.
   Automobile insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000/$3,000,000 of
public liability coverage and automobile property damage insurance;
§ 4.4 NOTIFICATION OF CANCELLATION.
   All of said insurance coverage shall provide a 30-day notice to the city in
the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in
said policies prior to the date said material alteration or cancellation shall
become effective; and
§ 4.5 FURTHER INDEMNIFICATION.
   The grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the city in
defending itself with regard to all damages, penalties or other claims
resulting from the acts of the grantee, its assigns, employees, agents or
invitees in connection with the operation of the cable system. Clerical
expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorneys’ fees and
court costs. Certificates of insurance or actual insurance policies required by
this section shall be furnished to the city prior to the commencement of any
work to be performed by the grantee in accordance with this franchise and
continuing certificates of insurance or actual insurance policies shall, at all
times, be furnished to the city providing proof of insurance coverage as
required herein during the course of this franchise.
§ 5 HOLD HARMLESS.
   During the term of the franchise, the grantee absolutely assumes and agrees
to pay the city for, and the grantee forever indemnifies the city against, and
agrees to hold and save the city harmless from, any and all damage, injury,
costs, expenses, liability, claims, settlements, judgments, decrees and awards
of every kind, and nature whatsoever, including attorneys’ fees, costs and
disbursements, that may ever be claimed against the city by any individual, or
as the result of any actual or alleged loss, damage, injury to or death of any
person or damage to any property whatsoever, however arising from or related to
or connected with, directly or indirectly:
   (A)   Construction, operation or maintenance of its cable television system
by the grantee;
   (B)   The non-observance by the grantee of the provisions of any laws,
statutes, ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules duly promulgated by any
governmental entity which may be applicable, directly or indirectly, to rights,
privileges and authority, and the obligations and liabilities assumed by the
grantee under the franchise; and/or
   (C)   The non-observance by the grantee of any of the terms and conditions
of the franchise.
§ 6 ASSIGNMENT.
   Except for the purpose of obtaining financing, or in the event the grantee
assigns or transfers its interest in the franchise to an entity controlled by
or under common control with the grantee or its parent shall not assign or
transfer a controlling interest in the franchise, nor any part of the rights,
privileges and authority granted thereunder, without the written consent of the
city (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed).
§ 7 INSOLVENCY OF THE GRANTEE.
   In the event that the grantee shall become insolvent, or be declared
bankrupt, or the property of the grantee shall come into the possession of any
receiver, assignee or other officer acting under an order of court, and any
such receiver, assignee or other such officer shall not be discharged within 60
days after taking possession of such property, the city may, at its option,
terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the grantee.
§ 8 GRANTOR TO ASSUME CONTROL.
   In the event of receivership or bankruptcy as in §
7 of this chapter, the grantor shall have the right to assume control and
management of the cable system by satisfying the creditors and the courts, in
order to assure continued acceptable quality of service to subscribers.
§ 9 DEFAULT OF GRANTEE.
   In the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any of the material terms
and conditions of the franchise within 120 days after receipt of notice in
writing from the city specifying the failure or default, the city may, at its
option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the
grantee. In the event that the grantor desires to elect to revoke the
franchise, it must notify the grantee of the same at least 30 days prior to the
last day of the 120-day period to cure breach. Should the grantee dispute that
a material breach has occurred, the grantee may request the grantor to hold a
hearing pursuant to §
9.1 of this chapter, and the time shall toll until said hearing is held and a
final determination is made regarding whether a material breach has in fact
incurred. Said hearing shall be held within 20 days of the grantee’s request
therefor.
§ 9.1 HEARING.
   Should the grantor desire to revoke the franchise or impose a penalty, and
the grantee requests a hearing under §
9 of this chapter, the grantor shall provide the grantee an opportunity to
appear at a public hearing within 20 days of receipt of such request to present
its argument, including the opportunity to offer evidence and question
witnesses. Based on the evidence at such hearing, the grantor shall, within ten
days of such hearing, determine whether the grantee was in material breach of
this chapter or franchise and, if so, determine whether the grantee has failed
to cure or take substantial steps to cure such material breach within the
allotted time.
§ 9.2 FORCE MAJEURE.
   The grantee shall not be deemed in material breach of this chapter or the
franchise for any failure to perform which results from circumstance not under
the grantee’s reasonable control, such as war, civil disturbance, natural
catastrophe or acts of God. The grantee shall not be excused by economic
hardship or by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers,
employees, affiliates or parent.
§ 10 TERMINATION.
   Upon termination of the franchise for any cause, the grantee agrees to
remove any property belonging to the grantee which the grantor requests to have
removed for good reason set forth by the grantor from all public property and
private property within the city within a reasonable time not to exceed 160
days, and shall return such public property and private property to the owner
thereof in the same condition as when the property of the grantee was placed
thereon, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
§ 11 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS.
   During the term of the franchise, the grantee shall comply with all
governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may now be or
hereinafter, applicable to the construction, operation, maintenance, repair,
replacement, renewal, reconstruction and removal of a cable television system,
the sale and supply of audio and video communications services and the use of
public property and private property.
§ 12 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE.
   During the term of the franchise, the property of the grantee shall be
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, replaced, renewed, reconstructed
and removed in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles so as
not to endanger improvements which the city may deem proper to make, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of
public property or private property, and subject to the following provisions.
§ 12.1 CONSTRUCTION; PERMITS; SUPERVISION; APPROVAL.
   The cable system equipment installed by the grantee shall be constructed and
maintained in good and safe condition at all times; the grantee shall erect no
structures and make no excavations in any streets without first procuring a
written permit in accordance with applicable ordinances and codes. All work of
such kind shall be subject to inspection and approval by the grantor in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
§ 12.2 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   In cases of emergency, the grantee may make whatever repairs are necessary
to maintain the operation of the cable system at required levels; provided,
however, that all emergency work shall comply with all applicable local, state
and federal laws, ordinances and regulations. The grantee shall be responsible
for any damages resulting from temporary repairs.
§ 12.3 BARRIERS; LIGHTING.
   Any openings or obstructions in streets caused by the grantee shall be
guarded and protected by the grantee and its contractors, at all times, by the
placement of adequate barriers, fences, boarding or other protective devices,
at the sole expense of the grantee. During periods of dusk and darkness,
protective devices and protected areas shall be designated by warning lights.
§ 12.4 TEMPORARY RELOCATION.
   (A)   The grantee’s cable distribution system shall be located, relocated,
erected and maintained so as:
      (1)   Not to interfere with the lives or safety of persons or with any
improvements the grantor deems proper to make, and of which the grantee has
received reasonable notice; and
      (2)   Not to hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets.
   (B)   Removal of poles and other structures to avoid such interference shall
be at the grantee’s expense. Raising or lowering or moving of the grantee’s
cable distribution system to permit moving of buildings and other structures
and equipment shall be done by the grantee with at least ten days’ prior
notice, and at mover’s expense, payable in advance, subject to receipt of all
required permits.
§ 12.5 PERMANENT RELOCATION.
   If the grantor shall elect to alter or change the grade or location of any
street, or shall engage in any construction or other public works in, on or
under the streets, the grantee, upon at least 45 days’ written notice by the
grantor, shall relocate its cable distribution system at its own expense, and,
in each instance, shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal
laws, ordinances, codes and regulations.
§ 13 INTERFERENCE.
   The grantee’s cable television system shall be so designed, engineered and
maintained so it will not interfere with the radio and television reception of
persons who are not subscribers of the grantee.
§ 14 INSTALLATION OF CABLES.
   The grantee shall have the right, privilege and authority to lease, rent or,
in any other manner, obtain the use of wooden poles with overhead lines,
conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities
from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the city, and
to use such poles, conduits, ducts, lines and cables in the course of its
business. The grantee shall install its cable on the existing poles owned by
other holders of public licenses and franchises with the city whenever possible
for the installation of its cable. When installation of cable on poles is
insufficient, or when holders of other public licenses or franchises have both
installed underground cable, then, in that event, the cable used by the grantee
shall be installed underground, and the grantee is hereby given the same rights
as the utility companies furnishing gas and electric and telephone service to
the residents of the community to use any and all easements dedicated to the
city or to the public.
§ 14.1 GRANTEE TO LOCATE BURIED SERVICES.
   The grantee shall, upon reasonable request of the grantor, contractors or
other private parties, including all residents of the grantor, locate the exact
location of buried services by visible markings within 72 hours of said
request, the grantee shall also maintain membership in Underground Plant
Location Service, Inc., d/b/a Iowa One Call, or its successor or replacement.
§ 15 RESTORATION OF GROUND SURFACE.
   The grantee, at its expense, shall repair all damage caused by the grantee,
its agents, contractors and subcontractors, in the construction, rebuilding,
upgrade, operation, maintenance and repair of the cable system and shall
restore all property, both public and private, to its original condition, or as
nearly so as possible. Such restoration and repair shall be made as soon as
practicable after such damage, and in accordance with applicable codes. If any
damage involves pavements, sidewalks, driveways, streets or other public
property, such damage shall be repaired at the grantor’s election either by the
grantor at the grantee’s expense or by the grantee to the grantor’s reasonable
satisfaction. The foregoing shall not limit the grantee’s right to contest its
liability for any damage claimed.
§ 16 TREE TRIMMING.
   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon the overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cable system of the
grantee. All trimming shall be done at the expense of the grantee.
§ 17 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SUBSCRIBER TERMINALS IN CITY BUILDINGS AND
SCHOOLS.
   (A)   The grantee shall install and maintain basic service and cable
programming service without charge to the City Hall building, the fire station,
the police station, the library and North Scott Administrative Building, North
Scott Junior High School, North Scott High School, Ed White Elementary School
and Eldridge Community Center.
   (B)   In the event that a new government or school building is constructed
within the territorial limits, the city may request additional hookups and show
reasonable need for service and the grantee shall not unreasonably refuse to
provide the same basic service and cable programming service to said building.
One standard drop and one converter (if needed) per building shall constitute
compliance. The grantee shall locate cable television terminals within such
buildings at the location prescribed by the grantor or the recognized
educational authority located within territorial limits of the grantor. This
provision shall apply only to those buildings accessible to the grantee’s
system.
§ 17.1 ADDITIONAL EDUCATIONAL LOOP TO BE PROVIDED.
   In addition, the grantee agrees to construct and maintain an independent
distribution system connecting North Scott Administrative Building, North Scott
Junior High School, North Scott High School and Ed White Elementary School.
This dedicated system will terminate at the entry point of each building and
the grantee, or its designee, shall be responsible for any electronics or
wiring within each of the buildings. In the event that an additional school
facility or new school building is built within the territorial limits of the
grantor, the grantee shall, upon request and reasonable showing of need,
provide access to the independent distribution system to that building if
reasonably accessible to the grantee’s system.
§ 18 TELECAST OF EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   The grantee shall not cablecast, tape, reproduce or otherwise convey to its
subscribers the activities of any recognized educational authority, public or
private, without the written consent of the governing body of such authority.
§ 19 CHANGE IN CHANNEL ARRAY.
   The grantee shall provide 30 days’ advance notice to the grantor and
subscribers of any changes of channels line-up, unless the schedule of such
changes is beyond the control of the grantee. In such case, the grantee shall
provide notification and explanation immediately by public notice.
§ 20 SUBSCRIBER RATES, INSTALLATION CHARGES AND OTHER CHARGES.
   Except as otherwise provided by the franchise, the grantee shall have the
right, privilege and authority to charge fair and reasonable rates,
installation fees and other charges as to be determined by the grantee for its
services subject to the following.
§ 20.1 COMPLIANCE WITH “CABLE ACT”.
   Said rates shall, at all times, comply with the Cable Act, being the Cable
Communications Act of 1984 (Pub. Law No. 98-549, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as
amended by the 1992 Cable Act (Pub. Law No. 102-385), and all rules and
regulations of the FCC as promulgated thereunder.
§ 20.2 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS.
   This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant hereto shall be subject to
all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations (hereinafter
“law”). If any such law is thereafter amended, changed or repealed, or any new
law is adopted or promulgated applicable to cable service after the effective
date of any franchise granted hereunder, any such amendment or change shall be
incorporated into this chapter at the option of the grantor to the extent
permitted by law. Such change shall become effective upon 30 days’ written
notice by the grantor to the grantee of such incorporation.
§ 20.3 REGULATION BY GRANTOR.
   The grantor reserves the right to regulate rates for cable service or to
engage in other regulatory activity to the fullest extent permitted by law. In
the event that applicable law is amended or repealed, or any restrictions on
the authority of the grantor to regulate rates, or other grantee activities are
removed or lessened, this chapter shall be deemed to include such regulatory
authority for the grantor, as if expressly set forth herein. If the FCC permits
the grantor to regulate such rates, the grantor may, at its discretion,
establish reasonable procedures and standards and regulate such rates to the
fullest extent permitted.
§ 20.4 NOTICE OF RATE CHANGES.
   The grantee shall give the grantor and all subscribers at least 30 days’
public notice of any change in subscriber rates. Notice to subscribers may be
given by ordinary mail or included with their monthly statements.
§ 20.5 RATE OR SERVICE DISCRIMINATION; SPECIAL CLASSIFICATIONS.
   The grantee shall not subject any person or group of persons to any
prejudice or disadvantage, preference or advantage, in connection with rates,
charges, service, facilities, rules or regulations. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the provision of free cable service to government, institutional or
school buildings, or the provision of free cable service to the grantee’s
employees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee may negotiate bulk or
special rates for businesses, hospitals, nursing homes, multiple dwelling units
and other non-single-family residential users.
§ 20.6 EXISTING RATES.
   The current rates being charged by grantee, as of the time of execution of
this franchise, which is on June 25, 2001, including all charges for services
rendered and installation charges and other related changes are set forth in
“Appendix A” attached to this franchise, and by this reference made a part
hereof.
§ 21 SERVICE AGREEMENTS.
   The grantee shall have the right to prescribe a reasonable “contract and
service agreement” for use between the grantee and its subscribers. Such
agreement shall be consistent with all terms and conditions of this chapter and
shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, including all FCC
regulations.
§ 22 FRANCHISE FEES.
   The grantee shall pay a franchise fee of 5% of “gross revenues” to the
grantor as set forth below.
§ 22.1 PAYMENTS.
   Franchise fee shall be computed quarterly for the preceding calendar
quarter, and quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than 30 days
after the end of the calendar quarter for which payment is intended.
§ 22.2 NON-WAIVER.
   Such payments shall be deemed compensation for use of the grantor’s rights-
of-way, administration of service complaints, supervision and inspection of
equipment and facilities and administration of the franchise and ordinance, and
shall be in addition to all federal, state and local taxes of general
applicability.
§ 22.3 CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTANCE.
   The grantor’s acceptance of any payment shall not constitute agreement that
the payment is in fact the correct amount, and such acceptance of payment shall
not constitute a release of any claim the grantor may have for further or
additional sums payable under the provisions of the franchise or any other
claim whatsoever that the grantor may have.
§ 22.4 REPORTING.
   No later than 75 days after the end of each grantee fiscal year, the grantee
shall present to the grantor a certification signed by an officer of the
grantee certifying the methods of calculation and the actual amount of the
yearly gross revenues.
§ 23 NETWORK TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The grantee shall, at all times, maintain its cable system in compliance
with those technical standards publicized by the FCC, pursuant to the Cable
Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended, published June 30, 1992, to
become effective December 30, 1992, subject to the following.
§ 23.1 FCC CHANGES IN STANDARDS.
   In the event the FCC amends, modifies or changes said technical standards,
the grantee shall conform to all changes within the time period specified by
the FCC.
§ 23.2 TESTING AND CONFORMANCE.
   The grantee shall, at all times, perform all tests, as prescribed by the
FCC, and shall file all compliance reports required by the FCC.
§ 23.3 ADDITIONAL TESTS AND INSPECTION.
   The grantor reserves the right to:
   (A)   Require additional tests at specific terminal locations in the event
of particular problems the network;
   (B)   Conduct its own tests and inspections of the cable system on its own
motion at any time during normal business hours upon the provision of
reasonable notice. The grantee shall have a representative available during
such inspection; and
   (C)   If the system fails to meet one or more of the technical standards at
the time of any test, the grantee shall investigate and correct the cause of
said failure. The grantee shall be given a period of 60 days to correct said
failures. Performance testing shall be repeated upon completion of necessary
repair or adjustment by the grantee, and a report of the second test submitted
to the grantor.
§ 23.4 TECHNICAL RECORDS.
   The grantee shall keep accurate records concerning the construction,
modifications and testing of the “cable system”, the grantor shall be allowed
to inspect all records and have access to the same upon reasonable notice to
the grantee.
§ 23.5 EXISTING TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS ATTACHED.
   The present FCC standards as promulgated on June 30, 1992, and which became
effective December 30, 1992, are attached to this franchise, marked “Appendix
B”, and by this reference made a part hereof.
§ 24 GEOGRAPHICAL AREA OF SERVICE.
   The grantee shall maintain its present cable system in existence as of the
date of the execution of this franchise and shall provide additional service as
provided below.
§ 24.1 CONDITIONS REQUIRING EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
   It shall be the obligation of the grantee to make cable service available to
all residents of the city except to the extent that density of homes, adverse
terrain or other factors render providing cable service impracticable,
technically unfeasible or economically non-compensatory. For purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this subsection, and to provide
for reasonable and non-discriminatory policy governing extensions of cable
service within the city, the grantee shall extend service to new subscribers,
at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that
classification where there is an average of 40 units per each linear mile of
new cable construction. In the event the requirements contained herein are not
met, extension of cable service shall be required only on a basis which is
reasonable and compensatory.
§ 24.2 NON-MANDATORY EXTENSION OF SERVICE PERMITTED.
   The grantee may extend its cable service to serve other customers at its
option even though it does not meet the conditions as set forth in §
24.1 of this chapter.
§ 24.3 PROVISION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Beginning with the effective date of the franchise and subject to the
provisions of §
24.1 of this chapter, the grantee shall make available, upon request of owner,
tenant or lessee of any dwelling unit or any business premises serviceable by a
standard drop in the territorial limits, the full range of cable services
available.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall not be required to
provide cable services where conditions beyond the reasonable control of the
grantee as reasonably determined by the parties prevent the provision of cable
service.
§ 25 SERVICE AND REPAIR STANDARDS.
   (A)   The grantee shall establish and adhere to a preventive maintenance
policy directed toward maximizing the reliability and maintainability of the
cable system with respect to its delivery of cable service to subscribers at or
above the technical standards set forth herein.
   (B)   When it is necessary to interrupt cable service for any major and
prolonged time for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, installations or
other maintenance activities, the grantee shall do so at such times as will
cause the least inconvenience to its subscribers, generally between the hours
of 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next morning.
   (C)   The grantee shall comply with customer service standards as
promulgated by the FCC, which standards are incorporated herein by reference
and with the following.
§ 25.1 REPAIR CAPABILITY.
   The grantee shall maintain sufficient qualified technicians, service
vehicles and test and repair equipment to provide repair service within the
parameters set forth below.
§ 25.2 NOTICE.
   Except in an emergency, the grantee shall give subscribers at least 24
hours’ notice of any major and prolonged interruption of cable service for
purposes of maintenance or repair. In an emergency, the grantee shall give such
notice as is reasonable in the circumstances. Notice given on the public access
channels shall be considered sufficient.
§ 25.3 REPAIR PROCEDURE.
   The grantee shall have a toll-free listed telephone number for receipt of
requests for repairs at any time, 24 hours per day, seven days per week; the
grantee responses to such requests shall occur within 24 hours after the
grantee’s receipt of such a request, oral or written, excluding Sundays and
holidays. Verification of the problem and the grantee’s best efforts to resolve
the problem shall occur within 48 hours. The grantee shall respond seven days a
week within two hours to any identified area outage which occurs between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and by not later than 11:00 a.m. the
following day to any area outage which occurs between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
the following day. Such response shall mean actual commencement of trouble-
shooting and repairs, plus contact with the complaining subscriber(s), if
reasonably possible under the circumstances.
§ 25.4 REFUND FOR OUTAGE.
   For any continuous cable service interruption or loss of service in excess
of 24 hours, the grantee shall make a pro-rated refund of such subscriber’s
regular monthly charge to each subscriber so affected, upon written request of
a refund from such subscriber. The 24-hour period shall commence when the
grantee learns of such outage whether through subscriber notification or
notification by the grantee’s maintenance personnel. Such refunds shall be pro-
rated by multiplying the applicable monthly service rate by a fraction whose
numerator equals the number of days of the outage and whose denominator equals
the number of days in the month of the outage. For purposes of this subsection,
an outage shall be defined as a subscriber’s receipt of less than two-thirds of
the authorized basic cable service channels, or loss of any premium channel.
The grantee shall not be required to grant a refund in the event that an outage
is caused by any subscriber.
§ 25.5 COMPLAINT POLICY.
   The grantee shall promulgate written policy statements and procedures for
reporting and resolving subscriber complaints. The grantee shall furnish a copy
thereof to each new subscriber and to the grantor, and thereafter to all
subscribers at least annually, and to the grantor and all subscribers at such
time as there is any change in such policy.
§ 25.6 CUSTOMER STANDARDS.
   The grantee shall comply with service standards that equal or exceed those
established by the FCC as amended from time to time.
§ 25.7 PRESENT FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION STANDARDS.
   The present existing FCC customer service standards are attached hereto
marked as “Appendix C” and by this reference made a part hereof.
§ 26 PRIVACY.
   The grantee shall comply fully with the letter and spirit of § 631 of the
Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 551, with regard to the right of privacy of any
subscriber. If any device or signal associated with the cable system interferes
with the right of privacy of any third-party, the grantee shall terminate any
such interference, consistent with the provisions set forth below; the grantee
shall not disclose the name of any subscriber to any third-party, except for
the grantee’s own marketing or research purposes:
§ 26.1 MONITORING.
   Neither the grantee nor any of its officers, employees or agents shall tap,
monitor or arrange for the tapping or monitoring of any drop, outlet or
receiver for any purpose whatsoever other than legitimate technical performance
testing of the cable system or the monitoring of subscriber cable service or
monitoring to prevent theft of service, without prior written consent of all
affected parties.
§ 26.2 SUBSCRIBER LISTS OR INFORMATION.
   The grantee shall not sell, disclose or otherwise make available, or permit
the use of lists of the names or addresses of its subscribers, or any list or
other information which identifies subscribers or subscriber viewing habits, to
any person or entity for any purpose whatsoever without the consent of such
subscriber, all in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the Cable
Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., and applicable law. This provision shall
not prevent grantee from performing such acts as may be necessary for the
purpose of service-related activities, including surveys.
§ 26.3 PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
   The grantee shall not transmit any audio or video signal, including polling
channel selections, from any subscriber’s premises without first obtaining the
written consent of that subscriber. (This provision is not intended to prohibit
the use of transmission signals useful only for the control or measurement of
signal performance and programming, e.g., status monitoring or reception of
premium service, but such information shall not be used except for those basic
purposes.) The grantee shall not install any special terminal equipment in any
subscriber’s premises which will permit transmission from subscriber’s premises
of two-way services utilizing audio or video signals on the cable system
without first obtaining written permission from the subscriber.
§ 27 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The grantee shall not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color,
sex or national origin in employment practices, contracting or provision of
cable services.
§ 28 OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The grantee shall make available, upon written request by the grantor,
complete and accurate books of account, records, maps, plans and other like
materials of the company applicable to the business, ownership and operations
of the cable system for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter.
The grantor shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s operations at
intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement, compliance and
administration of this chapter and the franchise and to obtain any applicable
information which has not otherwise been provided to the grantor, which the
grantor has reasonable basis to believe such has not been reported fairly or
accurately, the grantor shall protect the confidentiality of such information
to the extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Within 30 business days after request by the grantor, the grantee
shall provide the grantor with copies of such records, certified as accurate by
an officer of the grantee.
§ 29 WRITTEN NOTICE.
   (A)   All notices, reports or demands required to be given to the grantor
and to the grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been given
when delivered personally to the persons designated below, or when 72 hours
have elapsed after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, or on the
next business day if sent by express mail or overnight air courier addressed to
the party to which notice is being given, as follows:
      (1)   If to the grantor:
         City Administrator or Mayor
         City of Eldridge
         P.O. Box 375
         Eldridge, Iowa 52748
      (2)   If to the grantee:
         Vice President and General Manager
         Cox Cable Quad Cities, Inc.
         3900 26th Avenue
         Moline, Illinois 61265
      (3)   Copy to:
         Cox Communications, Inc.
         1400 Lake Hearn Drive
         Atlanta, Georgia 30319
         Attn: Legal Department
   (B)   Addresses may be changed by either party upon such written notice to
the other party.
§ 30 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
§ 31 PRIOR INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or contravening this
chapter or any franchise granted hereunder are hereby repealed.
§ 32 CERTIFICATION.
   The grantee, by accepting the franchise, certifies that it has investigated
its supply sources; is familiar with the community; has examined the cable
system and operations; has reviewed its own financial condition; and has the
capacity and resources to carry out its obligations to the community.
§ 33 CONSENT.
   Whenever, under the terms of the franchise or of this chapter, the grantor’s
or the grantee’s consent or approval is required, it shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
§ 34 CRIMES AND PENALTIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other business entity to
violate the subsections below and such action shall be added to the penalties
below as follows.
§ 34.1 INJURY TO PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully or unlawfully injure the
property of the grantee or to deliberately interfere with the dissemination of
cable television, and any person so doing shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punishable under §
34.3 of this chapter.
§ 34.2 INTERCEPTING SIGNALS OF THE GRANTEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept or receive the signals of
the grantee without having subscribed for said services and entered into an
agreement to pay for said services, and any person so doing shall be deemed to
be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable under §
34.3 of this chapter.
§ 34.3 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
34.1 and
34.2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not to
exceed $100 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
§ 35 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Franchise shall continue for 15 years from the date of the adoption of
this franchise (year 2010).
   (B)   Note:
      (1)   Franchise assigned to TCI effective 1-1-1997;
      (2)   Franchise assigned to AT&T effective 11-9-1998; and
      (3)   Franchise assigned to Mediacom Communications Corporation effective
6-25-2001.
CHAPTER 15: MIDAMERICAN ENERGY GAS FRANCHISE
Section
   
1.00   Granting franchise
   
2.00   Rights
   
3.00   Relocating for purposes of construction
   
4.00   Excavations
   
5.00   Vacations
   
6.00   Relocation expense
   
7.00   Reimbursement
   
8.00   Requesting information
   
9.00   Right to remove brush and trees
   
10.00   Indemnification
   
11.00   Franchise fee
   
12.00   Returning or refunding
   
13.00   Implementation of fee
   
14.00   Binding
   
15.00   Termination
   
16.00   Severability
   
17.00   Effectiveness
   
18.00   Repealer
§ 1.00 GRANTING FRANCHISE.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called “company”, and to its successors and assigns, the right and
non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, replace, erect,
maintain and operate in the City of Eldridge, Iowa, hereinafter called the
“city”, a system for the transmission and distribution of natural gas along,
under, over and upon the streets, avenues, rights-of-way, alleys, public places
or public grounds (excluding parks) to serve customers within the city, and to
furnish and sell natural gas to the city and its inhabitants. The City Council
reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to parks at the request
of the company. The company is granted the right to exercise of powers of
eminent domain. This franchise shall be effective for a 20-year period from and
after the effective date of the ordinance incorporated herein this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 2.00 RIGHTS.
   The company shall have the right to lay, re-lay, operate, repair, construct,
reconstruct, replace and extend natural gas pipes, mains, conduit, fixtures,
valves, support brackets, line markers and other accessories as well as to
excavate for the distribution of natural gas in and through the city; provided
the same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and the city code and
regulations of the city, regarding the placement of structures, facilities,
accessories or other objects in the right-of-way by utilities and other users
of the right-of-way, including ordinances which assign corridors or other
placements to users of the right-of-way and requirements which may be adopted
regarding separations of structures, facilities, accessories or other objects.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 3.00 RELOCATING FOR PURPOSES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements
(whether titled in company exclusively or in company and other entities), in
accordance with state law, including company’s tariff on file with and made
effective by the State Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended
(“tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing pipes,
mains, conduits and facilities in, on, over or under any public street, avenue,
right-of-way or alley in the city in such a manner as the city may reasonably
require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or repair of the street, avenue, right-of-way or alley. If the city
has a reasonable alternative route for the street, avenue, right-of-way or
alley or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the
relocation of the company installations or would minimize the cost or expense
of relocation of company installations, the city and company shall work
together to consider said alternative route, or construction method. The city
shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provisions
for the placement of company service lines and facilities on city-owned rights-
of-way without charge to company. In planning for the extension or modification
of streets, the city shall, to the extent practicable, design such changes to
limit the need for the relocation of company facilities. The city shall be
responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for city projects that
require the company to relocate company facilities. If requested, the city
shall provide, at no cost to the company, copies of the relocation plan and
profile and cross section drawings. If tree removals must be completed by the
city as part of the city’s project and are necessary whether or not utility
facilities must be relocated, the city, at its own cost, shall be responsible
for said removals. If the timing of tree removals does not coincide with
company’s facilities relocation schedule and the company must remove trees that
are included in the city’s portion of the project, the city shall either remove
the trees or reimburse the company for the expenses incurred to remove the
trees. If project funds from a source other than the city are available to pay
for the relocation of utility facilities, the city shall attempt to secure said
funds and provide them to the company to compensate the company for the costs
of relocation.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 4.00 EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, rights-of-way and
public places for the installation, maintenance or repair of gas pipes, mains,
conduit, fixtures, accessories or other appliances, the company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. The company in making such
excavations shall, if required by ordinance, obtain a city permit therefor and
shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets, avenues or alleys; shall
provide the Public Works Director with 24 hours’ notice prior to the actual
commencement of the work; and shall comply with all provisions and requirements
of the city in its regulation of the use of city right-of-way in performing
such work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the company may
proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit;
provided, however, that the company shall apply for and obtain the excavation
permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work. To the extent
not inconsistent with this chapter, the company shall comply with all
provisions and requirements of the city in its regulation of the use of city
right-of-way in performing such work, including all city ordinances regarding
paving cuts, placement of facilities and restoration of pavement and other
public infrastructure, the company shall replace the surface, restoring the
condition as existed prior to the company’s excavation, but shall not be
required to improve or modify the public right-of-way. The company shall
complete all repairs in a timely and prompt manner. Company agrees any
replacement of road surface shall conform to current city ordinances regarding
its depth and composition.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 5.00 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground or public right-of-way
shall not deprive the company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above or beneath the vacated
property.
   (B)   Prior to the city abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley or
public ground where the company has facilities in the vicinity, the city shall
provide the company with not less than 60 days’ advance notice of the city’s
proposed action and, upon request, grant the company a utility easement
covering its existing facilities.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 6.00 RELOCATION EXPENSE.
   The company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense,
company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at
company expense at the direction of the city in the previous five years.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 7.00 REIMBURSEMENT.
   Pursuant to relocation of company facilities as may be required by §§
3.00,
4.00 and
5.00 of this chapter, if the city orders or requests the company to relocate
its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly facilitate the
project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the
city shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the company
for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing
facilities or equipment. The company shall not be required to relocate in order
to facilitate such private project at its expense.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 8.00 REQUESTING INFORMATION.
   Upon reasonable request, the company shall provide the city, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in city right-of-way, including documents, maps and
other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“information”). The
company and city recognize the information may, in whole or part, be considered
a confidential record under state or federal law or both. Therefore, the city
shall not release any information without prior consent of the company and
shall return the information to company upon request. The city recognizes that
company claims the information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise
protected from public disclosure by state or federal law on other grounds and
agrees to retain the information in its non-public files. Furthermore, the city
agrees that no documents, maps or information provided to the city by the
company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such
documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, being 5 U.S.C. § 552, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 C.F.R. §§
388.112 and 388.113, or Iowa Code Chapter 22, as such statutes and regulations
may be amended from time to time. In the event any action at law, in equity or
administrative is brought against the city regarding disclosure of any document
which the company has designated as a trade secret or as otherwise protected
from disclosure the city shall promptly notify the company. The company shall
have the right to assume, upon request of the city, the defense of said action.
The company shall reimburse the city any and all costs, including attorney fees
and penalties, to the extent allowed by law which may result from any said
action.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 9.00 RIGHT TO REMOVE BRUSH AND TREES.
   The company is granted the right to remove brush and trees from the right-
of-way or other locations where gas pipe or mains are located consistent with
the requirements of state or federal regulations.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 10.00 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The company shall indemnify, save and hold harmless the city from any and
all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, including attorneys’
fees, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent
caused or occasioned in whole or part by the company’s negligence in
construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the
natural gas distribution system authorized by this franchise; provided,
however, that the company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save
harmless the city for any costs or damages to the extent arising in whole or
part from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees or agents.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 11.00 FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of 5% upon the gross revenue
generated from sales of natural and mixed gas and distribution service by the
company within the corporate limits of the city from July 1, 2021. For purposes
of this section, gross revenue shall include, in addition to revenue from
direct sales of natural or mixed gas to customers, the gross revenue derived by
the company from the transmission, transportation or distribution of natural or
mixed gas sold to customers by suppliers other than the company through the
company’s distribution system within the city. The franchise fee shall be
remitted by the company to the city on or before the last business day of the
calendar quarter following the close of the calendar quarter in which the
franchise fee is charged.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 12.00 RETURNING OR REFUNDING.
   The company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted
to the city. In the event the company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the city’s imposition of franchise fees or the
company is required to assist the city in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the city shall
reimburse the company for the expenses incurred by the company to provide such
data or information.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 13.00 IMPLEMENTATION OF FEE.
   Upon implementation of a franchise fee, the city shall not, pursuant to Iowa
Code Chapter 480A.6, impose or charge company right-of-way management fees for
permits for company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement
cutting or inspections of company work sites and projects or related matters.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 14.00 BINDING.
   This franchise shall apply to and bind the city and the company and their
successors and assigns.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 15.00 TERMINATION.
   Either city or company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer period for cure. If the
breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of
this franchise if it has operated in compliance with state or federal law. A
party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the alleged
breach is the result of the actions of a third-party or the other party.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 16.00 SEVERABILITY.
   If any of the provisions of this chapter are for any reason declared to be
illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this chapter, which are severable
from said provisions, shall be and remain in full force and effect, the same as
if this chapter contained no illegal or void provisions.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 17.00 EFFECTIVENESS.
   This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with state
law and the written acceptance by the company. The city shall provide company
with an original signed and sealed copy of the ordinance incorporated herein
this chapter within ten days of its final passage. The company shall, within 30
days after the City Council approval of this chapter, file in the office of the
City Clerk, its acceptance in writing of all the terms and provisions of this
chapter. Following City Council approval, this chapter shall be published in
accordance with the Iowa Code. The effective date of this chapter shall be the
date of publication. In the event company does not file its written acceptance
of this chapter within 30 days after its approval by the City Council, this
chapter shall be void and of no effect.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 18.00 REPEALER.
   Upon the effective date of the ordinance incorporated herein this chapter,
all prior natural gas franchises granted to the company to furnish natural gas
to the city and its inhabitants are hereby repealed and all other ordinances or
parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are also hereby repealed.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 16: HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Tax rate
   
3.00   Effective date
   
4.00   Payment of tax
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL and MOTEL. Any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house,
mobile home which is tangible personal property or tourist court, or in any
place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent,
whether with or without meals; except the renting of sleeping rooms in
dormitories and in memorial unions at all universities and colleges in the
state and the guests of a religious institution if the property is exempt under
Iowa Code § 427.1(8), and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a
religious retreat or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
   RENTING and RENT. Any kind of direct or indirect charge for such sleeping
rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters, or their use.
§ 2.00 TAX RATE.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and
all rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel, as defined in
this chapter, at the rate of 7% of such gross receipts derived from the renting
of a room, apartment or sleeping quarter while rented by the same person for a
period of not more than 31 consecutive days.
§ 3.00 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The tax herein above established shall be imposed only after an election at
which a majority of those voting on the question favor the imposition of such
tax. In the event that the tax is approved at such election, it shall then be
imposed upon the January 1, 2002, following the notification of the Director of
Revenue and Finance.
§ 4.00 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Such tax shall be paid as is provided in Iowa Code Chapter 423A, and the
proceeds of such tax shall be used for the purposes stated in subsection 4
thereof, as follows:
   “4.   The revenue derived from any hotel and motel tax authorized by this
chapter shall be used as follows:
   a.   Each county or city which levies the tax shall spend at least fifty
percent of the revenues derived therefrom for the acquisition of sites for, or
constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or
maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities
including but not limited to memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic
center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or
facilities located at those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment
facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or
other evidence of indebtedness issued by the county or city for those
recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities; or for the
promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the city or
county and surrounding areas.
   b.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the city or county which levies
the tax for any city or county operations authorized by law as a proper purpose
for the expenditure within statutory limitations of city or county revenues
derived from ad valorem taxes.
   c.   Any city or county which levies and collects the hotel and motel tax
authorized by this chapter may pledge irrevocably an amount of the revenues
derived therefrom for each of the years the bonds remain outstanding to the
payment of bonds which the city or county may issue for one or more of the
purposes set forth in paragraph ‘a’ of this subsection. Any revenue pledged to
the payment of such bonds may be credited to the spending requirement of
paragraph ‘a’ of this subsection.”
CHAPTER 17: TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
Section
   
1.00   Grant of franchise
   
2.00   Excavations
   
3.00   Regulatory authority
   
4.00   Applicable to successors or assigns
   
5.00   Attachments
   
6.00   Costs of publishing
   
7.00   Effectiveness and contract
 
   An ordinance granting unto Central Scott Telephone Company, its successors
and assigns, the right, franchise and privilege for a period of 25 years from
and after the adoption and approval thereof, to acquire, construct and/or
maintain in the incorporated city, the necessary facilities, including
telephone system and exchange for the purpose of transmitting messages in said
city by telephone for public and private use; to use and occupy streets,
avenues, alleys and other public grounds for such purposes and prescribing the
terms and conditions of the grant and repealing all ordinances in conflict
herewith.
   Be it ordained by the City Council of the incorporated city:
§ 1.00 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   Permission and authority are hereby granted for the period of 25 years from
and after the acceptance of this franchise as herein provided to Central Scott
Telephone Company, its successors or assigns (hereinafter called the grantee),
it being expressly understood that said permission and authority are non-
exclusive, to acquire, construct and maintain in the incorporated city, as the
same are now or may hereafter be extended or located, the necessary facilities
for the receiving and transmitting of messages by telephone, using wires,
cables, carrier, microwave and/or electronic and/or other methods, for public
and private use, and to sell and furnish telephone service to the city and its
inhabitants, for all purposes, and to construct and maintain along, upon,
across or under the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public
places the necessary fixtures, apparatus and equipment for such purposes, which
shall be located, arranged and maintained so as not to endanger persons or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of streets, alleys or private
property.
§ 2.00 EXCAVATIONS.
   Subject to the provisions of existing or subsequently enacted ordinances of
the city, the grantee may take up pavement or make excavations in the streets,
alleys, avenues or other public places in said city.
§ 3.00 REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
   This franchise shall not restrict, in any manner, the right of the City
Council or other governing body of the city in the exercise of any regulatory
authority which may now or hereafter be authorized or permitted by the laws of
the state.
§ 4.00 APPLICABLE TO SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS.
   All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the successors or
assigns of the grantee, with the same force and effect as they do the grantee
itself.
§ 5.00 ATTACHMENTS.
   The grantee shall agree to allow said city to attach, at any time, to any of
said poles of the grantee, the city fire alarm and/or police wires, including
necessary apparatus incident thereto; provided such attachments shall be made
under the direction and supervision of the grantee and made and maintained so
as not to interfere with the grantee’s use of said poles.
§ 6.00 COSTS OF PUBLISHING.
   Central Scott Telephone Company shall, upon demand, pay the costs of
publishing this chapter, and of holding the election hereinafter referred to.
§ 7.00 EFFECTIVENESS AND CONTRACT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect and shall constitute a
binding contract between the city and Central Scott Telephone Company when the
same shall have been approved by a majority of the electors of said city voting
thereon, and when the provisions hereon shall have been accepted in writing by
Central Scott Telephone Company, and such acceptance filed with the City Clerk
of the incorporated city.
CHAPTER 18: CONTRACTOR LICENSE
Section
   
1.00   Licensing generally
   
1.01   License required; exceptions
   
1.02   Sign contracting
   
1.03   Fence contracting
   
1.04   Restriction on transfer
   
2.00   Required fees
   
3.00   Required bonds
   
3.01   License and permit bond
   
3.02   Performance bond
   
3.03   Maintenance bond
   
4.00   Certificates of insurance
   
4.01   Insurance requirements
   
5.00   Renewals
 
   An ordinance regulating contractor license and certificate of insurance.
§ 1.00 LICENSING GENERALLY.
§ 1.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in
construction contracting without having a current valid license issued in
accordance with this chapter. The term construction contracting shall mean
being engaged in the performance or supervision of work regulated by provisions
of any of the technical codes, as defined in
Title C, Chapter 8, and shall include persons contracting to perform such work
in the conduct of a business.
   (B)   Exception:
      (1)   The owner of an existing single-family dwelling who occupies the
dwelling as his or her own residence may perform repair work regulated by any
of the above named codes on said dwelling together with any existing accessory
buildings not used for commercial purposes only if:
         (a)   The owner has secured a valid permit prior to commencement of
the repair work;
         (b)   The owner calls for all of the required inspection normally
required as part of performing such work;
         (c)   The owner has not applied for work permits at more than two
dwellings within a period of four years nor is engaged in the business of
remodeling dwellings other than his or her own dwelling; and
         (d)   The owner can demonstrate adequate knowledge and ability in the
area of work for which applied.
      (2)   A contractor’s license shall not be required for sanitary sewers,
storm sewers or water mains construction where such sewers are public sewers on
public property, or, as in the case of subdivision development work, where such
sanitary sewers, storm sewers or water mains are intended for future acceptance
by the city as public facilities on public property. All such work is directly
under the jurisdiction of the city.
§ 1.02 SIGN CONTRACTING.
   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in sign contracting
without having a current valid license issued in accordance with this chapter.
The term SIGN CONTRACTING shall mean being engaged in the performance or
supervision of work regulated by the provisions of
Title D, Chapter 2, § 37.
§ 1.03 FENCE CONTRACTING.
   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in fence
contracting without having a current valid license issued in accordance with
this chapter. The term FENCE CONTRACTING shall mean being engaged in the
performance or supervision of work regulated by the provisions of
Title D, Chapter 2, § 38.
§ 1.04 RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER.
   No license may be loaned, rented, assigned or transferred. No holder of a
valid license shall obtain a permit under his or her license and then
subcontract, sell or otherwise assign the work covered by the permit to a
person or firm who does not have a valid license.
§ 2.00 REQUIRED FEES.
   (A)   Fee. Effective July 1, 2014, and every year thereafter, all
contractors doing business within the limits of the city shall obtain a
license. The fee for said license shall be $75 and shall be paid annually.
Licenses obtained after April 1 shall require a $100 fee. Such a license shall
be valid for the remainder of the permit period, plus the next permitting
period.
   (B)   Licenses. All licenses are valid until June 30 of the year subsequent
to the year the license was obtained except as noted above. The license must be
renewed every July 1 after subsequent year when the license shall be renewed
for another 12-month period.
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 3.00 REQUIRED BONDS.
§ 3.01 LICENSE AND PERMIT BOND.
   (A)   All contractors doing business within the limits of the city shall be
required to execute and deposit with the city a license and permit bond on
forms as provided by the city, such forms hereby are made a part of this
chapter, annually on or before February 1, which shall be in the amount of
$10,000 or 5% of the contract amount in the case of a general contractor,
whichever is greater amount; and $1,000 or 5% of the contract amount, whichever
is the greater amount in the case of subcontractors.
   (B)   This license and permit bond shall be required in all cases of
contractors doing business within the limits of the city with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   Owner of an existing single-family dwelling performing work within
the dwelling; and
      (2)   Those persons performing contracting work, the aggregate amount for
which is less than $500.
§ 3.02 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   All contractors doing work for the city under a public contract shall supply
to the city a performance bond in an amount not less than the amount of said
contract. This bond shall guarantee that work shall be completed, and completed
to the satisfaction of the city as outlined in bid and specification documents.
The performance bond may be specified in bid documents in a public contract, as
determined by the City Council, which may provide additional requirements.
§ 3.03 MAINTENANCE BOND.
   The city may require, at the discretion of the City Council, a maintenance
bond for any work performed for the city, in an amount to be determined by the
city, which shall guarantee the complete repair and correction of any latent
defects which may arise from work performed by the contractor or any
subcontractor, for a period of time to be determined by the city, not to exceed
four years.
§ 4.00 CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE.
   (A)   All contractors shall supply a certificate or affidavit of insurance
executed by a representative of a duly qualified insurance company evidencing
that said insurance company has issued liability and property damage insurance
policies covering activities of said contractor in amounts not less than the
following schedule. Contractors doing work for the city, under a public
contract, must also provide that the city is named as an additional insured.
   (B)   All certificates of insurance required herein shall state that 30
days’ written notice will be given to the city before the policy is cancelled
or changed.
   (C)   All certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the city prior to
the time that any operations are started.
§ 4.01 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The contractor shall purchase and maintain such insurance as will
protect him or her from claims set forth below which may arise out of or result
from the contractor’s operations, whether such operations be by himself or
herself or by a subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by
any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The contractor shall maintain such general liability
insurance as shall protect him or her against claims for damages from:
            1.   Bodily injury, including wrongful death; and
            2.   Property damage, which may arise from operations by himself or
herself or by any subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by
either of them.
         (b)   The minimum acceptable limits are $1,000,000 combined single
limit per occurrence, and $1,000,000 single limit aggregate.
      (2)   The general liability insurance required by the division (B)(1)
above shall include the following extensions of coverage.
         (a)   The coverage shall be provided under a standard ISO
comprehensive general liability, occurrence form of policy.
         (b)   X.C.U. coverage - If the contract requires any work procedures
involving blasting, excavating, tunneling or other underground work, the
liability coverage shall include standard blasting or explosion coverage,
standard collapse coverage and standard underground coverage, commonly referred
to a XCU property liability coverage.
         (c)   Contractual liability coverage shall be included.
         (d)   Protective liability coverage shall be included to protect the
contractor against claims arising out of operations arising by his or her
subcontractors.
         (e)   Products and completed operations liability coverage shall be
included.
         (f)   Personal injury liability coverage.
      (3)   (a)   The contractor shall take out and maintain such automobile
liability insurance as shall protect against claims for damages from:
            1.   Bodily injury, including wrongful death; and
            2.   Property damage, which may arise from the operations of any
owned, hired or non-owned automobiles used by or for him or her in any capacity
in connection with work being performed.
         (b)   The minimum liability limits are $1,000,000 combined single
limit each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
      (4)   The contractor shall take out and maintain the applicable statutory
workers’ compensation insurance with a carrier authorized to write such
insurance and in the applicable state covering all of his or her employees. In
the case of any work sublet, the contractor shall require the subcontractor
similarly to provide statutory workers’ compensation insurance for the latter’s
employees. The contractor shall take out and maintain employer’s liability
insurance with limits of $100,000 bodily injury for each accident, $100,000
bodily injury for each employee by disease and $500,000 policy limit by
disease.
      (5)   The required limits of liability shown above may be satisfied in a
single underlying or “primary” policy or in combination with “umbrella” or
“excess” liability insurance policies so long as there is sufficient coverage
in the aggregate to meet the required minimums.
§ 5.00 RENEWALS.
   It is the responsibility of individual contractors to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. No permits shall be issued unless and until the
annual fee, current bonds and certificates have been supplied.
 
BOND #_________________
 
LICENSE AND PERMIT BOND
 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: That................
Address...........................as principal, and.............
as surety, are held and firmly bound unto the CITY OF ELDRIDGE, IOWA in the penal and
full sum of...........Thousand Dollars, ($...........), for the payment of which well
and truly to be made we do hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heirs,
executors, administrators, personal representatives, successors and assigns.
The conditions of the above obligation are such that, whereas the above bounden
principal has applied for a license permit, or certificate to engage in the business
or occupation of...........................in Eldridge, Iowa, which license, permit,
or certificate must be obtained or renewed yearly hereafter;
NOW, THEREFORE in consideration of said license, permit, or certificate now or
hereafter being granted, issued or renewed, said principal shall:
   1.   Indemnify and save harmless the City of Eldridge, its officials, employees,
and any members of any applicable Examining or License Board and their successors,
from and on account of any and all judgements, claims, demands, losses, costs,
expenses, or liabilities of any kind whatsoever which said City and any or all of the
persons above enumerated may sustain or which may be recovered from it or them, from
or by reason of the issuance of each such license, permit, or certificate, or by
reason of any act, neglect or thing done under or by virtue of the authority given in
any such license, permit, or certificate, or in any way connected with, relating to,
or growing out of any work performed by said principal, his or its agents and
employees, or any sub-contractor or anyone in any way under his or its supervision
and direction.
   2.   In all respects be bound hereby to any and all applicable requirement and
provisions required to be in this bond by existing and hereafter existing ordinances,
rules and regulations of the City of Eldridge, and other laws, the same as though
such requirements and provisions were fully set forth in this bond, and by reference
such requirements and provisions are made a part hereof;
   3.   Comply with and faithfully observe and obey all applicable rules,
regulations, and ordinances of the City of Eldridge now or hereafter existing and all
other applicable laws now or hereafter existing affecting or relating to the carrying
on of such business or occupation.
   4.   Pay all damages or loss that may occur from any act, neglect, or carelessness
of said principal, his or its agents or employees, anyone under his or its
supervision or direction, or any subcontractor, from such work pertaining to said
business or occupation, or from poor or defective work or material;
   5.   Properly perform and execute and fully protect any and all work of such
business or occupation undertaken by principal or under his or its direction and
supervision, or by any agent or employee, or by any subcontractor.
   6.   Pay any penalties that may be imposed during the period of any such present
and future permit, license or certificate.
 
Compliance with all and several of the above enumerated items shall make this bond
void. Otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect within the City of
Eldridge, Iowa. This bond is and shall be given effect as a yearly bond in the above
stated amount for each yearly license, permit, or certificate, now or hereafter
issued to principal, the same as though a separate bond for each such present and
future license, permit, or certificate year or period had been executed
notwithstanding this is a continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall
have the right to cancel this bond for future liability upon sixty (60) days notice
to the City of Eldridge in writing.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands
 
this.....................day of......................., 20......
 
............................
PRINCIPAL
 
............................
SURETY
 
............................
ATTORNEY-IN-FACT
 
CHAPTER 19: MOBILE FOOD UNITS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   License required
   
3.00   License application
   
4.00   General regulations for all mobile food units and pushcarts
   
5.00   Pushcart specific regulations
   
6.00   Mobile food unit specific regulations
   
7.00   Enforcement and penalties
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSARY. A licensed food facility regulated by a governmental entity
where food is stored, prepared, portioned, packaged or any combination thereof,
and where such food is intended for consumption at another location or place
from a mobile food unit or pushcart.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption. For the purposes of
this chapter, FOOD ESTABLISHMENT does not include an establishment that offers
only pre-packaged foods that are non-potentially hazardous; a produce stand
which sells only whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; an establishment
operating in a farmers market if potentially hazardous food is not sold or
distributed; a residence in which food that is non-potentially hazardous is
sold for consumption off-premises to a consumer customer provided the food is
labeled so as to identify its preparer; a private home that receives catered or
home-delivered food; child care facilities or food establishments in hospitals
or health care facilities which are subject to regulation by state agencies;
supply vehicles and vending machines.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Motorized, a self-propelled food establishment or a
trailer or vehicle towed by a motorized vehicle, that is readily movable, and
which typically operates at a remote location and returns to base of operation
or commissary at the end of its daily business. MOBILE FOOD UNITS are
considered Class IV mobile food units by the State Department of Inspections
and Appeals.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. Has the same meaning as provided in Iowa Code
Chapter 137F.
   PUSHCART. A non-motorized food establishment limited to serving non-
potentially hazardous packaged foods with limited assembly or commercial or
commissary prepared foods that are reheated on the PUSHCART, such as
frankfurters. PUSHCARTS may be towed by a vehicle but are generally capable of
being moved by human-power. PUSHCARTS are considered Class III mobile food
units by the State Department of Inspections and Appeals.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 2.00 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale or otherwise engage in a business as
a mobile food unit or pushcart within the city without having first obtained a
license to operate as such. A mobile food unit license is a special license and
is required in addition to any other required city business license or state
license or permit the person may hold or be required to hold. A separate mobile
food unit license is required for each mobile food vehicle or pushcart from
which business is conducted in the city. Mobile food unit licenses are not
transferable or assignable. The license fee required shall be established by
the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 3.00 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application form available from the city offices must be filled out and
submitted to the city offices for processing. The completed application must be
submitted together with proof of liability insurance, including commercial
general liability insurance coverage and automotive liability insurance
coverage. Commercial general liability insurance shall include coverage for
bodily injury, death and property damage with limits of liability of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and aggregate combined single limit. Automobile
liability insurance coverage shall include coverage for bodily injury, death
and property damage with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence, combined single limit. Certificates of insurance shall provide that
the policy or policies have been endorsed to provide 30 days’ advance notice of
cancellation and 45 days’ advance notice of non-renewal and ten days’ advance
notice of cancellation for non-payment of premium and that these notices shall
be provided to the city offices by email, facsimile or mail. Cancellation of
required insurance automatically revokes and terminates the mobile food unit
license to operate in the city unless other insurance policies are provided in
a timely manner to the city. If the mobile food unit sells food or beverages
other than pre-packaged items that do not require hot or cold handling
procedures, the application shall also contain a copy of the mobile food unit’s
license issued by the State Department of Inspections and Appeals; a copy of
the food establishment license issued by the State Department of Inspections
and Appeals for any commissary kitchen or other premises where food is
prepared; copies of the food protection manager certifications; the name and
address of the facility at which any waste fat, waste oil or waste grease
generated by the mobile food unit operation is disposed of; and a copy of the
certificate of annual compliance issued by the Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 4.00 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL MOBILE FOOD UNITS AND PUSHCARTS.
   (A)   Mobile food units shall have, and always maintain, all necessary
licenses and permits from the State Department of Inspections and Appeals as
well as the city’s required permits and licenses.
   (B)   Mobile food units shall always operate in compliance with all
applicable food, health and sanitation laws and shall comply with all Health
Department regulations regarding food service, food storage and preparation,
food handling and food cooking and shall have a valid inspection certificate or
permit evincing Health Department inspection and approval on display and easily
visible to the mobile food unit’s or pushcart’s patrons at all times in
operation.
   (C)   No mobile food unit or pushcart shall offer for sale or sell food and/
or beverage between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless special
written permission is given by the City Council or City Administrator.
   (D)   No mobile food unit or pushcart may operate in the right-of-way
established by the city absent of the premises obtaining permission from the
City Council.
   (E)   No mobile food unit or pushcart shall operate within a city park or on
public property, unless invited by an authorized person to participate in an
authorized event.
   (F)   A mobile food unit or pushcart shall not call out to, cry out, shout
out or otherwise communicate or make any noise or use any device to call
attention to his or her unit’s or cart’s location and operation.
   (G)   A mobile food unit or pushcart is responsible for keeping and
maintaining the area around and within 50 feet of the mobile food unit or
pushcart neat, clean and free from trash, debris, garbage and other hazardous
conditions at all times, regardless of whether the trash, debris or garbage
originated from the operation of the unit or pushcart or was left in the area
by a pedestrian passersby or natural conditions. A mobile food unit or pushcart
shall always provide adequate trash receptacles for the public for all garbage
from its operation and from the accumulation of garbage in the area around his
or her unit or pushcart while the unit is in operation. At the close of its
daily business, the mobile food unit or pushcart must remove all garbage from
the area and properly dispose of it away from the site of its operation; the
garbage shall not simply be placed in nearby public garbage receptacles
provided for use to the public at large.
   (H)   The license required by this chapter, the state sales tax permit and
all licenses, permits or certificates required to be displayed by state law
shall be posted on the mobile food unit or pushcart to be readily visible to
all persons conducting business with the mobile food unit.
   (I)   Mobile food units and pushcarts shall only offer single service food
utensils, such as cups, straws, knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, plates, bowls,
wrappers, containers and similar utensils, which shall be individually wrapped
if usual, and kept in a clean place and only used once in the service of food
and/or beverage.
   (J)   No mobile food unit or pushcart shall be left at its operating
location at the end of its business day and shall be removed to its base
business operation location, unless invited to stay for an authorized city
event.
   (K)   No mobile food unit or pushcart shall conduct operations at a location
or in a manner that hinders, impedes or restricts access to a payphone,
mailbox, emergency call box, traffic control box, fire hydrant, entrance to a
building or a driveway.
   (L)   A mobile food unit or pushcart operating on private property shall not
encroach into any public sidewalk or public right-of-way. All private property
owners allowing mobile food units on property must notify the city as having a
mobile kitchen for public safety purposes.
   (M)   No mobile food unit or pushcart is allowed on the grounds of any
public or municipal property, unless it has been invited to be there as part of
an authorized function.
   (N)   The city reserves the right to move a mobile food unit or pushcart
from any location if determined to be necessary for the provision of emergency
or public services or in the interest of public safety, peace and welfare.
   (O)   No mobile food unit or pushcart shall offer for sale or sell any
liquor, beer or wine from such unit.
   (P)   The city has the right to grant or deny any applications at its sole
discretion.
   (Q)   The City Council or City Administrator has the right to waive the
license fee for a non-profit group for a single event.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 5.00 PUSHCART SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pushcart shall not allow, cause or obstruct the passage along any
sidewalk, street, alley or parking lot as a result of a congregation of people
seeking service from the pushcart or because of the size, shape or placement of
the pushcart so as to interfere, inhibit or block the normal flow of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
   (B)   A pushcart shall not violate parking regulations.
   (C)   A pushcart shall not sell to any person operating a vehicle on a
public street while the person’s vehicle is located within the traveled portion
of the roadway. A pushcart may sell to a person operating or occupying a motor
vehicle that is legally parked but may only do so from the curb side of said
parked vehicle.
   (D)   No pushcart or equipment shall be allowed to remain in the public
right-of-way at the close of business.
   (E)   All pushcarts and equipment associated with the business shall be
maintained to enhance the aesthetic and overall appearance of the area in which
the pushcart is operated.
   (F)   A pushcart may operate at a requested location on private property.
Their application must be accompanied by a verifiable letter from the owner or
person in control of the property granting permission to operate on the
premises. Permission by the owner/person in control of property may be
rescinded at any time by notifying the city offices in writing that permission
is rescinded. If permission is rescinded, no fees or portion of fees paid will
be refunded.
   (G)   No pushcart shall conduct business in areas of the city at which they
are not permitted or authorized.
   (H)   Pushcarts shall be subject to the same permit and fee structures as
all other mobile food units.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 6.00 MOBILE FOOD UNIT SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Sales shall be conducted away from moving vehicles and far enough from
the sidewalk to not impede regular pedestrian traffic.
   (B)   No mobile food unit shall be used for any purpose other than as a
mobile food unit offering food and/or beverage to customers.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 7.00 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The County Health Department, the City Police Department and the City
Enforcement Officer are authorized to enforce this chapter. The County Health
Department may elect to pursue enforcement under the provisions of this chapter
or under applicable state laws and regulations with the sanctions available
thereunder.
   (B)   The performance of any action contrary to the provisions of this
chapter may be cited as a municipal infraction offense. Additionally, failure
to adhere to the regulations is cause for revocation or suspension of a license
to operate as a mobile food unit or pushcart.
   (C)   Penalties for violation of this code as laid forth in
Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.02 is $50 for the first offense, $200 for the second
offense and $500 for subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-2023)
CHAPTER 20: CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
1.00   Residency requirements for civil service employees
§ 1.00 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   All sworn, civil service police employees shall reside within the
corporate limits of the city or within 30 miles of the center point of LeClaire
Road and First Street. For the sake of clarity, the above-described boundaries
include areas within the state that are within 30 miles of the corporate limits
of the city. The time limits for establishing a qualifying residence set forth
under state civil service law shall apply.
   (B)   All civil service employees, other than those described in division
(A) above, shall reside in the state or the State of Illinois.
   (C)   These residency requirements shall not be construed to be a defense or
justification for absenteeism or tardiness.
(Ord. 2023-16, passed 8-21-2023)
TITLE B: PUBLIC ORDER
   Chapter
      
1.   TRAFFIC
      
2.   ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL CODES
      
3.   BICYCLES
      
4.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
5.   CRIMINAL TRESPASS
      
6.   MISDEMEANORS
      
7.   PARK RULES
      
8.   NUISANCES
      
9.   WEEDS
      
10.   ANIMALS
      
11.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
12.   MULTI-HAZARD EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
      
13.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
      
14.   SOCIAL HOST
CHAPTER 1: TRAFFIC
Section
   
1.00   Adoption of state traffic provisions
   
2.00   Traffic signs and signals
   
2.01   New regulatory signs
   
2.02   Warning signs
   
2.03   Signs for emergency
   
2.04   Standards for signs
   
2.05   Yield signs
   
2.06   Observance of stop signs
   
2.07   Duty when facing steady red signal alone
   
2.08   Avoidance of traffic signals
   
2.09   Highways
   
2.10   Designating lanes for traffic, center lines and safety zones
   
2.11   Stop intersections
   
2.12   Yield intersections
   
3.00   Directing traffic
   
3.01   Direction by city official
   
3.02   Direction by work crews
   
3.03   Failure to comply with order
   
4.00   City traffic regulations
   
4.01   One-way streets and alleys
   
4.02   Storage of vehicles anywhere in the city
   
4.03   Storage of vehicles on city streets
   
4.04   Standing for loading
   
4.05   Truck parking
   
4.06   Street parking
   
4.07   No parking zones
   
4.08   Shared use paths
   
5.00   Speed restrictions
   
5.01   North First Street
   
5.02   South First Street
   
5.03   East LeClaire Road
   
5.04   West LeClaire Road
   
5.05   Blackhawk Trail
   
5.06   North Second Street
   
5.07   Gravel Roads
   
5.08   Alleys
   
5.09   Remaining streets
   
5.11   Cody Road
   
5.12   Buttermilk Road
   
5.13   Scott Park Road
   
5.14   East Lincoln Road
   
6.00   Snow emergency procedures
   
6.01   Snow emergency defined
   
6.02   Parking prohibited
   
6.03   Street parking
   
6.04   Snow emergency parking
   
6.05   Downtown snow removal
   
6.06   Snow emergency penalties
   
6.07   Sidewalks
   
6.08   Shared use paths
   
6.09   Snow discharge
   
7.00   School crossing guard
   
7.01   Establishment
   
7.02   Qualifications
   
7.03   Appointment and dismissal
   
7.04   Duties
   
7.05   Not subject to civil service rules
   
7.06   Compensation
   
7.07   Equipment
   
7.08   Extent of powers
   
8.00   Motorized vehicles
   
8.01   Definition
   
8.02   Prohibition of motorized vehicles on bike paths
   
8.03   Penalty
   
9.00   Golf carts
   
9.01   Purpose
   
9.02   Definition
   
9.03   General regulations/operation of golf carts permitted
   
9.04   Location restriction for golf carts
   
9.05   Exceptions
   
9.06   Permits
   
9.07   Equipment
   
9.08   Operation
   
9.09   Speed
   
9.10   Negligence
   
9.11   Accident reports
   
9.12   Golf cart insurance
   
9.13   Violation and penalties
   
10.00   Shared use paths
   
10.01   Purpose
   
10.02   Definition
   
10.03   Maintenance
   
11.00   Electric personal assistive mobility device and micromobility devices;
i.e. electric scooters
   
11.01   Purpose
   
11.02   Definitions
   
11.03   Safe operation of electric personal assistive and micromobility devices
   
11.04   Penalty
§ 1.00 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC PROVISIONS.
   The city has adopted the provisions relating to motor vehicles and the law
of the road as provided for in Iowa Code Chapter 321.
§ 2.00 TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
§ 2.01 NEW REGULATORY SIGNS.
   New regulatory signs, those which give notice of traffic laws or
regulations, such as speed limits and parking restrictions, may be installed by
the Director of Public Works or the Chief of Police. Signs so placed shall be
submitted to the City Council for its approval at the next scheduled regular
meeting. The Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works each shall keep a
log of all new regulatory signs installed after the passage of this code. The
list shall include the location, type and date installed of all new regulatory
signs; and such log shall be produced on demand by the City Council.
§ 2.02 WARNING SIGNS.
   Warning signs which call attention to hazardous conditions on streets or
highways, or guide signs which give notice of distances, destinations, route
designations or other such general information, may be installed by the
Director of Public Works or the Chief of Police until such time as the City
Council expresses disapproval.
§ 2.03 SIGNS FOR EMERGENCY.
   Signs or signals which are installed to regulate traffic on an emergency
basis or which facilitate a parade, long distance foot race or other public
festivity that directly involves the use of public streets or highways may be
installed and kept in place by the Chief of Police or Director of Public Works
for as long as the emergency or festivity lasts. It shall be unlawful to
violate any signs posted for such occasions.
§ 2.04 STANDARDS FOR SIGNS.
   All traffic signs and signals shall conform substantially in size, shape,
wording, color and placement to the standards set forth in the current Iowa
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Street and Highways.
§ 2.05 YIELD SIGNS.
   Whenever a “yield” sign is erected at the entrance to any intersection, the
driver of a vehicle directly approaching the sign shall yield the right-of-way
to any vehicle not so obliged to yield, which is within the intersection, or
approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard. Where no stop sign or yield
sign is erected at an intersection, the right-of-way, as described in Iowa Code
§ 321.319, shall apply.
§ 2.06 OBSERVANCE OF STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever a “stop sign” is erected at the entrance to any intersection, the
driver of a vehicle shall bring his or her vehicle to a complete stop before
the nearest crosswalk, or a clearly marked stop sign, and shall proceed
cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which may be within the
intersection or approaching so as to constitute a hazard, but then may proceed.
§ 2.07 DUTY WHEN FACING STEADY RED SIGNAL ALONE.
   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and
shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown.
§ 2.08 AVOIDANCE OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Maneuvers by motor vehicles for the purpose of or having the effect of
avoiding stop signs or other lawfully erected traffic control devices are
prohibited.
§ 2.09 HIGHWAYS.
   Streets or portions of streets described below are hereby declared to be
highways:
   (A)   Highway 61;
   (B)   Scott Park Road from the south to north corporate limits;
   (C)   Blackhawk Trail from the eastern corporate limits to First Street;
   (D)   Lincoln Road from the east to west corporate limits;
   (E)   LeClaire Road from the east to west corporate limits;
   (F)   First Street from the south to north corporate limits; and
   (G)   Buttermilk Road from Lincoln Road to the south corporate limits.
§ 2.10 DESIGNATING LANES FOR TRAFFIC, CENTER LINES AND SAFETY ZONES.
   The Chief of Police and Director of Public Works are hereby authorized to
establish center lines, lane lines and all traverse marking; shoulder markings;
word or symbol markings; stop lines; and crosswalk lines in accordance with the
standard set forth in the Iowa Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Street and Highways.
§ 2.11 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersections are hereby designated to be stop intersections
and all vehicles, other than emergency vehicles, are required to stop at the
designated intersections before proceeding:
East bound traffic on Blackhawk Trail at the intersection of Scott Park Road
East bound traffic on Daniels Court at the intersection of South Cody Road
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Eighth
Street
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North First
Street
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Fifth
Street
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Ninth
Street
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Second
Street
East bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Seventh
Street
East bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of Dammann Drive
East bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of Dammann Drive
East bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Second Street
East bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Seventh
Street
East bound traffic on Doral Drive at the intersection of Third Street
East bound traffic on East Augusta Court at the intersection of Fox Ridge Road
East bound traffic on East Lomar Street at the intersection of Stone Brook Lane
East bound traffic on East Phinehurst Drive at the intersection of Fox Ridge
Road
East bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Second
Street
East bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Sixth Avenue
East bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Third Street
East bound traffic on Green Meadow Court at the intersection of Eighth Avenue
East bound traffic on Harvest Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Heather Glen Drive at the intersection of South Third
Street
East bound traffic on Heiler Court at the intersection of Tombergs Drive
East bound traffic on Hickory Court at the intersection of South Tenth Street
East bound traffic on Hickory Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Hickory Street at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
East bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
East bound traffic on Lancer Court at the intersection of Sixteenth Avenue
East bound traffic on LeClaire Road at the intersection of Scott Park Road
East bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
East bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of Scott Park Road
East bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of South Cody Road
East bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of South First Street
East bound traffic on Linden Lane at the intersection of South Fifth Street
East bound traffic on Lomar Street at the intersection of Scott Park Road
East bound traffic on Maple Street at the intersection of Dammann Drive
East bound traffic on Muhs Circle at the intersection of South First Street
East bound traffic on Murfield Circle at the intersection of Fox Ridge Road
East bound traffic on Oak Street at the intersection of South Fifth Street
East bound traffic on Pine Street at the intersection of South Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Pinehurst Drive at the intersection of First Street
East bound traffic on Prairie Vista Drive at the intersection of South Fifth
Street
East bound traffic on Price Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
East bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Fifth Street
East bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Seventh Street
East bound traffic on Saint Andrews Circle at the intersection of Fox Ridge
Road
East bound traffic on Scott Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
East bound traffic on Scott Street at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of North First Street
East bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
East bound traffic on Slopertown Road at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
East bound traffic on Slopertown Road at the intersection of South First Street
East bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
East bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of South First Street
East bound traffic on Stone Brook Lane at the intersection of Scott Park Road
East bound traffic on Torey Pines Drive at the intersection of South First
Street
East bound traffic on Valley Drive at the intersection of South Fifth Street
East bound traffic on West Spring Street at the intersection of South First
Street
East bound traffic on Wiese Court at the intersection of Tombergs Drive
North bound traffic on Blanche Drive at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on Buttermilk Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on Buttermilk Road at the intersection of Lincoln Road
North bound traffic on Central Drive at the intersection of Davenport Street
North bound traffic on Country Club Court at the intersection of Iowa Street
North bound traffic on Davenport Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
North bound traffic on Eighth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst Drive
North bound traffic on Fifth Street at the intersection of Valley Drive
North bound traffic on Fourth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on Fox Ridge Road at the intersection of Hickory Street
North bound traffic on Hillandale Road at the intersection of Slopertown Road
North bound traffic on Murfield Circle at the intersection of East Pinehurst
North bound traffic on North Cody Road at the intersection of Scott Park Road
North bound traffic on North Eighth Street at the intersection of Scott Street
North bound traffic on North Fifth Place at the intersection of West Price
Street
North bound traffic on North Fifth Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
North bound traffic on North Fifth Street at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Avenue at the intersection of East Donahue
Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Avenue at the intersection of Franklin
Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of Davenport
Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of Donahue
Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of West
Davenport Street
North bound traffic on North Second Place at the intersection of Davenport
Street
North bound traffic on North Second Place at the intersection of Franklin
Street
North bound traffic on North Second Street at the intersection of West
Davenport Street
North bound traffic on North Seventh Street at the intersection of Scott Street
North bound traffic on North Third Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
North bound traffic on North Third Street at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on Redbud Circle at the intersection of West Lincoln Road
North bound traffic on Sawgrass Court at the intersection of Pinehurst Drive
North bound traffic on Scott Park Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on Second Street at the intersection of Franklin Street
North bound traffic on South Buttermilk at the intersection of West Leclaire
Road
North bound traffic on South Cody Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Eighteenth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire
Road
North bound traffic on South Eighth Avenue at the intersection of Iowa Street
North bound traffic on South Eighth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of Blackhawk
Trail
North bound traffic on South Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of Lincoln
Road
North bound traffic on South Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of Rustic View
Court
North bound traffic on South Eleventh Street Court at the intersection of
Spring Street
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst
Drive
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Leclaire
Road
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Lincoln
Road
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Prairie
Vista Drive
North bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Sheridan
Drive
North bound traffic on South Fourteenth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire
Road
North bound traffic on South Fourth Avenue at the intersection of East Iowa
Street
North bound traffic on South Ninth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Ninth Avenue at the intersection of Lincoln Road
North bound traffic on South Ninth Street Court at the intersection of Spring
Street
North bound traffic on South Second Street at the intersection of Torrey Pines
Drive
North bound traffic on South Seventh Street Court at the intersection of West
Pinehurst
North bound traffic on South Sixteenth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire
Road
North bound traffic on South Sixth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Sixth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Tenth Avenue at the intersection of Rustic View
Court
North bound traffic on South Tenth Street at the intersection of Spring Street
North bound traffic on South Third Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Oak Street
North bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Pinehurst
Drive
North bound traffic on South Twentieth Avenue Court at the intersection of
Lomar Street
North bound traffic on South Twenty-Second Avenue Court at the intersection of
Lomar Street
North bound traffic on South Twenty-Seventh Avenue at the intersection of
LeClaire Road
North bound traffic on Stonebridge Circle at the intersection of Pinehurst
Drive
North bound traffic on Tenth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst Drive
North bound traffic on Tombergs Drive at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on Buttermilk Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on Buttermilk Road at the intersection of Lincoln Road
South bound traffic on Cyprus Point Court at the intersection of Torey Pines
Drive
South bound traffic on Eighth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst Drive
South bound traffic on Fifth Street at the intersection of Valley Drive
South bound traffic on Fox Ridge Road at the intersection of East Lincoln Road
South bound traffic on Hillandale Road at the intersection of Slopertown Road
South bound traffic on Hunter Lane at the intersection of Blackhawk Trail
South bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of Sheridan Drive
South bound traffic on North Cody Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Eighth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Fifth Place at the intersection of Donahue Street
South bound traffic on North Fifth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Fourth Avenue at the intersection of East Donahue
Street
South bound traffic on North Fourth Avenue at the intersection of East Franklin
Street
South bound traffic on North Fourth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of Davenport
Street
South bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of Donahue
Street
South bound traffic on North Fourth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Ninth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Ninth Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Second Place at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Second Street at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Second Street at the intersection of West
Davenport Street
South bound traffic on North Seventh Street at the intersection of LeClaire
Road
South bound traffic on North Sixteenth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire
Road
South bound traffic on North Sixth Avenue at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on North Third Avenue at the intersection of East Donahue
Street
South bound traffic on North Third Street at the intersection of Davenport
Street
South bound traffic on North Third Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
South bound traffic on One-Hundred-Fifty-Fifth Avenue at the intersection of
Slopertown Road
South bound traffic on Railroad Avenue at the intersection of Price Street
South bound traffic on Scott Park Road at the intersection of LeClaire Road
South bound traffic on Second Street at the intersection of Franklin Street
South bound traffic on South Cody Road at the intersection of Blackhawk Trail
South bound traffic on South Eighth Avenue at the intersection Sheridan Drive
South bound traffic on South Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of East
Lincoln Road
South bound traffic on South Fifth Avenue at the intersection of West Valley
Drive
South bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst
Drive
South bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Prairie
Vista Drive
South bound traffic on South Fifth Street at the intersection of West Sheridan
Drive
South bound traffic on South Fourth Avenue at the intersection of East Iowa
Street
South bound traffic on South Second Street at the intersection of Torrey Pines
Drive
South bound traffic on South Second Street at the intersection of West Lincoln
Road
South bound traffic on South Sixteenth Avenue at the intersection of Blackhawk
Trail
South bound traffic on South Sixth Avenue at the intersection of East Iowa
Street
South bound traffic on South Tenth Avenue at the intersection of East Lincoln
Road
South bound traffic on South Tenth Street at the intersection of Spring Street
South bound traffic on South Third Avenue at the intersection of Iowa Street
South bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Oak Street
South bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Pinehurst
Drive
South bound traffic on South Twentieth Avenue Court at the intersection of
Lomar Street
South bound traffic on South Twenty-Fifth Avenue at the intersection of
Blackhawk Trail
South bound traffic on South Twenty-Sixth Avenue at the intersection of
Blackhawk Trail
South bound traffic on Stone Brook Lane at the intersection of East Lomar
Street
South bound traffic on Tenth Street at the intersection of Pinehurst Drive
South bound traffic on Wisconsin Avenue at the intersection of Slopertown Road
West bound traffic on Blackhawk Trail at the intersection of South First Street
West bound traffic on Blackhawk Trail at the intersection of Scott Park Road
West bound traffic on Broadmoor Drive at the intersection of South Fifth Street
West bound traffic on Colonial Drive at the intersection of South Second Street
West bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Eighth
Street
West bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Fifth
Street
West bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Ninth
Street
West bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Second
Street
West bound traffic on Davenport Street at the intersection of North Seventh
Street
West bound traffic on Davies Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
West bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Second Street
West bound traffic on Donahue Street at the intersection of North Seventh
Street
West bound traffic on Doral Drive at the intersection of Fifth Street
West bound traffic on East Lomar Street at the intersection of Stone Brook Lane
West bound traffic on Fairway Circle at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
West bound traffic on Fisher Court at the intersection of South First Street
West bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North First Street
West bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Second
Street
West bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Third Street
West bound traffic on Golfview Drive at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
West bound traffic on Heather Glen Drive at the intersection of South Fifth
Street
West bound traffic on Hickory Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Hickory Street at the intersection of Tenth Street
West bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of South First Street
West bound traffic on Iowa Street at the intersection of South Ninth Avenue
West bound traffic on Lancer Court at the intersection of Sixteenth Avenue
West bound traffic on LeClaire Road at the intersection of Scott Park Road
West bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of South Cody Road
West bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of South First Street
West bound traffic on Lincoln Road at the intersection of Scott Park Road
West bound traffic on Linden Lane at the intersection of South Fifth Street
West bound traffic on Lomar Street at the intersection of Scott Park Road
West bound traffic on Maple Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
West bound traffic on Maple Street at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Oak Street at the intersection of South Fifth Street
West bound traffic on Pine Street at the intersection of South Ninth Street
Court
West bound traffic on Pinehurst Drive at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Prairie Vista Drive at the intersection of South Eighth
Street
West bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of Dammann Drive
West bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Fifth Street
West bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North First Street
West bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Seventh Street
West bound traffic on Robert Edgar Court at the intersection of North
Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Rustic View Court at the intersection of Fox Ridge Road
West bound traffic on Scott Street at the intersection of Dammann Drive
West bound traffic on Scott Street at the intersection of Harvest Street
West bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of South Fifth Street
West bound traffic on Sheridan Meadows Driveway at the intersection of North
First Street
West bound traffic on Slopertown Road at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of Buttermilk Road
West bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Stone Brook Lane at the intersection of Lomar Street
West bound traffic on the frontage road at the intersection of North Ninth
Avenue
West bound traffic on Trails Road at the intersection of South First Street
West bound traffic on Valley Drive at the intersection of South Eighth Street
West bound traffic on Wade Street at the intersection of North Second Street
West bound traffic on West Brookview Drive at the intersection of South Fifth
Street
West bound traffic on West Leclaire Road at the intersection of South Fifth
Street
West bound traffic on West Torrey Pines Drive at the intersection of South
Fifth Street
 
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 2-8-2022; Ord. 2024-02, passed 2-5-2024; Ord. 2025-23,
passed 9-22-2025)
§ 2.12 YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersections are hereby designated to be yield intersections
and all vehicles, other than emergency vehicles, are to yield to oncoming
traffic at each of the designated intersections:
East bound traffic on Brookview Drive at the intersection of South Sixth Street
East bound traffic on Central Drive at the intersection of North Second Place
East bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North Second Street
East bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North Third Street
East bound traffic on Hickory Street at the intersection of South Seventh
Street
East bound traffic on Maple Street at the intersection of Railroad Avenue
East bound traffic on North Scott Road at the intersection of East Leclarie
Road
East bound traffic on Pine Street at the intersection of South Third Street
East bound traffic on Price Street at the intersection of North Twelfth Avenue
East bound traffic on Sheridan Drive at the intersection of South Seventh
Street
East bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of South Second Street
East bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of South Seventh Street
East bound traffic on West Pine Street at the intersection of South Eighth
Street
North bound traffic on East Leclaire Road at the intersection of North Scott
Road
North bound traffic on North Fifth Court at the intersection of Donahue Street
North bound traffic on North Fifth Place at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on North Ninth Avenue at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on North Ninth Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
North bound traffic on North Second Street at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on North Sixth Court at the intersection of Davenport
Street
North bound traffic on North Sixth Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
North bound traffic on North Sixth Street at the intersection of Price Street
North bound traffic on South Fourth Street at the intersection of Sheridan
Drive
North bound traffic on South Second Place at the intersection of Sheridan Drive
North bound traffic on South Second Street at the intersection of Sheridan
Drive
North bound traffic on South Sixth Street at the intersection of Prairie Vista
Drive
North bound traffic on South Third Place at the intersection of Sheridan Drive
North bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Sheridan Drive
North bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Spring Street
North bound traffic on South Twenty-Fifth Avenue at the intersection of Lomar
Street
North bound traffic on South Twenty-Sixth Avenue at the intersection of Lomar
Street
North bound traffic on West Davenport Court at the intersection of Davenport
Street
South bound traffic on East Leclaire Road at the intersection of N. Scott Road
South bound traffic on North Fifth Place at the intersection of Donahue Street
South bound traffic on North Fifth Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
South bound traffic on North Sixth Street at the intersection of Davenport
Street
South bound traffic on North Sixth Street at the intersection of Donahue Street
South bound traffic on North Sixth Street at the intersection of Price Street
South bound traffic on South Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of Trails Road
South bound traffic on South Fourth Street at the intersection of Oak Street
South bound traffic on South Second Place at the intersection of Spring Street
South bound traffic on South Sixth Street at the intersection of Prairie Vista
Drive
South bound traffic on South Sixth Street at the intersection of Valley Drive
South bound traffic on South Third Place at the intersection of Spring Street
South bound traffic on South Third Street at the intersection of Spring Street
West bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North Fourth Street
West bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North Second Street
West bound traffic on Davies Street at the intersection of North Third Street
West bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Fourth
Street
West bound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of North Ninth Avenue
West bound traffic on North Scott Road at the intersection of East Leclaire
Road
West bound traffic on Pine Street at the intersection of South Fourth Street
West bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of South Fourth Street
West bound traffic on Spring Street at the intersection of South Second Street
West bound traffic on West Donahue Court at the intersection of Dammann Drive
 
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 3.00 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
§ 3.01 DIRECTION BY CITY OFFICIAL.
   Any police officer, official of the City Department of Public Works or any
City Fire Department official is hereby authorized to direct traffic in the
event of a fire, other emergency or public festivity for as long as the
emergency or festivity lasts.
§ 3.02 DIRECTION BY WORK CREWS.
   (A)   When utility, street maintenance or repair or construction operators
are working on or adjacent to the traveled way, it is the responsibility of
said work crews to adequately protect and control traffic.
   (B)   Adequate traffic protection is defined in the Iowa Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control for Streets and Highways, or as a minimum shall be:
      (1)   Through streets with speeds of 45 mph or greater, lights and/or
signs, cones and barricades. Flaggers at either end of operations are also
required when operations are on the traveled way;
      (2)   Through streets with speeds of less than 45 mph, lights and/or
signs. When operations are on the traveled way, barricades and/or flaggers are
also required; and
      (3)   Residential and other streets, lights or signs. Flagging should be
provided at periods of unusual traffic.
§ 3.03 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a police or any other authorized person
who is directing traffic.
§ 4.00 CITY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
§ 4.01 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   The following streets and alleys are hereby declared to permit vehicular
traffic only in the direction indicated: the alley between Davenport Street and
Franklin Street, and running parallel to and between Second Street and Third
Street, shall be restricted to one-way traffic in a northerly direction.
§ 4.02 STORAGE OF VEHICLES ANYWHERE IN THE CITY.
   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on
such property longer than 48 hours. No person shall leave any such vehicle on
any property within the city for a longer time than 72 hours; except that this
subsection shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building or
a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the city.
§ 4.03 STORAGE OF VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS.
   Parking for a period of more than 72 hours on a public street is prohibited.
The penalty for a violation of this subsection or of other parking violations
shall be a fine of not more than $25 payable to the City Clerk, according to
Iowa Code § 321.236, or shall be a simple misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 4.04 STANDING FOR LOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone. It
shall be unlawful for the operator of vehicle to stop, stand or park said
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery of pick
up and loading of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case
shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 4.05 TRUCK PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck trailer or vehicle having a
licensed weight of six tons or more to park on any residential street in the
city for more than two hours, except while such vehicle is in the actual
process of loading or unloading.
§ 4.06 STREET PARKING.
   All vehicles that are parked on a street must be facing the same direction
as the flow of traffic on that street; and must be parked parallel to, and
within 18 inches of, the curb.
§ 4.07 NO PARKING ZONES.
   The following table describes no parking zones in the city.
The east and west sides of First Street from the center line of Franklin Street
to the center line of West Sheridan Drive
The east and west sides of First Street from the south city limits to a point
600 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Blackhawk Trail
The east and west sides of Ninth Avenue from the south line of Franklin Street
to the north line of Iowa Street
The east and west sides of South Second Street from Lincoln Road to a point 115
feet north of the center line of Lincoln Road
The east side of South Fourteenth Avenue from East LeClaire Road to South
Sixteenth Avenue
The east side of South Second Street from West Sheridan Drive to West Spring
Street
The east side of South Sixteenth Avenue from East LeClaire Road to the south
edge of Aberrant First Addition Lot 2
The north and south sides of Blackhawk Trail from the east right-of-way line of
First Street to a point 800 feet east
The north and south sides of East LeClaire Road running from the center line of
North Second Street to the east city limits
The north and south sides of the southern entrance of Muhs Circle from First
Street to the point 115 feet west of the center line of First Street
The north and south sides of Torey Pines Drive from South First Street to a
point 115 feet west of the center line of South First Street
The north and south sides of West Pinehurst Drive from First Street to a point
95 feet west of the center line of First Street
The north side of Blackhawk Trail from the east edge of the pavement of the
entrance ramp to north bound Highway 61 east to Scott Park Road and south sides
of Blackhawk Trail from the east edge of the exit ramp for north bound Highway
61 exit east to Scott Park Road
The north side of Iowa Street from the east right-of-way line of First Street
to the west right-of-way line of Third Avenue Monday through Friday between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
The north side of Iowa Street from the east right-of-way line of Third Avenue
to a point 322 feet east of Sixth Avenue
The north side of LeClaire Road from the west city limits to North Ninth Street
The north side of Pinehurst from the center line of the north leg of Fifth
Street to a point 107 feet east
The north side of Price Street from First Street to a point 90 feet west
The north side of the northern entrance of Muhs Circle from First Street to the
point 115 feet west of the center line of First Street
The north side of West Franklin Street from the center line of the North First
Street to a point west 90 feet
The north side of West Price Street for 70 feet to the west of the North Fifth
Street center line and 95 feet to the East of the North Fifth Street center
line
The north side of West Sheridan Drive for 485 feet west of the center line of
South First Street
The north side of West Spring Street from South Second Street to South First
Street
The south side of Iowa Street from the east right-of-way line of First Street
to the west right-of-way line of Third Avenue Monday through Friday between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
The south side of East Iowa Street from a point 330 feet east of the right-of-
way line of Third Avenue to a point 70 feet east of the east right-of-way line
of Country Club Court
The south side of LeClaire Road from the west city limits to North Eighth
Street
The south side of Pinehurst Drive from the center line of the south leg of
Fifth Street to a point 68 feet west
The south side of Price Street from First Street to a point 50 feet west
The south side of Sheridan Drive from South First Street to South Fifth Street
The south side of the northern entrance of Muhs Circle from First Street to the
point 90 feet west of the center line of First Street
The south side of West Price Street for 70 feet to the west of the North Fifth
Street center line
The south side of West Spring Street for 90 feet west of the center line of
South First Street
The west side of Fifth Street from the south right-of-way line of Sheridan
Drive to a point 230 feet south between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
The west side of Sixteenth Avenue from Blackhawk Trail to Lomar Street
The west side of South Sixteenth Avenue from south entrance to 400 South
Sixteenth Avenue to South Fourteenth Avenue
 
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 4-4-2018; Ord. 2020-04, passed 6-1-2020; Ord. 2020-05,
passed 6-15-2020; Ord. 2020-10, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 2021-08, passed 10-18-
2021; Ord. 2022-08, passed 10-3-2022; Ord. 2022-09, passed 10-3-2022; Ord.
2023-05, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2024-03, passed 2-5-2024)
§ 4.08 SHARED USE PATHS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle, including, but not
limited to, cars, trucks, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and
motorized scooters upon designated shared use paths as defined in this code.
This prohibition shall not apply to motorized wheelchairs, emergency response
vehicles and city-owned maintenance vehicles.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 5.00 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   Established speed zones in the city are as follows, unless otherwise marked
on an emergency basis as defined in §
2.03 of this chapter:
§ 5.01 NORTH FIRST STREET.
   Thirty-five mph from the north city limits for 1,100 feet south; 25 mph from
1,100 feet south of the north city limits to LeClaire Road;
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5.02 SOUTH FIRST STREET.
   Twenty-five mph from LeClaire Road to the north right-of-way line of Spring
Street on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 35 mph from LeClaire Road to
a point 422 feet south of the center line of Lincoln Road; 45 mph from a point
422 feet south of the center line of Lincoln Road to the south city limits;
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 6-1-2020; Ord. 2022-07, passed 8-15-2022; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 8-4-2025)
§ 5.03 EAST LECLAIRE ROAD.
   Thirty-five mph from the east city limits to the east line of South Third
Avenue; 25 mph from the east line of South Third Avenue to the west line of
First Street;
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-30-2020)
§ 5.04 WEST LECLAIRE ROAD.
   Twenty-five mph from First Street to a point 200 feet west of the west
right-of-way line of Ninth Street; and 35 mph from a point 200 feet west of the
west right-of-way line of Ninth Street to the west city limits;
§ 5.05 BLACKHAWK TRAIL.
   Forty-five mph from the east city limits to 300 feet east of South Twenty-
Sixth Avenue; 35 mph from 300 feet east of South Twenty-Sixth Avenue to Scott
Park Road; and 45 mph from Scott Park Road to South First Street;
§ 5.06 NORTH SECOND STREET.
   Twenty mph from LeClaire Road to Donahue Street;
§ 5.07 GRAVEL ROADS.
   Forty-five mph on all gravel roads or streets not already designated above;
§ 5.08 ALLEYS.
   Fifteen mph on all alleys;
§ 5.09 REMAINING STREETS.
   Twenty-five mph on all other streets and roads within the city;
§ 5.11 CODY ROAD.
   Thirty-five mph from the north city limits to LeClaire Road; 25 mph from
LeClaire Road to 700 feet south of Daniel’s Court; 45 mph from 700 feet south
of Daniel’s Court to the south city limit;
§ 5.12 BUTTERMILK ROAD.
   Thirty-five mph from the north city limits to the south right-of-way line of
Lincoln Road; 55 mph from the south line of Lincoln Road to the south city
limits;
§ 5.13 SCOTT PARK ROAD.
   Fifty-five mph from the north city limit to a point 750 feet north
Stonebrook Lane; 45 mph from 750 feet north of Stonebrook Lane to the south
city limit; and
§ 5.14 EAST LINCOLN ROAD.
   Thirty-five mph from the east right-of-way line of South First Street to the
west right-of-way line of Scott Park Road.
§ 6.00 SNOW EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
§ 6.01 SNOW EMERGENCY DEFINED.
   A snow emergency exists whenever there is a snow fall of two inches or more,
or the equivalent amount of snow from drifting, or when so declared by the
Chief of Police. The emergency shall cease after the snow stops and the streets
have been cleared of snow, or 24 hours after the cessation of falling snow.
§ 6.02 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Parking of motor vehicles is prohibited on all streets in the city during a
snow emergency.
§ 6.03 STREET PARKING.
   No vehicle on any street in the city shall remain parked for more than 24
hours in any one location when such parking limits or interferes with snow
plowing or snow removal operations.
§ 6.04 SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING.
   (A)   Snow emergency parking facilities shall be provided by the city and
shall be identified as such. Vehicles may be parked in these areas upon a
forecast of a two-inch or greater snow fall. All vehicles shall be removed
within 48 hours after the end of a snow emergency. If a forecast snow emergency
does not occur, all vehicles shall be removed within 48 hours of when they were
first parked in the special area.
   (B)   The snow emergency parking facilities are located at:
      (1)   North Third Street and Franklin Street (municipal parking lot);
      (2)   North Fifth Street and LeClaire Road (Faith Lutheran Church);
      (3)   South Second Street and Spring Street (United Methodist Church);
      (4)   North Scott Junior High School south side parking lot;
      (5)   400 Block of North Third Street (west side of Centennial Park);
      (6)   400 Block of North Fourth Street (east side of Centennial Park);
and
      (7)   Cornerstone Baptist Church parking lot (775 East LeClaire Road).
(Ord. 2021-11, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 6.05 DOWNTOWN SNOW REMOVAL.
   Parking is prohibited on all streets bounded by North First Street, Donahue
Street, North Third Street and LeClaire Road during a snow emergency.
§ 6.06 SNOW EMERGENCY PENALTIES.
   (A)   The penalty for violation of the provisions of this section shall be:
      (1)   The removal of said motor vehicles and impounding of same by the
city, and the payment before release by the owner of the vehicle of all costs
for towing and impounding; and/or
      (2)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of $50 for
the first offense, $100 for the second offense and $200 for the third and
subsequent offenses.
   (B)   For purposes of calculating the number of offenses, this means during
one snow season October 1 to May 1. Each snow season starts the offense cycle
over.
(Ord. 2020-12, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 6.07 SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to promptly
remove snow and/or ice from the sidewalk. In the event that such snow and/or
ice remain more than 36 hours, the city may remove them and assess the
property. Charges for such removal shall be set forth by resolution of the
Council.
§ 6.08 SHARED USE PATHS.
   Shared use paths are closed from December 1 through March 15 or when
accumulation of snow, ice or water exists on the surface of the trail.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 6.09 SNOW DISCHARGE.
   The discharge of snow and ice on to public streets is prohibited at any
time. It is the responsibility of the abutting property owner to store any snow
and/or ice removed on his or her own property. Any violation of this section
shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second
offense and $200 for the third and subsequent offenses. For purposes of
calculating the number of offenses, this means during one snow season October 1
to May 1. Each snow season starts the offense cycle over. This prohibition
shall not apply to commercial properties located in the boundaries of §
6.05 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-12, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 7.00 SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD.
§ 7.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   In the interest of safety to those attending elementary schools in the city,
a school crossing guard is hereby established.
§ 7.02 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Each crossing guard shall not be less than 18 years of age, of good
character and shall be sworn by the appointing officer to the faithful
performance of his or her duty.
§ 7.03 APPOINTMENT AND DISMISSAL.
   Appointment and dismissal of crossing guards shall be by the Chief of Police
with the majority approval of the City Council. Each crossing guard shall be
responsible to the Chief of Police and he or she shall be the sole supervisor
of the school crossing guard.
§ 7.04 DUTIES.
   The duties of the crossing guard shall include assisting school children
across streets designated by the Chief of Police, the direction of traffic when
necessary to assist in street crossing and other relevant duties as the Chief
of Police may direct. The Chief of Police shall have authority to assign each
crossing guard to duty at such times and place as he or she may deem necessary
for the protection of children proceeding to and from school.
§ 7.05 NOT SUBJECT TO CIVIL SERVICE RULES.
   The crossing guards herein appointed shall not be connected with the city
and shall not be subjected to the civil service rules of the state, nor shall
they acquire any rights under civil service.
§ 7.06 COMPENSATION.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, fix the amount of compensation to be
paid members of the school crossing guards and the manner of payment.
§ 7.07 EQUIPMENT.
   Each crossing guard shall, at the expense of the city, be provided with an
adequate badge and other equipment as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 7.08 EXTENT OF POWERS.
   Such crossing guards shall have such limited police powers in the matter of
traffic control as may be delegated to them by the Chief of Police which
authority shall not be exercised by any crossing guard except when on
authorized duty.
§ 8.00 MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   The operation or parking of motorized vehicles on city bike paths presents a
threat to the safety of bicyclists and pedestrians using such bike paths. The
operation of motorized vehicles places stress on the structure of the bike
path.
§ 8.01 DEFINITION.
   (A)   Motorized vehicle is any device for carrying person or objects
equipped with a motor to produce motion.
   (B)   Motorized vehicles shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters and mopeds.
§ 8.02 PROHIBITION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON BIKE PATHS.
   The parking and/or operation of motorized vehicles shall not be allowed on
city bike paths at any time. An exception will be allowed for snowmobiles to
cross the bike path when traveling along designated snowmobile routes.
§ 8.03 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or a fine not exceeding $500. Each day that a violation
continues to exist constitutes a separate offense.
§ 9.00 GOLF CARTS.
§ 9.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to permit the operation of golf carts on
certain streets in the city, as authorized by Iowa Code § 321.247, as amended.
This section shall be applicable whenever a golf cart is operated on any street
or alley within the city as provided in this section.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. Three- or four-wheeled recreational vehicle generally used for
transportation of person(s) in the sport of golf.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the
operation of a golf cart in any manner, whether or not the golf cart is moving.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a golf
cart.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designated or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular travel.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS/OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED.
   (A)   Golf carts may be operated on the city streets by persons possessing a
valid driver’s license and who are at least 18 years of age, except as
otherwise prohibited by this section or the Iowa Code.
   (B)   Golf carts can only operate on city streets from sunrise to sunset.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.04 LOCATION RESTRICTION FOR GOLF CARTS.
   (A)   (1)   Golf carts shall not operate on a city street which is a primary
road extension through the city, but are allowed to cross a primary road
extension.
      (2)   Primary road extensions, for purposes of this section, where golf
carts shall not operate, include:
         (a)   South First Street;
         (b)   North First Street;
         (c)   West LeClaire Road;
         (d)   East LeClaire Road;
         (e)   North Buttermilk Road;
         (f)   South Buttermilk Road;
         (g)   North Scott Park Road;
         (h)   South Scott Park Road;
         (i)   West Blackhawk Trail;
         (j)   East Blackhawk Trail;
         (k)   Slopertown Road;
         (l)   West Lincoln Road;
         (m)   East Lincoln Road;
         (n)   Hillandale Road; and
         (o)   South Cody Road.
   (B)   Golf carts shall not operate on any city streets or highway within the
city limits, with a speed limit greater than 30 mph.
   (C)   Golf carts shall not operate on any recreational, bike or walking
trail.
   (D)   Golf carts shall not operate upon sidewalks.
   (E)   Golf carts shall not be operated upon that portion of a street right-
of-way between the curb or edge of street paving and the sidewalk referred to
as the “parking”.
   (F)   Golf carts shall not be operated upon any city parks and other land
owned by the city except in areas where regular vehicle traffic is allowed.
   (G)   Golf carts may be given special exemptions by the Chief of Police, or
authorized designee, for certain special events.
   (H)   Golf carts may be operated on private property with express consent of
the owner.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   Golf carts may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following
circumstances.
   (A)   Golf carts may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      (2)   The golf cart is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street; and
      (3)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street (Iowa Code § 321G.9(2)).
   (B)   Carts may be operated on any street when operated by an on-duty city
police officer or firefighter for official use.
   (C)   Golf carts may be operated on any street when operated by an on-duty
city employee or official that has the appropriate license and is doing work or
volunteering for the Public Works, Streets, Electric, Water, Sewer Department,
the Park Board or the city.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.06 PERMITS.
   No person shall operate a golf cart on any public street or alley for any
purpose, unless the operator possesses a city permit to operate a golf cart on
city streets, issued by the City Police Department Chief of Police, or
authorized designee (Deputy Chief or appointed supervisor).
   (A)   Golf cart owners must/shall apply for a permit from the City Police
Department on forms provided by the City Police Department or printed from the
Police Department city website.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or authorized designee, shall not issue a permit
until the owner/operator provides the following:
      (1)   Evidence that the operator is at least 18 years of age and
possesses a valid driver’s license; and
      (2)   Valid proof that the owner/operator has financial liability
insurance covering operation of the golf cart(s) within the city.
   (C)   The applicant for a permit to operate a golf cart on the city streets,
as part of the application, shall verify the golf cart complies with state law
and provisions of this section.
   (D)   The operator of a golf cart shall prominently display the city permit
on the left side of the rear fender or similar component of the golf cart.
   (E)   The fee for a permit to operate a golf cart on the city streets and
alleys shall be $35 for the first year and $25 annually from the expiration of
the first permit issued. There will be no refund for the permit.
   (F)   Permits will run from April 1 of every year with only a 30-day grace
period. All owner/operators will be required to complete the required paperwork
each year following divisions (A) through (E) above.
   (G)   Failure to update the permit by the end of the 30-day grace period
after April 1 of each year will require the owner/operator to pay the $35
permit fee. The Chief of Police, or authorized designee, has the authority to
waive the late fee upon his or her own discretion.
   (H)   Golf carts must/shall adhere to Iowa Code Chapter 321, regulating
motor vehicles and law of the road.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.07 EQUIPMENT.
   Golf carts operated upon city streets within the city shall be equipped with
the following items:
   (A)   A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five
feet from ground level; if the golf cart has a canopy, the flag must be above
the canopy;
   (B)   A slow-moving vehicle triangle; and
   (C)   Properly functioning brakes.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.08 OPERATION.
   (A)   To operate a golf cart on any city street, alley or right-of-way, a
person shall be at least 18 years of age and shall have a valid driver’s
license. While on city streets, operators must have on their person or in the
golf cart valid proof of insurance and registration.
   (B)   Any person operating a golf cart, including those for which a city
permit has been issued, shall strictly adhere to all traffic signs and signals
and all other traffic rules and regulations, and shall obey the orders and
direction of any law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic.
   (C)   No person shall leave a golf cart unattended on public property while
the motor is running or keys are in the ignition switch. Owner/operators shall
comply with all parking regulations in the city.
   (D)   A person operating a golf cart shall not ride other than on a
permanent seat which is designed to be a part of the golf cart and permanently
attached thereto. No golf cart shall be used to carry more persons at a time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped. All riders are required
to be seated at all times.
   (E)   Any person operating a golf cart under the influence of alcohol or
controlled substance shall be processed under the Iowa Code Chapter 321J,
“Operating While Intoxicated”.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.09 SPEED.
   No golf cart shall be operated at a speed more than the lesser of 25 mph or
a posted speed limit under 25 mph, nor shall any golf cart be operated at a
speed greater than is reasonable and proper for the existing conditions.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.10 NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of a golf cart is liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the golf cart. The owner of a golf
cart shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the
operator of the golf cart, at the time the injury or damage occurred, or if the
operator had the owner’s consent to operate the golf cart, at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321I.19
§ 9.11 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever a golf cart is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500 or more, either the operator
or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement
officer and file an accident report, in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321I.11
§ 9.12 GOLF CART INSURANCE.
   Financial responsibility is required. The owner/operator of every golf cart
being operated upon the streets and alleys of the city shall have in effect
liability insurance covering operation of the golf cart in the same limits, as
required of automobiles by the financial responsibility provision of Iowa Code
§ 321A.21 (“Motor Vehicle Liability Policy”).
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 9.13 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   (A)    Any person may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police, or
authorized designee, upon receipt of sufficient evidence that the permit holder
has violated the conditions of the permit or has abused the privilege of being
a permit holder.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions herein for the
first time shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of
$100 and revocation of the city permit for a period of six months.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating this section two times in a 12-
month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of
$200 and revocation of the city permit for one year.
   (D)   Any person found guilty of violating this section three times in a 12-
month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of
$300 and a permanent revocation of the city permit.
   (E)   Any person who has been denied of a city permit due to violations and
is found operating a golf cart within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine of $500.
   (F)   Any person who is in good standing, and who permits another person who
has previously been deemed as “an unauthorized person to possess a permit” to
drive his or her golf cart, shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of $200 for allowing an unauthorized person to drive.
Additionally, revocation of the city permit for a period of two months.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-20-2023)
§ 10.00 SHARED USE PATHS.
§ 10.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to define shared use paths and establish when
they are closed for maintenance.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 10.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SHARED USE PATH. A multi-use trail that is physically separated from
motorized traffic. SHARED USE PATHS can be used by pedestrians, bicyclists, and
other non-motorized users.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 10.03 MAINTENANCE.
   A shared use path will be closed when debris exists on the surface of the
trail that needs to be cleared by the Public Works Department, during
maintenance or repairs, or at other times such as the trail may be closed by
the order of the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 11.00 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE AND MICROMOBILITY DEVICES;
I.E. ELECTRIC SCOOTERS.
§ 11.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to permit and regulate the safe operation of
"electric scooter" type devices as defined below within the city limits of
Eldridge.
(Ord. 2025-24, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 11.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. Has the same meaning as set
forth under Iowa Code § 321.1(20B).
   MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Any device not an electric personal assistive mobility
device and not a bicycle or low-speed electric bicycle, designed to carry one
rider or operator, where such device is equipped with an electric motor of less
than 750 watts, and where such device is not required to be licensed or
registered by the State of Iowa. MICROMOBILITY DEVICES may be propelled either
by the power of the rider or by an electric motor or a combination thereof.
MICROMOBILITY DEVICES include, but are not limited to, electric unicycles,
electric tricycles, electric stand-up scooters, electric sit-down scooters, and
motorized skateboards.
(Ord. 2025-24, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 11.03 SAFE OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE AND MICROMOBILITY
DEVICES.
   (A)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
sidewalks and shared use path as defined in city code in accordance with this
section and the provisions of Iowa Code § 321.235A.
   (B)   Micromobility devices may be operated on sidewalks and shared use
paths in accordance with this section.
   (C)   A person who operates an electric personal assistive mobility device
or micromobility device shall exercise caution to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall not
operate the device in such a manner as to indicate a willful or wanton
disregard for the safety of people.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an electric personal
assistive mobility device or a micromobility device upon any publicly owned
property at a speed greater than 20 mph.
   (E)   No person shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility device
on any roadway and will only operate them on sidewalks and shared use paths and
shall traverse the roadway at marked pedestrian crossings yielding to vehicular
traffic.
   (F)   No person without a valid driver's license shall operate a
micromobility device on any roadway and will only operate them on sidewalks and
shared use paths and shall traverse the roadway at marked pedestrian crossings
yielding to vehicular traffic.
   (G)   No person shall operate a micromobility device on any roadway unless
the person possesses a valid driver's license and obeys the rules of the road.
   (H)   No person shall operate a micromobility device upon any road with a
posted speed limit of greater than 25 mph.
   (I)   All electric personal assistive mobility devices and micromobility
devices shall only carry one person at a time.
   (J)   All electric personal assistive mobility devices and micromobility
devices used during the hours from sunset to sunrise shall display, or their
drivers shall wear, a lamp on the front part of the device, and the lamp shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 300 feet from the front
of the device and a red visible light from a distance of at least 300 feet from
the back of the device.
(Ord. 2025-24, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 11.04 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
$25 for a first offense. Second and subsequent offenses are simple misdemeanors
punishable in accordance with the standard city criminal penalty.
(Ord. 2025-24, passed 9-22-2025)
CHAPTER 2: ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL CODES
Section
   
1.00   Adopting sections of the Iowa Criminal Code
   
2.00   Adoption of State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
Cross-reference:
   Beer licensing, see
Title A, Chapter 12
   Misdemeanors, see
Title B, Chapter 6
§ 1.00 ADOPTING SECTIONS OF THE IOWA CRIMINAL CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the following provisions relating to the Iowa
Criminal Code (§ 701.1), as provided for in the Iowa Code, 2024 (all numbers
are inclusive):
 
Assault
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.1          708.1             Assault defined (also
                               Title B, Chapter 6, § 2.01)
1.2          708.2             Penalties for assault
 
Theft
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
Theft
Code    Iowa Code Section Heading
Section Section
                  Theft defined (also Title B, Chapter 6, §§
1.3     714.1     10.01 through
                  10.06)
1.4     714.2(5)  Degree of theft (under $200)
1.5     714.3     Value
                  Fraudulent practices defined (also Title B, Chapter 6, §§
1.6     714.8     11.00 through
                  11.11)
1.7     714.13    Degree of fraudulent practice (under $200)
1.8     714.14    Value for purpose of fraudulent practice
 
Damage and Trespass to Property
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
Damage and Trespass to Property
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.9          716.1             Criminal mischief defined
1.10         716.2             Multiple acts
1.11         716.6             Degree of criminal mischief (under $200)
1.12         716.7             Trespass defined (also
                               Title B, Chapter 5)
1.13         716.8(1)          Penalties (also
                               Title B, Chapter 5)
1.13         716.8(2)          Penalties (also
                               Title B, Chapter 5)
 
 
Injury to Animals
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.14         717B.2            Animal abuse (also
                               Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.12)
1.15         717B.8            Abandonment of cats and dogs
1.16         717B.9            Injury or interference with a police service dog
 
 
Offenses Against the Government
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.18         718.4             Harassment of public officers and employees
1.19         718.6             False reports to law enforcement authorities
 
Desecration of Flag or Other Insignia
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
Desecration of Flag or Other Insignia
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.20         718A.1            Desecration of flag or insignia
1.21         718A.2            Actions for penalty
1.22         718A.3            Federal flag and insignia - definition
1.23         718A.4            State flag and insignia - definition
1.24         718A.5            Presumptive evidence of desecration
1.25         718A.6            Enforcement
 
 
Obstructing Justice
Code Section Iowa Code Section Heading
             Section
1.26         719.1     Interference with official acts (also
                       Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.08)
1.27         719.2     Refusing to assist officer (also
                       Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.15)
                       Unlawful assembly (also Title B, Chapter 6, §§
1.28         723.2     2.05 and
                       7.16)
1.29         723.3     Failure to disperse (also
                       Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.17)
1.30         723.4     Disorderly conduct (also
                       Title B, Chapter 6, § 2.03)
 
Health, Safety and Welfare
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
Health, Safety and Welfare
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
1.31         727.1             Distributing dangerous substances
1.32         727.2             Fireworks (also
                               Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.04)
1.33         727.3             Abandoned or unattended refrigerators (also
                               Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.05)
1.34         727.4             Exposing persons to X-ray radiation
1.35         727.5             Obstruction of emergency communications
1.36         727.6             Falsely claiming emergency (also
                               Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.19)
1.37         727.9             Transacting business without a license
1.38         727.11            Disclosure of information concerning use of
                               videotapes
 
§ 2.00 ADOPTION OF STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT.
   The city hereby adopts the following provisions relating to the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (§ 123.1), as provided for in the Iowa Code,
2001 (all numbers are inclusive):
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
Code Section Iowa Code Section Section Heading
2.1          123.3             Definitions
2.2          123.28            Restrictions on transportation of open or
                               unsealed receptacles
2.3          123.46            Consumption in public places - intoxication -
                               right to chemical test on arrest - exoneration
2.4          123.47            Persons under the age of 18
2.6          123.47B           Parental notification - persons under 18 years
                               of age
2.7          123.49            Miscellaneous prohibitions
2.8          123.50            Criminal and civil penalties
 
CHAPTER 3: BICYCLES
Section
   
1.00   Effect of regulations
   
2.00   License required
   
3.00   License application
   
4.00   Issuance of license
   
5.00   Attachment of license decal
   
6.00   Inspection of bicycles
   
7.00   Transfer of ownership
   
8.00   Rental agencies
   
9.00   Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles
   
10.00   Riding on bicycles
   
11.00   Penalties
§ 1.00 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this chapter or Iowa Code § 321.234.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
§ 2.00 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license sticker is attached thereto
as provided herein.
§ 3.00 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the
city and shall be made to the Chief of Police. A license fee of $3 shall be
paid to the city before each license is granted.
§ 4.00 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he
or she knows or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the
owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the number of each license,
the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the
number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all
bicycle license fees collected by him or her.
§ 5.00 ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE DECAL.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue
a license decal bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name
of the city.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall cause such license decal to be firmly
attached to the rear mudguard or the frame of the bicycle for which issued in
such position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
   (C)   No person shall remove a license decal from a bicycle during the
period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the
bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in this city.
§ 6.00 INSPECTION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or any officer assigned such responsibility,
shall inspect each bicycle before licensing to ensure that each bicycle has its
seat, brakes, tires and pedals in good condition; a reflector visible from the
rear of the bicycle; has a chain guard; and handle grips and lights, if ridden
at night.
   (B)   The officer shall refuse a license for any bicycle which does not
comply with the above criteria or which he or she determines is in any unsafe
mechanical condition.
§ 7.00 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall
notify the Chief of Police of the sale or transfer and the license may be
canceled or may be changed to the name of a new owner upon payment of a license
fee.
§ 8.00 RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is licensed and a decal is attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 9.00 TRAFFIC ORDINANCES APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
bicycle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature have no
application.
§ 10.00 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number
for which it is designed or equipped except that an adult rider may carry a
child securely attached to his or her person in a back pack or sling or in an
approved child seat.
§ 11.00 PENALTIES.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $2, payable to the City Clerk, or by
impounding of such person’s bicycle for a period not to exceed seven days or by
any combination thereof.
CHAPTER 4: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Licenses
   
3.00   Exemptions
   
4.00   Filing application
   
5.00   Filing and fee provisions
   
6.00   Masseur or masseuse license
   
7.00   Operator of massage establishments - exception
   
8.00   Application form for masseur or masseuse
   
9.00   Verification of application
   
10.00   Facilities necessary
   
11.00   Referral of application to other departments
   
12.00   Issuance of license for a massage establishment
   
13.00   Issuance of masseur or masseuse license
   
14.00   Health certificate
   
15.00   Operator to maintain register of employees and patrons
   
16.00   Identification name plate
   
17.00   Revocation or suspension of license
   
18.00   Revocation of masseur or masseuse license
   
19.00   Employment of persons under the age of 18 prohibited
   
20.00   Massage parlors - unlawful acts
   
21.00   Sale or transfer
   
22.00   Name and place of business - change of location
   
23.00   Renewals
   
24.00   Display of license
   
25.00   Employment of masseurs and masseuses
   
26.00   Violation and penalty
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCREDITED SCHOOL. Any school which furnishes a certified statement of
courses offered, including anatomy and physiology, and is accredited by a
state, district or other unit of educational accreditation, which provides for
not less than 750 hours of instruction, which shall require at least one school
year and shall furnish a certificate or diploma of successful completion of
such course of study or learning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses, who
render any services to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from
the permittee and who have no physical contact with the customers or clients.
   INSPECTOR. Scott County Health Inspector, or his or her authorized
representative; inspectors of city building department; the Chief of Police, or
his or her representative; the Fire Chief, or his or her representative.
   LICENSEE. The operator of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS. Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or
permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in the
definitions for MASSAGE, MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSEUR, MASSEUSE or PUBLIC
BATH HOUSE. Any establishment engaged in or carrying on, or permitting any
combination of massage and bath house shall be deemed a MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person, including a trainee, who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, as herein
defined.
   PERSON. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form of
character.
   PUBLIC BATH HOUSE. Any place, including a private club or organization,
wherein any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership engages in,
conducts or carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on,
the business of giving or furnishing Russian, Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor,
electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, salt, Japanese, sauna fomentation or
electric baths or baths of any kind whatever, excluding ordinary tub baths
where any attendant is not used or required.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED ACTIVITIES. These activities include those encounters or
rap groups, artist or photo modeling, go-go dancing or such activities
characterized by the public display of sexual or genital parts.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL PARTS. These shall include the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
§ 2.00 LICENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried out, in or a part of any premises in the city, the
operation of a massage establishment as herein defined, without first having
obtained a license from the City Clerk so to do;
   (B)   To engage in, conduct or carry on in the city the practice of massage
as herein defined without first having obtained a license from the City Clerk
as a masseur or masseuse; and
   (C)   As an operator of a massage establishment, to permit any person to act
as a masseur or masseuse unless such person is duly licensed as required in
this chapter.
§ 3.00 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be required under this chapter for establishment
which is a hospital or health care facility licensed by the state nor for a
medical clinic or the office of a duly licensed chiropractor, osteopath,
physician or medical doctor or physical therapist. No license shall be required
of a duly licensed barber or cosmetologist extending massage to the face, head
or shoulders.
   (B)   No license shall be required under this section by any person duly
licensed by the state under the provisions of the Iowa Code.
   (C)   No license shall be required under this section by trainers of any
amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team or for
facilities used for such purposes.
§ 4.00 FILING APPLICATION.
   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application with the City Clerk upon a form
provided by said City Clerk and pay a filing fee of $100 which shall not be
refundable.
§ 5.00 FILING AND FEE PROVISIONS.
   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a license shall furnish the
following information:
   (A)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of
the applicant;
   (B)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
   (C)   Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
   (D)   Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches;
   (E)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (F)   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation;
   (G)   All criminal convictions except minor traffic violations;
   (H)   Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from an
accredited school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the
applicant will have no physical contact with his or her customer or clients, he
or she need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession and work of massage is taught;
   (I)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the
applications;
   (J)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny to the City Clerk
the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant,
nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right of said City
Clerk to confirm the height and weight of the applicant; and
   (K)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with
the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each
stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one
or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.
§ 6.00 MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE LICENSE.
   Any person who engages in the practice of massage, as herein defined, shall
file an application with the City Clerk upon a form provided by said City Clerk
and shall pay a filing fee of $25 which shall not be refundable.
§ 7.00 OPERATOR OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS - EXCEPTION.
   A diploma from an accredited school as defined herein will not be required
by the operator of a massage establishment or for any employee where such
operator or employee does not give a massage, as defined herein.
§ 8.00 APPLICATION FORM FOR MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   The application for a masseur or masseuse license shall contain the
following:
   (A)   Name and residence address;
   (B)   Social Security number and driver’s license number if any;
   (C)   Applicant’s weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
   (D)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
   (E)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (F)   Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except
misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this section has
been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which
such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was
obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;
   (G)   The name and address of the accredited school attended, the date
attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded stating
that the applicant has completed not less than 750 hours of instruction; and
   (H)   The City Clerk shall have the right to direct the Chief of Police to
take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and the right to confirm
the information submitted.
§ 9.00 VERIFICATION OF APPLICATION.
   Every application for a license under this chapter shall be verified by the
oath of the applicant.
§ 10.00 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Inspector first assures that the establishment complies with
each of the following minimum requirements.
   (A)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. Plumbing fixtures shall
be installed in accordance with established city codes.
      (1)   For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules and rooms containing
bathtubs, there shall be water proof floor covering, which will be carried up
all walls to an absorbent finish surface of Keene’s cement, tile or similar
material.
      (2)   Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors,
walls and ceilings approved by the inspector.
      (3)   Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one
or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: dry heat
rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor
drains).
      (4)   A source of hot water must be available within the immediate
vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
   (B)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet
per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex
on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets
after one water closet has been provided. All toilet rooms shall be equipped
with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet
rooms. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
   (C)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories
or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
   (D)   All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided
with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an
area of not less than one-eighth of the total floor area, or shall be provided
with approved artificial light and a mechanical operating ventilating system.
When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the
total required window area shall be operable. To allow for adequate
ventilation, cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patrons use not served
directly by a required window, skylight or mechanical system of ventilation
shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed 75% of
the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located.
   (E)   All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the city’s Electrical Code. All mechanical equipment shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the city’s Mechanical Code.
   (F)   No massage establishment granted a license under the provision of this
chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that service is available
other than those services as described in §
1.00 of this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text
of such advertising that any service is available other than those services as
described in §
1.00 of this chapter.
   (G)   No service enumerated in the definition of MASSAGE in §
1.00  of this chapter may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any
area within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of
being locked.
   (H)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposal instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposal instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
   (I)   Clean linen and towels shall be provided for each massage patron. No
common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.
   (J)   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and
floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
   (K)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (L)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted.
   (M)   Animals, except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work areas.
   (N)   No massage technician shall administer a massage to a patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption;
provided that a physician duly licensed by the state may certify that such
person may be safely massaged prescribing the conditions thereof.
   (O)   No massage technician shall administer a massage if such massage
technician knows or should know that he or she is not free of any contagious or
communicable disease.
   (P)   Each massage technician shall wash his or her hands in hot, running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each patron.
   (Q)   No massage establishment shall operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
§ 11.00 REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
   The City Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage establishment
license, shall refer the application to the Building Inspection Department, the
Fire Department and the County Health Department, which departments shall
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and
shall make written recommendations to the City Clerk concerning compliance with
the codes that they administer. The Clerk shall also refer the application to
the Police Department.
§ 12.00 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The City Clerk may issue a license if all requirements for a massage
establishment described in this chapter are met and may issue a license to all
persons who apply to perform massage services, unless he or she finds:
      (1)   That the operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted would
not have complied with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
Building, City Zoning, Housing and Fire Codes of the city or regulations
adopted by the County Department of Health; or
      (2)   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly
engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been
convicted of an offense outside of the state that would have constituted any of
the following offenses if committed within the state:
         (a)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another that amounts to a felony;
         (b)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; and
         (c)   An offense as defined in Iowa Code Chapters 702, 704, 705 and
724.
   (B)   The City Clerk may refuse to issue any permit if it shall appear that
the character of the building is not a proper or suitable place in which to
conduct or maintain such business or calling, or if the applicant requesting
such license does not warrant the issuance thereof.
   (C)   The City Clerk may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of
the crimes prescribed above in this section if he or she finds that such
conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application
and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no
subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this section.
§ 13.00 ISSUANCE OF MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE LICENSE.
   The City Clerk may issue a masseur or masseuse license unless he or she
finds:
   (A)   An offense involving the use of force and violence on the person of
another that amounts to a felony;
   (B)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
   (C)   An offense, as defined under Iowa Code Chapters 702, 704, 705 and 724;
provided, however, that the City Clerk may issue a permit to any person
convicted of any crimes described above in this section if he or she finds that
such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of application
and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no
subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this section; or
   (D)   That the applicant has not obtained the health certificate required in
this chapter.
§ 14.00 HEALTH CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   All persons who desire to perform the services of massage technician
at a massage parlor shall first undergo a physical examination for contagious
and communicable diseases, which shall include a recognized blood test for
syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a chest X-ray which is to be made and
interpreted by a trained radiologist and such other laboratory tests, as may be
necessitated by the above examination, and shall furnish a certificate based
upon the above examination to the City Clerk, which certificate shall be issued
within 30 days of such examination, signed by a physician duly licensed by the
state and stating that the person examined is either free from any contagious
or communicable disease or incapable of communicating any of such diseases to
others. Such persons shall undergo the physical examination referred to above
and submit to the City Clerk the certificate required herein within five days
of the issuance of the license and at least once every six months thereafter.
   (B)   The City Clerk, or his or her duly authorized representative, when he
or she has cause to believe that the massage technician is capable of
communicating any contagious disease to others, may at any time require an
immediate physical examination of any such person.
   (C)   Upon presentation to and approval by the City Clerk of the certificate
required herein, the City Clerk shall issue a health card to the applicant,
containing, among other items, the name of the holder, the date of expiration
and a statement that the holder has complied with the provision of this
section. The City Clerk shall refuse to issue such card if the applicant has
either failed to furnish the certificate required herein or is not free from
any contagious or communicable disease.
   (D)   The employer of any such person shall require all such persons to
undergo the examination and obtain the certificate provided by this section;
shall register at the place of employment, the name and date of employment of
each employee; and shall have the health cards and registration of all
employees available for inspection at all reasonable times.
   (E)   Any massage establishment, its equipment, records and methods of
operation shall be open during working or business hours to inspection by
representatives of the Police Department or the County Health Department.
§ 15.00 OPERATOR TO MAINTAIN REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES AND PATRONS.
   The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of all
persons employed as masseurs or masseuses and their permit numbers. A register
of patrons by name and address and age shall also be maintained and be
available for examination on reasonable request by the Chief of Police or by
the City Clerk. Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited upon the premises.
§ 16.00 IDENTIFICATION NAME PLATE.
   The City Clerk shall provide each masseur and masseuse granted a license
with an identification name plate which shall contain a photograph of the
masseur or masseuse and the name and license number assigned to said masseur or
masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the outermost garment at all times
during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 17.00 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended
by the City Council after a hearing, for good cause or in any case where any of
the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the
licensee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct which
violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at licensee’s place of
business and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of such
violations or the licensee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due
diligence, or in any case, where the licensee refuses to permit any duly
authorized police officer or inspector of the city or county to inspect the
premises or the operations therein. Such license may also be revoked or
suspended by the City Council after hearing, upon the recommendations of the
health inspector that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained
without regard for the public health or health of patrons or customers or
without due regard to proper sanitation and hygiene.
§ 18.00 REVOCATION OF MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE LICENSE.
   A masseur or masseuse license issued by the City Clerk to any employee may
be revoked or suspended after a public hearing on any of the following grounds:
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and
   (B)   Violation of any section of Iowa Code Chapters 702, 704, 705 and 724.
§ 19.00 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18
years of age.
§ 20.00 MASSAGE PARLORS - UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to place his
or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle
in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital part of any other person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to expose
his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other
person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to
expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, of any other
person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any
other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque
covering the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage parlor, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage
parlor any agent, employee or any other person under his or her control or
supervision to perform such acts prohibited in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in §
26.00 of this chapter.
   (F)   Sexually oriented activities, as defined in this chapter, are
prohibited, whether as a part of the operation of a business regulated herein
or as a part of any other business activity.
§ 21.00 SALE OR TRANSFER.
   Upon sale, transfer, change of ownership or relocation of a massage
establishment, the permit and license therefor shall be null and void.
§ 22.00 NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS - CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any
name or conduct his or her business under any designation for any location not
specified in his or her license.
§ 23.00 RENEWALS.
   Each licensee or masseur or masseuse shall apply for a license annually by
application as if for an original license. There shall be no automatic renewal.
Such application shall be filed and the fee paid no less than 30 days prior to
the anniversary date of the issuance of the current license. Each license
issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of one year from its date of
issuance.
§ 24.00 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every person to whom or for whom a massage establishment license shall have
been granted, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and shall display
said license in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that
the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
§ 25.00 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSEURS AND MASSEUSES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee for the massage establishment
or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseurs and masseuses, to
ensure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse shall first have
obtained a valid license pursuant to this chapter.
§ 26.00 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter, whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator,
or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts
a massage establishment or who in conjunction with the massage establishment
gives or administers, or practices the giving or administering of, baths, as
defined herein, or any of the services defined in §
1.00 of this chapter without first obtaining a license and paying a license fee
so to do from the city or who shall violate any provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
CHAPTER 5: CRIMINAL TRESPASS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Penalty
   
3.00   Damage or injury
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   (Same as
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.12 and Iowa Code § 716.7)
   PROPERTY. Any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other
temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned.
   TRESPASS. One or more of the following acts:
      (1)   Entering upon or in property without the implied or actual
permission of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession with the intent
to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass
or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied
or actual permission of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession;
      (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without legal
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to
remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession,
or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession,
or by any peace officer, magistrate or public employee whose duty it is to
supervise the use or maintenance of the property;
      (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of
unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others; and
      (4)   Being upon or in property and using, removing therefrom, altering,
damaging, harassing or placing thereon or therein anything animate or
inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee or
person in lawful possession.
§ 2.00 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall knowingly trespass upon the property of another is
guilty of a public offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 30 days (same as Iowa Code § 716.8(1)).
§ 3.00 DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   A person committing a trespass as defined in §
1.00 of this chapter resulting in injury to any person or damage in an amount
of more than $100 to anything, animate or inanimate, located thereon or
therein, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in
the county jail not to exceed 30 days (same as Iowa Code § 716.8(2)).
CHAPTER 6: MISDEMEANORS
Section
   
1.00   Violations of this code
   
2.00   Public peace
   
2.01   Assault
   
2.02   Affray
   
2.03   Disorderly conduct
   
2.04   Disturbing congregations or other assemblies
   
2.05   Unlawful assembly and riot
   
2.06   Sound amplification systems
   
2.07   Disorderly houses
   
2.08   Inhaling other toxic vapors and chemicals
   
3.00   Public safety and health
   
3.01   Putting glass and the like on streets and sidewalks
   
3.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
3.03   Manner of conveyance of weapons
   
3.04   Limitations on use of consumer fireworks
   
3.05   Abandoned refrigerators
   
3.06   Falsely assuming to be an officer
   
3.07   Refusing to assist an officer
   
3.08   Interference with official acts
   
3.09   Throwing or shooting
   
3.10   Interference with city officers
   
3.11   Playing in streets
   
3.12   Discharging firearms
   
3.13   Vagrancy
   
3.14   Loitering
   
4.00   Animals
   
4.01   Cruelty to animals
   
4.02   Bullfights and other contests
   
4.03   Animals running at large
   
4.04   Bothersome animals
   
5.00   Public property
   
5.01   Defacing public grounds
   
5.02   Injuring new pavement
   
5.03   Injury to public library books or property
   
5.04   Injury to roads, railways and other utilities
   
6.00   Streets
   
6.01   Removal of safeguards or danger signals
   
6.02   Obstructing or defacing streets
   
6.03   Removal of hydrant caps, sewer caps or manhole covers
   
6.04   Damage to trees
   
6.05   Posting advertising
   
7.00   Public morals
   
7.01   Prostitution
   
7.02   Soliciting
   
7.03   Keeping house of ill fame
   
7.04   Leasing house for prostitution
   
7.05   Indecent exposure
   
7.06   Obscene books or pictures - printing or distributing
   
7.07   Keeping of gambling houses
   
7.08   Gaming and betting; pool selling - places used for gaming, betting,
staking and booking
   
7.09   Possession of gambling devices
   
7.10   Blasphemous or obscene language
   
7.11   Transport or convey of controlled substance
   
7.12   Cruelty to animals
   
7.13   Harassment of public officers and employees
   
7.14   False reports to law enforcement authorities
   
7.15   Refusing to assist officer
   
7.16   Unlawful assembly
   
7.17   Failure to disperse
   
7.18   Obstructing emergency telephone calls
   
7.19   Falsely claiming emergency
   
8.00   Parties to crime
   
8.01   Aiding and abetting
   
8.02   Joint criminal conduct
   
8.03   Accessory after the fact
   
8.04   Responsibility of employers
   
9.00   Harassment
   
10.00   Theft
   
11.00   Fraudulent practice
   
12.00   Penalty
   
13.00   Use, sale and possession of dangerous weapons
   
13.01   Title
   
13.02   Definition
   
13.03   Sale or possession of offensive weapons prohibited
   
13.04   Exceptions
   
13.05   Penalty
   
14.00   Voyeurism
   
15.00   Title
   
15.01   Definitions
   
15.02   Restrictions
   
15.03   Exceptions
   
15.04   Penalty
   
16.00   Penalty
§ 1.00 VIOLATIONS OF THIS CODE.
   Commission of any of the acts named in the following sections by any person
will constitute a violation of this code.
§ 2.00 PUBLIC PEACE.
§ 2.01 ASSAULT.
   A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person does any
of the following:
   (A)   Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is
intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act;
   (B)   Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate
physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act; and
   (C)   Intentionally points any firearm toward another, or displays in a
threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another. (A person who commits
an assault, as defined in this section, with the intent to inflict serious
injury upon another shall be guilty of an aggravated misdemeanor.) Provided
that where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other
person are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in
itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such
sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of serious injury
or breach of the peace, the act shall not be an assault. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.1 and Iowa Code § 708.1.)
§ 2.02 AFFRAY.
   For two or more persons voluntarily or by agreement to engage in any fight,
or use any blows or violence towards each other in an angry or quarrelsome
manner, in any public place, to the disturbance of others.
§ 2.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person commits a simple misdemeanor when the person does any of the
following (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.30 or Iowa Code § 723.4):
   (A)   Engages in fighting/violent behavior in any public place or in/near
any lawful assembly of person; provided that participants in athletic contests
may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport;
   (B)   Makes loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
hospital which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof;
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit any disturbance,
disturbance of peace, including any hollering, screaming, uses of profane
language or fighting, loud music, in any house upon any premises owned,
occupied or possessed by him or her, or of which he or she has control, as an
agent or otherwise, in such a manner as to disturb the neighborhood, neighbors
or person(s) passing in the streets. The proof of such acts shall form a
rebuttable presumption that the same was done with the permission of the owner,
occupant or possessor;
   (D)   Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another;
   (E)   Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs
any lawful assembly or meeting of person(s) by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly;
   (F)   By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of
fire, epidemic or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such
warning to be baseless;
   (G)   Knowingly and publicly uses the flag of the United States in such
manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States,
with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or
encourage another to commit a public offense;
   (H)   Without authority or justification, the person obstructs any street,
sidewalk, highway or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its
lawful use by others;
   (I)   To use blasphemous or obscene language publicly, to the disturbance of
the public peace and quiet; and
   (J)   Urinates or defecates in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public
place or in any place open to public view; providing that this section shall
not apply to restrooms or public facilities designated for such purposes.
§ 2.04 DISTURBING CONGREGATIONS OR OTHER ASSEMBLIES.
   Willfully to disturb any assembly of persons met for religious worship by
profane discourse or rude and indecent behavior, or by making a noise, either
within the place of worship or so near as to disturb the order and solemnity of
the assembly, or willfully to disturb or interrupt any school, school meeting,
literary society or other lawful assembly.
§ 2.05 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY AND RIOT.
   For three or more persons, in violent or tumultuous manner, to assemble
together to do or attempt to do an unlawful act, or when together to do or
attempt to do an unlawful act, or when together, to commit or attempt to commit
an act, whether lawful or unlawful, in an unlawful violent or tumultuous manner
to the disturbance of others. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.28 or Iowa Code § 723.2.)
§ 2.06 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS.
   No driver of any motor vehicle shall operate or permit operation of any
sound amplification system that can be heard outside the vehicle from 75 or
more feet away when the vehicle is being operated upon a highway, unless such
system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous
situation. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 2.07 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit in any house or upon
any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her any fighting or any
loud or raucous noise.
§ 2.08 INHALING OTHER TOXIC VAPORS AND CHEMICALS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors,
whether synthetic or organic, for the purpose of causing a condition of
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the
nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such
substance for the purposes described in this section, nor shall any person
knowingly aid any other person to use any such substance for the purposes
described in this division (A). This division (A) shall not apply to the
inhalation of anesthesia or other substances for prescribed medical or dental
purposes.
   (B)   No person shall use an aerosol spray product or other inhalant that is
not used pursuant to the instruction or prescription of a licensed healthcare
provider, or that is not used pursuant to the manufacturer’s label
instructions, for the purposes described in division (A) above.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly uses or possesses
with intent to use inhalant paraphernalia to inhale, ingest or otherwise
introduce a toxic vapor into the human body.
§ 3.00 PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH.
§ 3.01 PUTTING GLASS AND THE LIKE ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   To throw or deposit on any street or sidewalk any glass bottle, glass,
nails, tacks, wire, can, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal or any other
debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
§ 3.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   To go armed with or to carry, except as hereinafter provided, a dirk,
dagger, sword, pistol, revolver, stiletto, metallic knuckles, pocket billy,
sandbag, skull cracker, slug shot or other offensive or dangerous weapon,
concealed either on or about the person; or to go armed within the city with a
pistol or revolver.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   A person who goes armed with a dangerous weapon in his or her own
dwelling or place of business, or on land owned or possessed by the person;
      (2)   Any peace officer, when his or her duties require the person to
carry such weapons;
      (3)   Any member of the armed forces of the United States or National
Guard or person in the service of the United States, when the weapons are
carried in connection with his or her duties as such;
      (4)   Any correctional officer, when his or her duties require, serving
under the authority of the Division of Adult Corrections;
      (5)   Any person who for any lawful purpose carries an unloaded pistol,
revolver or other dangerous weapon inside a closed and fastened container or
securely wrapped package which is too large to be concealed on the person;
      (6)   Any person who for any lawful purpose carries or transports an
unloaded pistol or revolver in any vehicle inside a cargo or luggage
compartment where the pistol or revolver will not be readily accessible to any
person riding in the vehicle or common carrier;
      (7)   Any person while he or she is lawfully engaged in target practice
or a range designed for that purpose or while engaged in lawful hunting for
game in a lawful hunting area; and
      (8)   Any person who has been issued a valid, unexpired permit to carry
weapons, and whose conduct is within the limits of that permit.
§ 3.03 MANNER OF CONVEYANCE OF WEAPONS.
   No person, except as permitted by law, shall have or carry any gun in or on
any vehicle on any public highway, unless such gun is taken down or contained
in a case, and the barrels and magazines thereof are unloaded.
§ 3.04 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks on days other
than July 3, July 4 and December 31.
   (B)   A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks at times other
than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on July 3 and 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. on July 4, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. on December 31 and 12:
30 a.m. on the immediately following day.
   (C)   A person shall not use consumer fireworks on real property other than
that person’s real property or on the real property of a person who has
consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that property. A person that
uses, explodes or discharges consumer fireworks shall have responsibility to
clean up all debris created by the fireworks.
   (D)   A person who violates this chapter commits a simple misdemeanor,
punishable as follows:
 
First offense        $250
Second offense       $400
Third and subsequent $625
 
(Ord. 2017-11, passed 11-20-2017; Ord. 2025-15, passed 6-16-2025)
§ 3.05 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   To place, or to allow to be placed, any discarded, abandoned, unattended or
unused refrigerator, ice box or similar container equipped with air-tight door
or lid, snap lock or other locking device which cannot be released from inside,
in a location accessible to children, outside any building, dwelling or within
an unoccupied or abandoned building or dwelling, or other structure, under his,
her or their control without first removing the door, lid, snap lock or other
locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or similar container. This
section applies equally to the owner of any such refrigerator, icebox or
similar container, and to the owner or occupant of the premises where the
hazard is permitted to remain. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.33 or Iowa Code § 727.3.)
§ 3.06 FALSELY ASSUMING TO BE AN OFFICER.
   To falsely assume to be judge, magistrate, sheriff, deputy sheriff, peace
officer, special agent to the State Department of Public Safety or conservation
officer, and take upon himself or herself to act as such or require anyone to
aid or assist him or her in any manner.
§ 3.07 REFUSING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER.
   When lawfully required by a sheriff, police officer, constable or other
officer to willfully neglect or refuse to assist him or her in the execution of
the duties of his or her office in any criminal case or in any case of escape
or rescue.
§ 3.08 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   A person who knowingly resists or obstructs anyone known by the person to be
a peace officer in the performance of any act which is within the scope of the
officer’s lawful duty or authority, or who knowingly resists or obstructs the
service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process
or order of any court, commits a simple misdemeanor. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.26 or Iowa Code § 719.1.)
§ 3.09 THROWING OR SHOOTING.
   To throw stones, snowballs or missiles of any kind or shoot arrows, rubber
guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into
any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or public place.
§ 3.10 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICERS.
   To interfere with or hinder any police officer, firefighter, officer or city
official in the discharge of his or her duty.
§ 3.11 PLAYING IN STREETS.
   To coast, sled or play games on streets or highways except in areas blocked
off by the Chief of Police for such purposes.
§ 3.12 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   To discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns or firearms of any
kind within the city limits except by authorization of the City Council.
§ 3.13 VAGRANCY.
   (A)   To be at large, not in the care of some discreet person, in a state of
vagrancy.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter the following persons are vagrants:
      (1)   All common prostitutes and keepers of bawdy houses or house for the
resort of common prostitutes;
      (2)   All habitual drunkards, gamesters or other disorderly persons;
      (3)   All persons wandering about and lodging in barns outbuildings,
tents, wagons or other vehicles, and having no visible calling or business to
maintain themselves;
      (4)   All persons begging in public places, or from house to house, or
persons inducing children or others to do so;
      (5)   All persons representing themselves as collectors of alms for
charitable institutions under a false or fraudulent pretenses; and
      (6)   All persons playing or betting in any street or public or open
place at any game, or pretended game, or chance, or at or with any table or
other instrument of gaming.
§ 3.14 LOITERING.
   Any person found loitering or standing on any street, sidewalk, curb or in
any public park or building shall move on when required to do so by a police
officer of the city who must have a reasonable suspicion that such person has
no lawful purpose and may be a threat to the public health, safety, welfare,
morals or convenience. Any such person who fails to move on or who commences to
loiter in another such place shall be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
§ 4.00 ANIMALS.
§ 4.01 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   To torture, torment, mutilate, cruelly beat, cruelly kill any animal or
unnecessarily fail to provide the same with proper food, shelter or protection
from the weather, or drive or work the same when unfit for labor, or cruelly
abandon the same or cause the same to be cruelly carried on any vehicle or
otherwise; or to commit any other act or omission by which unjustifiable pain,
distress, suffering or death is caused or permitted to any animal or animals,
whether the acts or omissions herein contemplated be committed either
maliciously, willfully or negligently. (See
Title B, Chapter 1, § 1.14 or Iowa Code § 717B.2.)
§ 4.02 BULLFIGHTS AND OTHER CONTESTS.
   To keep or use, or in any way be connected with, or be interested in the
management of, or receive money for the admission of any person to, any place
kept or used for the purpose of fighting or baiting any bull, bear, dog, cock
or any other creature, or to engage in, aid, abet, encourage or assist in any
fight between bull, bear, dog, cock or an other creatures.
§ 4.03 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   To allow cattle, horses, swine, sheep or other similar animals or fowl to
run at large within the limits of the municipal corporation.
§ 4.04 BOTHERSOME ANIMALS.
   To keep within the city such bothersome animals as barking dogs, bees,
cattle, horses, swine and sheep which tend to disrupt the peace and good order
of the community.
§ 5.00 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 5.01 DEFACING PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   To cut, break or deface any tree or shrub in a public park or on any avenue
thereto by willfully defacing, cutting, breaking or injuring, except by the
authority of the Park Commission or Mayor.
§ 5.02 INJURING NEW PAVEMENT.
   Willfully to injure new pavement in a street, alley or sidewalk by willfully
driving, walking or making marks on such pavement before it is ready for use.
§ 5.03 INJURY TO PUBLIC LIBRARY BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
   To willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface, mutilate, injure or
destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet,
chart, picture or other property belonging to any public library or reading
room.
§ 5.04 INJURY TO ROADS, RAILWAYS AND OTHER UTILITIES.
   To maliciously injure, remove or destroy any electric railway or apparatus
belonging thereof, or any bridge, rail or plank road; or place, or cause to be
placed, an obstruction on any electric railway, or on any such bridge, rail or
plank road; or willfully obstruct or injure any public road or highway; or
maliciously cut, burn or in any way break down, injure or destroy any post or
pole used in connection with any system of electric lighting, electric railway
or telephone or telegraph system; or break down and destroy or injure and
deface any electric light, telegraph or telephone instrument; or in any way
cut, break or injure the wires of any apparatus belonging thereto; or to
willfully tap, cut, injure, break, disconnect, connect, make an conduits,
meters or any other apparatus belonging to, or attached to, the power plant or
distributing system of any electric light plant, electric motor, gas plant or
water plant; and electric load management control device or to aid or abet any
other person in so doing.
§ 6.00 STREETS.
§ 6.01 REMOVAL OF SAFEGUARDS OR DANGER SIGNALS.
   To willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any highway,
street, alley, avenue or bridge any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article
or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon
for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
highway, street, alley, avenue or bridge without the consent of the person in
control thereof.
§ 6.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING STREETS.
   To obstruct, deface or injure any public road in any manner by breaking up,
plowing or digging within the boundary lines thereof, without the permission
from the City Council.
§ 6.03 REMOVAL OF HYDRANT CAPS, SEWER CAPS OR MANHOLE COVERS.
   To remove or carry away hydrant caps, sewer caps or manhole covers without
the consent of the person in control thereof.
§ 6.04 DAMAGE TO TREES.
   For any person to maliciously or negligently, in any manner injure, deface,
remove or destroy any ornamental or shade tree, or boxing placed around the
same or any shrub, fence, railing, gate or sign upon any public grounds.
§ 6.05 POSTING ADVERTISING.
   For any person to post, paste or attach, or cause to be posted or attached,
any bill placard, poster, announcement or advertisement on any house, window,
building, sidewalk, wall, fence or tree, to any telephone, electric light or
power pole or water hydrant, within the city, without the consent of the owner
upon whose property such advertisement is to be attached.
§ 7.00 PUBLIC MORALS.
§ 7.01 PROSTITUTION.
   To resort to, use, occupy or inhabit for the purpose of prostitution or
lewdness any house of ill fame or place kept for such purpose, or to be found
at any hotel, boarding house, private residence or other place leading a life
of prostitution or lewdness.
§ 7.02 SOLICITING.
   To ask, request or solicit another to have carnal knowledge with any male or
female for a consideration or otherwise.
§ 7.03 KEEPING HOUSE OF ILL FAME.
   To keep a house of ill fame which is resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution or lewdness.
§ 7.04 LEASING HOUSE FOR PROSTITUTION.
   To let any house, knowing that the lessee intends to use it as a place or
resort for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness, or knowingly permit such
lessee to use the same for such property.
§ 7.05 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   Any person who exposes his or her genitals or pubes to another not his or
her spouse, or who commits a sex act in the presence of or in view of a third
person, commits a simple misdemeanor, if:
   (A)   The person does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of either
party; and
   (B)   The person knows or reasonably should know that the act is offensive
to the viewer.
§ 7.06 OBSCENE BOOKS OR PICTURES - PRINTING OR DISTRIBUTING.
   To import, print, publish, sell or distribute any book, pamphlet, ballad or
any printed or written paper containing obscene language or obscene prints,
pictures or descriptions, manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth; or
to introduce into any family, school or place of education, or buy, procure,
receive or have in one’s possession any such book, pamphlet, ballad, printed or
written paper, picture or description, either for the purpose of loan, sale,
exhibition or circulation, or with intent to introduce the same into any
family, school or place of education. This section does not apply to adult
entertainment businesses that comply with
Title D, Chapter 2, § 43A.
§ 7.07 KEEPING OF GAMBLING HOUSES.
   To keep a house, shop or place resorted to for the purpose of gambling, or
knowingly to permit or suffer any person in any house, shop or other place
under the permitter’s control or care to play at cards, dice, faro, roulette,
equality, punch board, slot machine or other game for money or other thing of
value.
§ 7.08 GAMING AND BETTING; POOL SELLING - PLACES USED FOR GAMING, BETTING,
STAKING AND BOOKING.
   To play at any game for any sum of money or other property of any value, or
to make any bet or wager for money or other property of value; or to record or
register bets or wagers or sell pools on the result of any trial or contest of
skill, speed or power of endurance of human or beast, or on the result of any
political nomination or election, or to keep a place for the purpose of doing
any such thing, or to own, lease or occupy any premises where the same is
permitted, or any part thereof is used for any such purpose, or to receive as
custodian or depository, for hire or reward, money, property or things of value
staked, wagered or bet on any such result.
§ 7.09 POSSESSION OF GAMBLING DEVICES.
   In any manner or for any purpose whatever except under proceeding to destroy
the same to have, keep or hold in possession or control any roulette wheel,
Klondike table, poker table, punch board, faro or keno layouts or any other
machines used for gambling, or any slot machine or device with an element of
such operation.
§ 7.10 BLASPHEMOUS OR OBSCENE LANGUAGE.
   To use blasphemous or obscene language publicly to the disturbance of the
public peace and quiet.
§ 7.11 TRANSPORT OR CONVEY OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or convey any controlled
substance, as defined in Iowa Code Chapter 204, by motor vehicle on any highway
or street in the city.
§ 7.12 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   Any person who shall impound or confine or cause to be impounded or
confined, in any place, any domestic animal, or fowl, or any dog or cat, and
fail to supply such animal during confinement with sufficient quantity of food
and water, or who shall torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance,
mutilate, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, beat or kill any such
animal by any means which shall cause unjustified pain, distress or suffering,
whether intentionally or negligently. (See Iowa Code § 717B.)
§ 7.13 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Any person who willfully prevents or attempts to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
§ 7.14 FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES.
   A person who reports, or causes to be reported, false information to a fire
department or a law enforcement authority, knowing that the information is
false, or who reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the same
did not occur, commits violation of this code.
§ 7.15 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. It is violation of this code for a person who
unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuses or neglects to render assistance
when so requested. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.27 or Iowa Code § 719.2.)
§ 7.16 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   An unlawful assembly is three or more person assembled together, with them
or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense. A person who willingly joins in or remains a
part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe
that it is such, commits a violation of this code. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.28 or Iowa Code § 723.2.)
§ 7.17 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
Any person within hearing distance of such command who refuses to obey commits
a violation of this code. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.29 or Iowa Code § 723.3.)
§ 7.18 OBSTRUCTING EMERGENCY TELEPHONE CALLS.
   An emergency call is any call to a fire department or police department for
aid, or a call for medical aid or ambulance service, when human life or
property is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. Any
person who fails to relinquish any telephone or telephone line which the person
is using when informed that such phone or line is needed for an emergency call
commits a violation of this code.
§ 7.19 FALSELY CLAIMING EMERGENCY.
   Any person who secures the use of telephone or telephone line by falsely
stating that such telephone or line is needed for an emergency call commits a
violation of this code. (See
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.36 or Iowa Code § 727.6.)
§ 8.00 PARTIES TO CRIME.
§ 8.01 AIDING AND ABETTING.
   (A)   All persons concerned in the commission of public offense, whether
they directly commit the act constituting the offense or aid and abet its
commission, shall be charged, tried and punished as principals.
   (B)   The guilt of a person who aids and abets the commission of crime must
be determined upon the facts which show the part the person had in it, and does
not depend upon the degree of another person’s guilt.
§ 8.02 JOINT CRIMINAL CONDUCT.
   When two or more persons, acting in concert, knowingly participate in a
public offense, each is responsible for the acts of the other done in
furtherance of the commission of the offense or escape therefrom, and each
person’s guilt will be the same as that of the person so acting, unless the act
was one which the person could not reasonably expect to be done in the
furtherance of the commission of the offense.
§ 8.03 ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT.
   Any person having knowledge that a public offense has been committed and
that a certain person committed it, and is not the husband or wife of the
person who committed the offense, who harbors, aids or conceals the person who
committed the offense, with the intent to prevent the apprehension of the
person who committed the offense, commits an aggravated misdemeanor if the
public offense committed was a felony or commits a simple misdemeanor or if the
public offense was a misdemeanor.
§ 8.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF EMPLOYERS.
   An employer or an employer’s agent, officer, director or employee who
supervises or directs the work of other employees is guilty of the same public
offense committed by an employee acting under the employer’s control,
supervision or direction in any of the following cases:
   (A)   The person has directed the employee to commit a public offense;
   (B)   The person knowingly permits an employee to commit a public offense,
under circumstances in which the employer expects to benefit from the illegal
activity of the employee; and
   (C)   The person assigns the employee some duty or duties which the person
knows cannot be accomplished, or are not likely to be accomplished, unless the
employee commits a public offense; provided that the offense committed by the
employee is one which the employer can reasonably anticipate will follow from
this assignment.
§ 9.00 HARASSMENT.
   It shall be the violation of this code for any person to commit a
harassment. HARASSMENT is defined as:
§ 9.01.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, electronic message
or writing without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other
person annoyance or harm;
§ 9.02.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car or boat
occupied by such person;
§ 9.03.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent;
§ 9.04.   Reports, or causes to be reported, false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act knowing the same did not occur; and
§ 9.05.   Reports, or causes to be reported, false information to the
department of human services, alleging that a person has abused a child,
knowing that the information is false, or who reports the alleged occurrence of
child abuse knowing that the child abuse did not occur.
§ 10.00 THEFT.
   It shall be the violation of this code for any person to commit theft of
property not exceeding $200 in value. THEFT is defined as (see also
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1):
§ 10.01.   Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property
in the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 10.02.   Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property
of another which the person has in the person’s possession or control, whether
such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it
in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the
owner’s rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates
such property to the person’s own use, when the owner of such property is known
to the person. Failure by a bailee or lessee of personal property to return the
property within 72 hours after a time specified in a written agreement of lease
or bailment shall be evidence of misappropriation (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 10.03.   Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of
possession, control or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial
use of property of another, by deception. Where compensation for goods and
services is ordinarily paid immediately upon the obtaining of such goods or the
rendering of such services, the refusal to pay or leaving the premises without
payment or offer to pay or without having obtained from the owner or operator
the right to pay subsequent to leaving the premises gives rise to an inference
that the goods or services were obtained by deception (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 10.04.   Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to
have been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has
been stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner
or to deliver it to an appropriate public officer. The fact that the person is
found in possession of property which has been stolen from two or more persons
on separate occasions, or that the person is a dealer or other person familiar
with the value of such property and has acquired it for a consideration which
is far below its reasonable value, shall be evidence from which the court or
jury may infer that the person knew or believed that the property had been
stolen (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 10.05.   Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone
else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 10.06.   Makes, utters, draws, delivers or gives any check, share draft,
draft or written order of any bank, credit union, person or corporation, and
obtains property or service in exchange therefor, if the person knows such
check, share draft, draft or written order will not be paid when presented.
Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because of
insufficient funds, and the maker has not paid the holder of the instrument the
amount due thereon within ten days of the maker’s receipt of notice from the
holder that payment has been refused by the drawee, the court or jury may infer
from such facts that the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on
presentation. Notice of refusal of payment shall be by certified mail, or by
personal service in the manner prescribed for serving original notices.
Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because the maker
has no account with the drawee, the court or jury may infer from such fact that
the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on presentation (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.3 or Iowa Code § 714.1);
§ 11.00 FRAUDULENT PRACTICE.
   It shall be the violation of the code for any person to commit fraudulent
practice where the amount of money or value of property or services involved
does not exceed $200. FRAUDULENT PRACTICE is defined as (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8):
§ 11.01.   Makes, tenders or keeps for sale any warehouse receipt, bill of
lading or any other instrument purporting to represent any right to goods, with
knowledge that the goods are presented by such instrument do not exist (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.02.   Knowingly attaches or alters any label to any goods offered or kept
for sale so as to materially misrepresent the quality or quantity of such
goods, or the maker or source of such goods (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.03.   Knowingly executes or tenders a certification under penalty of
perjury, false affidavit or certificate, which is required by law, or which is
given in support of a claim for compensation, indemnification, restitution or
other payment (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.04.   Makes any entry in or alteration of any public records, or any
records of any corporation, partnership or other business enterprise or
nonprofit enterprise knowing the same to be false;
§ 11.05.   Removes, alters or defaces any serial or other identification
number, or any owners’ identification mark, from any property not the person’s
own (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.06.   For the purpose of soliciting assistance, contributions or other
things of value, falsely represents oneself to be a veteran of the armed forces
of the United States, or a member of any fraternal, religious, charitable or
veterans organization, or of any pretended organization of a similar nature, or
to be acting on behalf of such person or organization (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.07.   Manufactures, sells or keeps for sale any token or device suitable
for the operation of a coin-operated device or vending machine, with the intent
that such token or device may be so used; provided that the owner or operator
of any coin-operated device or vending machine may sell slugs or tokens for use
in the person’s own devices (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.08.   Manufactures or possesses any false or counterfeit label, with the
intent that it be placed on merchandise to falsely identify its origin or
quality, or who sells any such false or counterfeit label with the
representation that it may be so used (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.09.   Alters or renders inoperative or inaccurate any meter or measuring
device used in determining the value of or compensation for the purchase, use
or enjoyment of property with the intent to defraud any person (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8);
§ 11.10.   Does any act expressly declared to be a fraudulent practice by any
other section of the code (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8); and
§ 11.11.   Removes, defaces, covers, alters or destroys any component part
number, as defined in Iowa Code § 321.1(73), or vehicle identification number,
as defined in Iowa Code § 321.1(74), for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the identity of the component part or vehicle (see
Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.6 or Iowa Code § 714.8).
§ 12.00 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the provisions of §§
1.00 through
11.00 of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or a fine not
exceeding $500. Each day that a violation continues to exist constitutes a
separate offense.
§ 13.00 USE, SALE AND POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   The use of certain instruments or devices may result in the injury or death
of a human being or animal; and the existence of such instruments or devices
within the city constitutes possible threat to the health and safety of persons
and/or property.
§ 13.01 TITLE.
   This section shall be known and cited as the “City Dangerous Weapon
Ordinance” of the city.
§ 13.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS WEAPON. Any instrument or device designed primarily for use in
inflicting death or injury upon a human being or animal, which is capable of
inflicting death upon a human being when used in the manner for which it was
designed. Additionally, any instrument or device of any sort whatsoever which
is actually used in such a manner as to indicate that the defendant intends to
inflict death or serious injury upon a human being, is a DANGEROUS WEAPON.
DANGEROUS WEAPONS include, but are not limited to, any offensive weapon,
pistol, revolver or other firearm, dagger, razor, stiletto or knife having a
blade of three inches or longer in length, or nunchuku sai kama, tonfa,
throwing star, butterfly knife or brass knuckles.
§ 13.03 SALE OR POSSESSION OF OFFENSIVE WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply defensive weapons, as defined
in §
13.02 of this chapter, to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe him or her to be under 18 years of age, and no person or persons under
18 years of age shall individually or jointly have offensive weapons in his,
her or their possession or control.
§ 13.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This section shall not apply to any of the following: a person under 18
years of age within a private home and with the knowledge and consent of the
parent or guardian, or a person under the age of 18 years of age upon the
premises of a martial arts school or studio, said school possessing all of the
licenses necessary to conduct the business of teaching and instructing persons
in the martial arts and said person under the age of 18 having the written
authorization to so participate from his or her parent or guardian.
§ 13.05 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or a fine not exceeding $500. Each day that a violation
continues to exist constitutes a separate offense.
§ 14.00 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to enter upon the property of
another with the effect of violating the privacy of a person therein.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, VIOLATING THE PRIVACY shall be
defined as physical observation of another at such times or in such manner as
would cause distress to a reasonable person so observed.
§ 15.00 TITLE.
   This section may be known as the “City Curfew Ordinance” of the city.
§ 15.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINOR. An unemancipated person who has not yet reached the eighteenth
birthday.
   PARENT. A person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive
parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis or by
virtue of a court order.
   STREET. A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for vehicular or pedestrian travel, including, but not
limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, irrespective of what the right-of-way
is called.
§ 15.02 RESTRICTIONS.
   No minor shall be or remain upon the streets of the city from 11:00 p.m.
until 5:00 a.m. Sunday night through Friday morning, and from 12:00 a.m. until
5:00 a.m. Friday night through Sunday morning.
§ 15.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   In the following cases the presence of a minor on city streets shall not
constitute a violation of §
15.02 of this chapter:
   (A)   When the minor is accompanied by the minor’s parent;
   (B)   When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of
such minor to take said parent’s place in accompanying said minor for a
designated period of time and purpose. Such permission shall be written and
presented to a peace officer upon request;
   (C)   When the minor exercises First Amendment rights, such as free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech, right of assembly or right to petition the
government and use of city streets is a necessary incident thereto;
   (D)   When the minor is traveling, via direct route, to or from a place of
employment, or such travel necessary in conjunction with employment duties;
   (E)   When the minor is traveling through the city from and to destinations
outside the city, with no point of destination within the city, when such
travel is by direct route;
   (F)   When the minor is returning home by a direct route from and within 30
minutes from the termination of a school or church activity, or government
sponsored activity or events;
   (G)   When the minor is traveling to or from a city or school sponsored
after prom event; and
   (H)   Any contacts with minors under this section shall be followed up by
contact with their parent or guardian.
§ 15.04 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$100, or community service work as per Iowa Code § 903.1(3), each day that a
violation continues to exist.
§ 16.00 PENALTY.
   For a person who violates §§
1.00 through
15.00 of this chapter, there shall be a fine of at least $50 but not to exceed
$500. The court may order imprisonment not to exceed 30 days in lieu of a fine
or in addition to a fine.
CHAPTER 7: PARK RULES
Section
   
1.00   Park rules
   
1.01   Commercial activity
   
1.02   Destroying park property
   
1.03   Injuring wildlife
   
1.04   Placing advertising in park
   
1.05   Firearms and fireworks
   
1.06   Control of pets
   
1.07   Damage by pets
   
1.08   Park hours
   
1.09   Riding animals
   
1.10   Driving animals
   
1.11   Unlicensed motor vehicles
   
1.12   Motor vehicles on park roadways
   
1.13   People powered vehicles
   
1.14   Parking
   
1.15   Littering
   
1.16   Snowmobiles
   
1.17   Skateboard park rules
   
2.00   Intoxicants in park
   
3.00   Beer sales and possession for sale
   
3.01   Concession stands
   
3.02   Other locations
   
3.03   Written lease or grant
   
3.04   Sale of beer prohibited at certain events
   
4.00   Beer consumption and possession for consumption
   
4.01   Beers in cans and bottles
   
4.02   Keg beer
   
4.03   Beer purchased at concessions
   
5.00   Rules for enclosed dog parks
   
6.00   Activities prohibited on Sanctuary Gardens
   
6.01   Exemptions
§ 1.00 PARK RULES.
§ 1.01 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons to conduct any promotional or
commercial activity on any park property within the limits of the city, without
first obtaining a written permit from the Park Board.
§ 1.02 DESTROYING PARK PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface damage or destroy park
property, natural or human-made.
§ 1.03 INJURING WILDLIFE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, injure or kill any wildlife
on park property.
§ 1.04 PLACING ADVERTISING IN PARK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any
structure, advertising or vegetation on park property without first obtaining
written permission from the Park Board.
§ 1.05 FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unlicensed individual to shoot, fire or explode
any firearms, fireworks or explosives on park property without first obtaining
written permission from the Park Board.
§ 1.06 CONTROL OF PETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any pets to be on park property unless they are on
a leash except when using the dog park as in §
5.00 of this chapter.
§ 1.07 DAMAGE BY PETS.
   It shall be unlawful to allow pets to damage or destroy park property, or to
disturb the use of the park by others or disturb, injure or kill any wildlife.
§ 1.08 PARK HOURS.
   All city parks, with the exception of Sheridan Meadows Park, shall be open
to the public between dawn and dusk. Sheridan Meadows Park shall be open to the
public between dawn and midnight. Persons found on park property at other times
shall be subject to fine not to exceed $500 or to imprisonment not to exceed 30
days.
§ 1.09 RIDING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive animals anywhere on
park property except on park roadways.
§ 1.10 DRIVING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch riding and driving animals
anywhere on park property except in areas so designated.
§ 1.11 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an unlicensed motor vehicle
on park property.
§ 1.12 MOTOR VEHICLES ON PARK ROADWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on park
property, other than on park roadways.
§ 1.13 PEOPLE POWERED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any PPV (“people powered
vehicle”) on park property other than on park roadways or designated PPV
pathways.
§ 1.14 PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle anywhere but
designated parking areas on park property.
§ 1.15 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter park property.
§ 1.16 SNOWMOBILES.
   The operation of snowmobiles is hereby prohibited on city park property,
except as is set forth in the snowmobile chapter.
§ 1.17 SKATEBOARD PARK RULES.
   Users of the outdoor skateboard park shall comply with the rules as adopted
from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such rules shall be posted
at the skateboard park facility.
§ 2.00 INTOXICANTS IN PARK.
   It is unlawful for any person on park property to possess, consume, sell or
be under the influence of beer; alcoholic beverages; liquor; controlled
substances, as defined in Iowa Code Chapter 204; or prescription drugs for
which such person does not have a valid prescription, unless otherwise provided
by this chapter. Any person violating this section may be ejected from the park
area by any police officer and may be fined not to exceed $500 or imprisoned
for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 3.00 BEER SALES AND POSSESSION FOR SALE.
§ 3.01 CONCESSION STANDS.
   Beer may be legally sold and possessed for sale at the concession stand at
Sheridan Meadows Park pursuant to a written lease with the Park Board of the
city which lease shall specify the days and hours during which sale are
permitted. The lessee must be a civic group organized and existing within the
city.
§ 3.02 OTHER LOCATIONS.
   Beer may be legally sold and possessed for sale at other locations in
Sheridan Meadows Park upon written authorization from the Park Board of the
city, which authorization shall state the person or group to whom authority is
given, the park area to which it applies and the days and hours during which
sales are permitted. Said authorization shall only be for a civic group
organized and existing within the city and shall be granted only for a civic
function.
§ 3.03 WRITTEN LEASE OR GRANT.
   The City Park Board may enter into a written lease or grant written
authorization under the preceding sections when the person or group proposing
to sell beer has:
   (A)   Provided proof that such person or group is the holder of valid liquor
license or Class “B” beer permit issued pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 123 and
Title A, Chapter 12 of the city code; and
   (B)   Provided a certificate of insurance in such amount and for such
coverages as the Park Board determines to be necessary, naming the city and the
Park Board of the city as additional insured.
§ 3.04 SALE OF BEER PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN EVENTS.
   Beer shall not be sold at Sheridan Meadows Park during any organized
activity at the baseball diamond complex that involves participants under 16
years of age.
§ 4.00 BEER CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION FOR CONSUMPTION.
§ 4.01 BEERS IN CANS AND BOTTLES.
   Beer in cans and bottles may be brought into and consumed within the fence
surrounding the shelter at the Sheridan Meadows Park during the hours the park
is open to the public.
§ 4.02 KEG BEER.
   (A)   Keg beer may be brought into and consumed within the fence surrounding
the shelter at Sheridan Meadows Park by any person or group which has been
issued a permit therefor by the City Park Board. The request for a permit shall
be made at a regularly scheduled Park Board meeting. Said permit shall state
the person or group to whom issued and the date and hours during which it is
effective.
   (B)   Such applicant for said permit has:
      (1)   Identified the use to which the shelter area will be put, the time
at which the area will be used, the anticipated number of participants and the
name and address of the person or group to whom the permit is to be issued; and
      (2)   Deposited with the City Park Board a sum of not less than $50 nor
more than $250, contingent upon the size of the group, to cover any expenses
incurred by the city and by its Park Board for clean up or repairs of the park
area or any other expenses incurred by the city as a result of the applicant’s
use of the park. Any amount not needed to cover expenses shall be refunded to
the applicant within 14 days after the applicant’s use of the park.
§ 4.03 BEER PURCHASED AT CONCESSIONS.
   Beer purchased at the concession stand may be legally possessed and consumed
at Sheridan Meadows Park within the baseball diamond complex area during the
hours the concession stand is open and is selling beer.
§ 5.00 RULES FOR ENCLOSED DOG PARKS.
   (A)   The dog park is open daily from dawn until dusk unless closed for
maintenance.
   (B)   Sports activities, dog training and business uses are prohibited
unless authorized by the Director of Parks.
   (C)   Dogs must be in view and under the control of their handlers at all
times. All handlers must be at least 16 years of age. Each handler must have a
leash in hand at all times.
   (D)   No more than two dogs per handler are permitted in the park on any one
visit. Dogs cannot be left alone in the dog park.
   (E)   Dogs must wear collars with current vaccination tags and city dog
licenses attached. (Dog licenses are available at City Hall, 305 North Third
Street, Eldridge, Iowa.)
   (F)   Puppies under five months of age and female dogs in heat are
prohibited from the park.
   (G)   Owners are required to pick up and dispose of their dog’s waste.
   (H)   Dogs must be on a leash when they are outside the dog park.
   (I)   Remove or re-attach leashes when the dog is in the staging area. Do
not enter the play area with the dog on a leash.
   (J)   Children under four feet in height are not permitted in the dog park.
Children under 16 years of age must be closely supervised by an adult.
   (K)   Dogs that consistently exhibit dominant, aggressive behavior; dogs
that regularly do not come when called; dogs that play too roughly; and dogs
that cannot control their barking must be removed from the park immediately and
without debate. Owners are required to stop their dog from digging and are
responsible for filling any holes their pet creates.
   (L)   Smoking is not allowed in the dog park. (Tobacco products are
hazardous to canine health.)
   (M)   Water must be furnished outside the dog park, and owners bringing pet
toys must take them when they leave.
   (N)   The following items are not allowed in the dog park:
      (1)   Bicycles, skates, rollerblades and skateboards;
      (2)   Strollers and baby carriages;
      (3)   Children’s toys;
      (4)   Dog treats and rawhides;
      (5)   Food (dog and human);
      (6)   Glass bottles; and
      (7)   Prong or spike collars.
§ 6.00 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED ON SANCTUARY GARDENS.
   The following activities are prohibited on the property described as Lot 9,
Block 1, Original Town of the city, also known as Sanctuary Gardens:
   (A)   Use of metal detectors, ground penetrating radar, probes and other
methods that might be used to attempt to locate a burial site; and
   (B)   Excavation for the purpose of locating and opening a burial site.
(Ord. 2017-08, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 2025-06, passed 3-3-2025)
§ 6.01 EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons or organizations that obtain a permit from the city and the office
of the State Archeologist are exempted from the restrictions set forth above.
(Ord. 2017-08, passed 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 8: NUISANCES
Section
   
1.00   Defining nuisances
   
2.00   Nuisances prohibited
   
3.00   Notice to abate nuisances
   
4.00   Contents of notice to abate
   
5.00   Method of service
   
6.00   Request for hearing and appeal
   
7.00   Abatement by municipality
   
8.00   Collection of the cost of abatement
   
9.00   Abatement in emergency
§ 1.00 DEFINING NUISANCES.
   The term NUISANCE shall mean whatever is injurious to health, indecent or
offensive to the senses or an obstacle to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
NUISANCES are declared to be, but not limited to, the following:
§ 1.01.   All dogs, goats, horses, cattle, swine or fowl running at large
within the city limits;
§ 1.02.   All pools or ponds of stagnant water;
§ 1.03.   A carcass of any kind of dead animal not disposed of within 24 hours
after its death;
§ 1.04.   Dense growth of all vines, brush or other vegetation in the city so
as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard;
§ 1.05.   The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of an
river, creek, pond or ground water, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course to the injury or prejudice of others;
§ 1.06.   Accumulations of refuse;
§ 1.07.   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
§ 1.08.   The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples
are placed in the hands of an adult;
§ 1.09.   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch board;
§ 1.10.   All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and
newspapers;
§ 1.11.   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
§ 1.12.   The public use of profane or obscene language;
§ 1.13.   The burning of leaves, debris or other materials upon a public street
sidewalk or other such public places;
§ 1.14.   All diseased animals running at large;
§ 1.15.   Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease or trees infected by Emerald
Ash Borer;
§ 1.16.   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons from having a clear view of any portion or part of a public street,
road, highway, alley or railroad track so as to endanger the safety of the
public;
§ 1.17.   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half of their original
value and which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the public;
§ 1.18.   All unnecessary noises and vibrations;
§ 1.19.   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions
as are provided for by this code;
§ 1.20.   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any
use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather or an obstruction of traffic and the free use of the streets or
sidewalks;
§ 1.21.   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substance
stored in any manner or in any amount other than that provided for by this
code;
§ 1.22.   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by this code;
§ 1.23.   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the ground; and
§ 1.24.   Electric and barb wire fences as provided in the city’s zoning
ordinances.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 10-15-2018)
§ 2.00 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is hereby prohibited, and a
nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this
chapter.
§ 3.00 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCES.
   Whenever the Mayor, or other municipal officer, finds that a nuisance
exists, he or she shall cause to be served upon the owner, agent or occupant of
the property on which the nuisance is located, or upon the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance, a written notice to abate or to request a hearing as
provided for in this chapter.
§ 4.00 CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE.
   The notice to abate shall contain:
§ 4.01.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other condition;
§ 4.02.   The location of the nuisance or condition;
§ 4.03.   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
condition;
§ 4.04.   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement; and
§ 4.05.   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated a
directed and no request for a hearing is made within the time prescribed, the
city will abate it and assess the costs against the person to whom the notice
was sent.
§ 5.00 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   The notice to abate shall be caused to be served by the Police Chief, where
practical, upon the named person in the manner provided by law for the personal
service of original notices. Return of service shall be made as provided by law
for the returns of personal service.
§ 6.00 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL.
   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may have a hearing with
the officer ordering the abatement as to whether the prohibited condition
exists. A request for hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the
officer ordering the abatement within the time stated in the notice, or it will
be conclusively presumed that a nuisance or prohibited condition exists, and it
must be abated as ordered. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited
condition exists. If he or she finds that a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists, he or she must order it abated within an additional time which must be
reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal from this decision may be had by
immediately filing a written notice with the hearing officer. This appeal will
be heard before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance or prohibited
condition is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances.
§ 7.00 ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 8.00 COLLECTION OF THE COST OF ABATEMENT.
   The City Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the
property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the
amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the City
Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Auditor and it shall then be
collected with, and in the same manner as general property taxes.
§ 9.00 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.
   If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any action which
may be required to abate the nuisance or condition without prior notice. The
city shall assess the costs in the manner set out in this chapter, after notice
to the property owner under the applicable provision of §§
3.00 and
4.00 of this chapter and hearing as provided in §
6.00 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 9: WEEDS
Section
   
1.00   When a nuisance
   
2.00   Opportunity to abate
   
3.00   Request for hearing
   
4.00   Abatement
   
5.00   Fees
§ 1.00 WHEN A NUISANCE.
   The owner of property abutting a public street or streets shall maintain all
property outside the lot and property lines and to the curb lines upon such
public street or streets, except that the property owner shall not be required
to remove diseased or dead wood. Whenever an officer of the city government
determines that grasses and/or weeds within 300 feet of established buildings
are more than six inches high, those grasses and weeds shall constitute a
public nuisance. Any weeds and/or grasses more than 12 inches in height,
whether near a building or not, are likewise a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2022-10, passed 10-3-2022)
§ 2.00 OPPORTUNITY TO ABATE.
   A written notice or a verbal notice shall be given to the landowner when it
is determined that weeds and grasses constitute a nuisance. Said landowner
shall have seven days in which to cut the weeds and grasses or to request a
hearing before the city officer giving notice.
§ 3.00 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   The landowner may request a hearing before the officer giving notice by
either verbal or written request addressed to the said officer. The said
officer may, in his or her discretion, deny an appeal of the hearing to the
City Council.
§ 4.00 ABATEMENT.
   If, after due notice, any weeds and/or grasses have not been cut, the city
or its contractor(s) shall cut the weeds and/or grasses and bill the landowner
according to §
5.00 of this chapter.
§ 5.00 FEES.
   Fees shall be set by the City Council by resolution.
CHAPTER 10: ANIMALS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   License required
   
3.00   Display of license
   
4.00   Rabies vaccination and reporting
   
5.00   Report of bites required
   
6.00   Livestock and poultry prohibited
   
7.00   Animal running at large
   
8.00   Mistreatment of animals
   
9.00   Removal of excrement
   
10.00   Number of animals regulated
   
11.00   Wild, exotic or dangerous animals prohibited
   
12.00   Vicious dogs
   
13.00   Working service dogs
   
14.00   Damage to property
   
15.00   Barking dogs regulations
   
16.00   Impoundment
   
17.00   Enforcing provisions
   
18.00   Notice of violation, confiscation, revocation
   
19.00   Nuisances
   
20.00   Animal Hearing Commission
   
21.00   Penalties
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE FOOD. The provision, at suitable intervals as the dietary
requirements of the species so require, of a quantity of wholesome foodstuff
suitable for the species and age sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of
nutrition in each animal. The foodstuff shall be served in a clean receptacle,
dish or container.
   ADEQUATE WATER. Reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water
provided in a sanitary manner and provided at suitable intervals for the
species not to exceed 24 hours at any one interval.
   ANIMAL. A living organism, other than human beings, birds, fish or
invertebrates, domesticated or wild, and distinguished from other living things
by structural and functional characteristics such as locomotion.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any humane officer employed by a humane society
under contract with the city; any animal control officer under the jurisdiction
of the Chief of Police or any other person authorized by the City Administrator
to enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of appropriate police
powers.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility which is used to house or contain dogs, cats or
other animals, and which is owned, operated or maintained by the city or
operated under contract with the city for the purpose of humane boarding of
animals impounded under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance.
   BOARDING KENNEL. A place or establishment other than an animal shelter or
pound where dogs, cats or other animals, not owned by the proprietor, are
sheltered, fed and watered in return for consideration.
   CAT. All members of the feline species regardless of sex.
   COMMERCIAL BREEDER. A person, engaged in the business of breeding dogs or
cats, who sells, exchanges or leases dogs or cats in return for consideration,
or who offers to do so, whether or not the animals are raised, trained, groomed
or boarded by the person. A person who owns or harbors three or less breeding
males or females is not a COMMERCIAL BREEDER.
   COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A kennel which performs grooming, boarding or training
services for dogs or cats in return for consideration.
   COMMISSION. The natural resources commission of the Department of Natural
Resources created and established by the Iowa Code.
   DOG. All members of the species Canis familiaris.
      (1)   A DANGEROUS DOG means any dog that:
         (a)   While unmuzzled, unleashed or without the supervision of a
person whose verbal commands are obeyed charges or chases in a terrorizing
manner with an apparent attitude of attack any person who is upon a street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place;
         (b)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
without provocation or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or domestic
animals; or
         (c)   An animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily
or in part, of animal fighting.
      (2)   A VICIOUS DOG means any dog that:
         (a)   Unprovoked, bites or attacks a person causing bodily injury, as
defined by Iowa Code § 702.18;
         (b)   Severely injures or kills another domestic animal; or
         (c)   Has been found to be a dangerous dog on two or more occasions.
      (3)   A dog may be declared dangerous or vicious even if it bites,
attacks or menaces a trespasser on the dog’s owner’s property or a person who
is contemporaneously tormenting, teasing or abusing the dog.
      (4)   The declaration that a dog is dangerous or vicious shall be made by
an animal control officer. Notification of the declaration and the owner’s
appeal rights shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in §
19.00 of this chapter.
   EUTHANASIA. The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or a method
that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of
consciousness, and death during the loss of consciousness.
   FUR-BEARING ANIMALS. The following which are declared to be fur-bearing
animals for the purpose of regulation and protection under this chapter:
beaver, badger, mink, otter, muskrat, raccoon, skunk, opossum, spotted skunk or
civet cat, weasel, coyote, bobcat, wolf, groundhog, red fox, gray fox and any
other animals defined as fur-bearing by the Commission.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog trained or used to protect persons or property by
attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area patrolled
by the dog such dog being either securely enclosed within the area at all times
or under the continuous control of a trained handler.
   HOUSING FACILITIES. Any room, building or area used to contain a primary
enclosure or enclosures.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her care, or who acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any
premises owned or occupied by him or her for three or more days.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation or association and includes
any officer, employee or agency thereof.
   PET SHOP. An establishment where any dog, cat, rabbit, rodent, fish other
than live bait, bird or other vertebrate animal is bought, sold, exchanged or
offered for sale.
   PRIMARY ENCLOSURE. Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a
limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage or compartment.
   TAKE. Any pursuing, hunting, killing, trapping, snaring, netting, searching
for, shooting at, stalking or lying in wait for or attempting any for the
foregoing, any animal protected by state laws, regulations or rules adopted by
the Commission or this chapter.
§ 2.00 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every dog and every cat shall be licensed. Fees for dog licenses shall
be due and payable between January 1 and April 30 of each year. Licenses become
delinquent after April 30 of each year and the delinquent license fee shall be
$1 in addition to the regular fee, except in those cases where, by reason of
residence or age, the dog was not subject to licensing during the January 1 to
April 30 period. No person shall have, harbor, keep or possess any unlicensed
dog or cat in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Licenses shall be purchased from the city. A person must present
evidence of a current rabies vaccination signed and administered by a licensed
veterinarian which shows the date of the vaccination, type of vaccination and
the date of the next, subsequent revaccination.
   (C)   Licenses are not transferable between animal owners or animals.
   (D)   Annual license fees shall be as follows:
      (1)   Neutered/spayed dog or cat (altered): $6;
      (2)   Non-altered dog or cat: $12;
      (3)   Dog declared dangerous: $150; and
      (4)   Dog declared vicious: $350.
   (E)   Residents age 60 or older and residents who are recipients of social
security disability insurance benefits may license their neutered dogs or cats
for an annual fee of $1.
   (F)   Altered dogs, duly and properly trained to aid or assist any person
who is blind, deaf or physically handicapped, may be licensed for $1 annually
when the dog is owned or maintained by a person actually training the dog to be
used to aid or assist persons who are blind, deaf or physically handicapped, or
is owned by a blind, deaf or physically handicapped person. The burden of
proving that a dog is being trained to assist a person who is blind, deaf or
physically handicapped is on the person seeking to license the dog. The city
may require documentation of the person’s affiliation with an organization
established for the purpose of training dogs to provide aid or assistance to
blind, deaf or physically handicapped persons or whatever evidence the humane
society deems satisfactory to establish the validity of such claim.
   (G)   The owner of a dog that has been declared a dangerous dog may qualify
to license said dog for the normal licensing fee upon proof that the owner and
said dog have attended and successfully completed a dog obedience class or
similar program approved by the city.
   (H)   Upon proof of loss, a duplicate license tag may be obtained upon
payment of a $2 replacement fee.
   (I)   A person owning or possessing any dog or cat who moves into the city
shall obtain a license for said animal within 30 days of the date the person
takes up residency in the city.
   (J)   Notwithstanding the licensing requirements of this chapter, the
following animals shall not be required to be licensed while in the city:
      (1)   Animals whose owner or custodian is a non-resident of the city and
who are visiting within the city temporarily. TEMPORARILY means for a period of
time 30 days or less within any consecutive 12-month period; and
      (2)   Animals brought into the city for participation in a show,
exhibition, demonstration or exhibit and which remain in the city for a period
of 30 consecutive days or less.
   (K)   The executive director of the County Humane Society or an animal
control officer of the humane society may revoke a person’s privilege to
license and keep a dog or cat within the city. Such revocation shall be for a
period as determined by the executive director or animal control officer.
Revocation of the privilege to license and keep a dog or cat within the city
may be initiated if the owner or custodian of the dog or cat has committed any
violations of the provisions of this chapter, except that violations for
failing to license a cat, non-dangerous dog or non-vicious dog shall not be
included as violations leading to revocation within any consecutive 12-month
period. A violation shall be shown by a conviction upon a citation or a finding
by the Police Chief or by a non-appealed notice of violation.
   (L)   An owner or custodian whose privilege has been revoked shall, within
ten days after notice of the revocation, remove from his or her residence all
dogs and cats which the person owns, keeps, harbors or maintains. If the
license is revoked, the owner or custodian shall surrender the animal to the
humane society or permanently remove the animal from the (city/county) within
five calendar days after either the time for appeal has expired or the decision
of the Police Chief has been served on the owner or custodian. If the animal is
found in the city after the five-day period, it shall be immediately impounded.
Failure to remove a dog or surrender it to the humane society may be prosecuted
as a municipal infraction violation or simple misdemeanor. An owner whose
license has been revoked shall inform the humane society, in writing, upon the
animal’s removal from the (city/county), the name, address and telephone number
of the animal’s new owner; the location where the animal will be kept; and the
name and description of the animal. In addition, the owner shall notify the new
owner in writing of any details concerning any and all complaints concerning
the animal, and any terms, conditions or restrictions imposed by the humane
society as to the animal. The owner shall provide the humane society with a
copy of the notification provided to the new owner as well as an acknowledgment
by the new owner of the receipt thereof.
   (M)   Upon revocation of a person’s privilege to license and keep dogs or
cats, no part of the licensee fee shall be refunded.
   (N)   During the period of revocation, any dog or cat which the person owns,
keeps, harbors or maintains at his or her residence may be immediately
confiscated upon its discovery and disposed of by the humane society absent
clear and convincing proof that the animal or animals belong to a person
visiting the resident.
   (O)   The humane society or animal control officer shall provide the owner
or custodian of the animal or animals, as shown on the records at the humane
society, so confiscated with notice of the confiscation. If the animal or
animals are unlicensed or no record exists as to the owner or custodian of an
animal, notice of confiscation shall be directed to the address of the
residence.
   (P)   Any person whose privilege to license and keep animals has been
revoked, but who owns, keeps, harbors or maintains a dog or cat during the
period of the revocation shall have an additional period of up to one year
added to the original period of revocation for each violation of the
revocation.
   (Q)   The notice of initial revocation, any notice of the extension of the
revocation period and any notice of confiscation of any animal may be appealed
to the Animal Hearing Commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
19.00 of this chapter. Any notice sent pursuant to this section shall contain a
brief explanation of the violation, the sanction imposed and appeal rights of
the person accused. If the accused can demonstrate by clear and convincing
evidence that he or she has played no role in the care, supervision, possession
or control of the animal, the animal shall be returned.
   (R)   When permanent ownership of an animal is transferred, the new owner
shall, within 14 days from the date ownership is assumed, obtain a license if
the animal is required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   (S)   An application to license a dangerous or vicious dog must include
presentation by the applicant of a certificate of insurance issuance by an
insurance company licensed to do business in this state which provides personal
liability insurance coverage for the death or injury of any person, or damage
to property of others, and for acts of negligence of the owner or owner’s
agents in the keeping of said dangerous or vicious animal. The minimum amount
of coverage shall be $50,000 for an animal declared dangerous and $100,000 for
an animal declared vicious. The certificate of insurance shall also require
notice to the city, in conformity with general city standards for certificates
of insurance, if the underlying policy of insurance is cancelled for any
reason. In lieu of such a certificate, a copy of a current homeowner’s policy
designating these requirements shall be sufficient proof of insurance for
purposes of this section. If said certificate is not immediately available, a
binder that indicates the proper coverage may be accepted for up to 30 days
subsequent to the determination that an animal is dangerous or vicious;
however, if after 30 days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been
submitted, the animal shall be deemed unlicensed and be disposed of at the
discretion of animal control officers. The prescribed insurance coverage,
whether it be certificate, policy or binder, must be obtained within ten days
of the declaration of the animal as dangerous or vicious, with retention of the
animal by animal control officers until compliance with this section is
assured.
§ 3.00 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license tag obtained pursuant to §
2.00 of this chapter shall be securely attached to a substantial collar which
collar shall be worn by the animal at all times. License tags are not
transferable to any other animal. Upon demand, the owner of an animal shall
display the city license to an animal control officer or city police officer.
§ 4.00 RABIES VACCINATION AND REPORTING.
   (A)   All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be inoculated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian upon such animal attaining the age of six months old.
Rabies vaccinations shall be administered at least once every three years for
dogs and cats and once every year for ferrets or as otherwise recommended by
the United States Department of Agriculture.
   (B)   A person who acquires a dog, cat or ferret that does not have a
current rabies vaccination certificate shall have the animal inoculated for
rabies within 30 days after the animal was acquired or within 30 days of the
animal attaining the age of six months, if the animal was not yet six months
old when acquired.
   (C)   The owner or custodian of any animal required to be vaccinated against
rabies shall keep a current rabies vaccination tag securely attached to a
substantial collar which shall be worn by the animal at all times.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   Whenever a veterinarian inoculates an animal for rabies
the veterinarian shall complete a rabies vaccination report which shall be
forwarded to the city, or its designee.
         (b)   The report shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name, age and sex of the animal;
            2.   A general description of the animal;
            3.   The date the current vaccination was given to the animal;
            4.   The revaccination date;
            5.   The vaccination tag number assigned to the animal; and
            6.   The name and address of the animal’s owner or custodian.
      (2)   The veterinarian shall sign the report and all reports shall be
sent to the humane society within 30 days of the administration of the
vaccination.
§ 5.00 REPORT OF BITES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person having knowledge of any dog, cat or ferret bite or scratch
which has caused a skin abrasion upon any person or for which the victim
required medical attention, which bite or scratch occurred within the city,
shall immediately report such fact to the City Police Department. This section
shall not apply if said bite or scratch occurred while the animal was being
treated, confined or housed within a veterinary hospital or clinic and that
facility knows such animal is currently inoculated for rabies and has the
certification to prove such inoculation. In such cases, reporting of the bite
or scratch shall be discretionary with the veterinary hospital or clinic.
   (B)   Any animal that has been involved in biting a person or other animal
must be quarantined for ten days from the date of the bite. Such confinement
may be at the premises of the owner if deemed appropriate and sufficient
safeguards are provided to the discretion of the animal control officer and/or
the County Health Department. If an animal is not quarantined at the owner’s
premises, it shall be confined at the animal shelter or at a licensed
veterinary hospital of the owner’s choosing. All costs of the quarantine shall
be the owner’s liability. This section shall not apply to police canines.
   (C)   The owner of an animal that has been reported as having inflicted a
bite on a person or other animal shall, on demand, produce the animal for
examination and quarantine to an animal control officer or police officer. It
is unlawful to fail to or refuse to produce such an animal. Failure to produce
an animal demanded shall subject the owner or custodian to arrest if probable
cause exists to believe the animal inflicted a bite on a person or other
animal.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to remove any animal which has been
quarantined pursuant to this chapter from its place of quarantine without the
express consent of an animal control officer and/or the County Health
Department officer.
§ 6.00 LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain, keep or harbor any cattle, swine
(except Vietnamese or Asian pot-bellied pigs), sheep, llamas, horses, jacks,
goats, guinea fowl, ostriches, poultry (domestic chickens, turkeys, geese and
ducks) or similar domestic animals raised for home use or for profit within the
city limits unless the property upon which such animals are maintained, kept or
harbored is zoned as agricultural property. This section shall not apply to a
bona fide zoological garden, senior care facility utilizing chickens as
therapeutic animals, pet shop, educational institute, circus, carnival or
veterinary hospital treating such animals.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any animal upon the public
or private sidewalks within the city, nor shall any person ride any animal upon
a public street or right-of-way during the hours of sunset to sunrise, except
for public parades for which a permit has been issued by the city.
   (C)   The lawful keeping of livestock, which is otherwise unlawful by reason
of the enactment of this chapter, may be continued upon property located within
the city; provided livestock was maintained thereon prior to the enactment of
this chapter, and may be continued until such time as livestock is no longer
kept or maintained upon such property. The burden of proving the maintenance of
livestock upon a parcel of land within the city proper to the enactment of this
chapter shall lie with the person claiming such prior existence. Nothing herein
shall be deemed to exempt an owner of livestock within the city limits from the
enforcement of nuisance or other laws regarding the keeping of such livestock.
(Ord. 2019-04, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 7.00 ANIMAL RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog, cat
or other animal to fail to keep the same from running at large within the city.
      (2)   For the purpose of this chapter an animal shall not be deemed
running at large, even if the animal is not restrained, as long as one of the
following situations applies:
         (a)   When the animal is restrained either upon the premises of the
owner or custodian or upon another’s premises with the permission of the owner
of that premises, so long as the animal is restrained in such a manner that it
cannot enter on the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, other public areas or
property not owned by the owner, custodian or permittee, unless the animal has
been declared dangerous or vicious, in which case the provisions of §
12.00 of this chapter shall apply;
         (b)   When the animal is confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner or custodian within a secured building, or within a secured pen,
enclosure or similar structure which has secured sides, bottom and top such
that the animal cannot escape, or within fencing or similar means secured such
that the animal cannot escape and which is fastened by an adequate locking
device;
         (c)   When an animal is enclosed within an automobile or other vehicle
of its owner or custodian such that it cannot escape and such that said
confinement does not endanger the animal’s health or well-being;
         (d)   When the animal is being walked off the premises of its owner or
custodian so long as the animal is on a leash not more than six feet in length
and under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal;
and
         (e)   When the animal is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or
registered kennel.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, animals injured or
killed on or along public streets or public rights-of-way shall be deemed
running at large. The animal control officer or city police officer shall
remove all such animals and, at his or her discretion, take such an animal
needing medical attention to a veterinarian or animal shelter. The owner or
custodian of such an animal shall be responsible and liable for the expenses of
medical treatment and care as well as impoundment fees and any other penalties
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure during the period of heat, in such a manner as will prevent
the animal from coming into contact with the other animals unless the animal is
used in a planned breeding situation. An animal is deemed to be in heat when it
is in an estrogous state or ovulating. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit exercising the animal provided the animal is restrained
on a leash or similar restraint not more than six feet in length and is under
the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal or from
transporting such animal within a motor vehicle.
   (D)   (1)   Any dog, cat or other animal which is found in violation of this
section may be impounded. Any such animal impounded may be redeemed by its
owner or custodian within five days from the time specified in §
16.00 of this chapter and upon payment of the applicable redemption fee,
current rabies vaccination fee unless current rabies inoculation is proven, the
current licensing fees and penalties if the animal is unlicensed, impoundment
fees, and the fees, costs and charges for any emergency medical treatment
administered to the animal.
      (2)   Redemption fees are as follow:
         (a)   For a first violation: $30;
         (b)   For a second violation: $75;
         (c)   For a third violation: $150; and
         (d)   Fourth violation will result in the revocation of the license to
keep the animal.
   (E)   Any violation of this section may result in the immediate apprehension
and impoundment of the animal by an animal control officer. After the time
specified in §
16.00 of this chapter the humane society may dispose of an unredeemed animal.
If an animal control officer is unable to apprehend an animal or impoundment is
not feasible, the animal control officer shall provide the owner or custodian
of the animal with a notice of violation under the procedures contained in §
18.00 of this chapter.
§ 8.00 MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person who does any of the following to an animal commits animal
neglect:
      (1)   Confines the animal without adequate food, water or shelter, or in
a manner that creates an unreasonable threat to the animal’s health or safety;
      (2)   Fails to supply adequate food or water to an unconfined animal
owned or cared for by the person;
      (3)   Causes injury or death to an animal when disciplining it; and
      (4)   Causes unnecessary pain and suffering to an animal by failing to
adequately tend to the animal’s health needs or grooming.
   (B)   The disposition of a neglected animal shall be governed by state law.
   (C)   No person shall torment, tease or harass any tied, fenced or otherwise
confined animal.
   (D)   No person shall expose any poison, poisonous meat or poisonous
substance anywhere within the city for the purpose of poisoning any animal.
This section shall not apply to a person who exposes poisons about a premises,
in accordance with the labeling instructions on the poisonous product, for the
purpose of exterminating insects, mice or rats. The use of any poison other
than one specifically produced for exterminating insects, mice or rats shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (E)   No person shall abandon any animal or cause such to be done, except
that a person may deliver an animal to another person who accepts ownership of
such animal or the person may deliver an animal to the humane society.
   (F)   A violation of this section may be charged as a simple misdemeanor.
§ 9.00 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.
   (A)   An owner or custodian of any animal shall keep all structures, pens,
coops or yards wherein an animal is confined clean and free from excrement and
the odor arising from excrement. Such area shall also be clean and free of
vermin and any thing that is likely to become putrid, offensive or injurious to
health. An area, structure, pen, coop or yard not maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition may be declared a public nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian to permit an animal to
discharge excrement upon any public property, common area, common thoroughfare,
street, sidewalk, alley, play area, park or private property, unless the
excrement is immediately picked up and disposed of in an appropriate refuse
container. If the owner of private property has given another owner or
custodian permission for their animal to use their private property, then this
section shall not apply to that particular usage.
   (C)   Animal excrement shall not be placed in storm sewers or street
gutters, but shall be picked up and disposed of in a sanitary manner in an
appropriate refuse container.
§ 10.00 NUMBER OF ANIMALS REGULATED.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain at any one
location within the city more than four of the following types of animals,
those being dogs, cats, ferrets and pot-bellied pigs; and of those four, no
more than three shall be of the same species. This limitation applies to
animals that are more than six months old or animals that are from more than
one litter that are more than three months old.
      (2)   This limitation shall not apply to any person provided that person:
         (a)   Is licensed to operate a kennel, animal shelter, pet shop,
boarding kennel, commercial kennel, commercial breeder operation, veterinary
hospital, zoological garden, circus, carnival, educational or medical
institution or research facility as defined by state law, and said person is in
compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city;
         (b)   If such animals are kept or maintained upon property zoned as
agricultural property within the city; or
         (c)   If said person has applied for and obtained a permit to keep
more than four animals from the humane society of the county and said person
keeps said animals within a residentially zoned district and exception in
division (A)(2)(a) above does not apply to said person.
      (3)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit as provided by this
section and the payment of a $10 fee, an animal control officer shall inspect
the applicant’s animal housing facilities and the sanitary condition of the
same. If the housing facilities are adequate and kept in a sanitary condition,
an excess number of animals permit shall be issued.
   (B)   Indoor pets, such as gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, birds,
fish, snakes and reptiles and similar animals normally maintained as pets in an
enclosure inside of a dwelling are not proscribed by this section unless
specifically regulated by other sections.
   (C)   If a person is found to be keeping more than four animals without the
permit required by this section, the excessive number of animals may be
immediately removed from the property and impounded. Any such impounded animals
shall be held for seven days and if the owner has not either complied with the
requirements of this section or petitioned the court for the return of the
animals by the end of the seventh day, the animal shelter shall seek to
permanently place the animals or euthanize such animals.
§ 11.00 WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, maintain,
sell or traffic in any of the following wild, exotic or dangerous animals:
      (1)   All poisonous snakes and poisonous reptiles; all non-poisonous
snakes greater than ten feet in length; Gila monsters, alligators, crocodiles
and caimans;
      (2)   Gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutans, baboons and other non-human
primate mammals, both arboreal and nonarboreal;
      (3)   Any species of feline not falling within the categories of ordinary
domesticated house cats as established by the American Cat Fancier Association;
      (4)   Bears or any species;
      (5)   Raccoons, porcupines, skunks, badgers and other similar fur-bearing
animals except ferrets;
      (6)   Foxes, wolves, coyotes or other species not falling within the
category of canis familiaris; and
      (7)   Any animal of any species known to be vicious or dangerous,
excluding canis familiaris.
   (B)   The prohibition contained in division (A) above shall not apply to the
keeping of poisonous snakes, poisonous reptiles, Gila monsters, crocodiles,
alligators and caimans; provided that the owner of such an animal is 18 years
of age or older, and that person has either:
      (1)   Received a bachelor of science degree based upon courses of
instruction which included courses in herpetology from an accredited college
level institution;
      (2)   Has successfully completed a course of instruction taught under the
auspices of a bona fide municipal zoo on the proper handling, care and keeping
of such animals; or
      (3)   Has completed a course of instruction of at least 20 hours duration
at an accredited educational institution on the care, handling and keeping of
reptiles; and
      (4)   Has applied for and received from the humane society a permit to
keep such animals, such application to be on a form approved by the City
Council.
   (C)   The prohibition contained in division (A) above, as to non-specified
other primates, shall not apply to the keeping of primates; provided that the
owner of such an animal is 18 years of age or older, and:
      (1)   That person has either a bachelor of science degree based upon
courses of instruction which included courses in primatology from an accredited
college level institution;
      (2)   Has successfully completed a course of instruction taught under the
auspices of a bona fide municipal zoo on the proper handling, care and keeping
of such animals; or
      (3)   Has completed a course of instruction of at least 20 hours duration
at an accredited educational institution on the care, handling and keeping of
primates; and
      (4)   Has applied for and received from the humane society a permit to
keep such animals, such application to be on a form approved by the City
Council.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any bona fide zoological garden, bona
fide educational or medical institution, museum, veterinary hospital, wildlife
rescue entity or wildlife rehabilitation entity with an appropriate permit from
the state, any such animals under the jurisdiction of the Commission, game
breeders, a circus or carnival licensed by the city, nor shall it apply to a
bona fide research institute or facility using wild, exotic or dangerous
animals for scientific research. In addition, this section shall not apply to
any primate trained and used to assist a handicapped person.
   (E)   Any wild, exotic or dangerous animal found within the city in
violation of this section is deemed a public nuisance per se. If a wild, exotic
or dangerous animal is found to be roaming at large within the city, it may, in
the discretion of the Police Department or animal control officer, be destroyed
immediately without prior notice to the owner thereof. The city and its agents
shall be under no duty or obligation to capture or otherwise confine the
animal.
   (F)   Any person found to be keeping, sheltering, harboring or maintaining a
wild, exotic or dangerous animal in violation of this section is subject to the
animals’ immediate seizure as contraband. Any animal so seized shall be held
for three business days. If the owner has not petitioned the court regarding
disposition of the animal and served notice of the pendency of the owner’s
petition for disposition of the animal on the humane society within that time
period, the humane society may euthanize the animal or permanently place it
with an entity which is exempt from the provisions of this section. If
necessary, the animal control officer or humane society may impound a wild,
exotic or dangerous animal at another facility. The animal’s owner shall be
responsible for all costs and expenses incurred by the humane society or the
city which arise as a result of the seizure and impoundment of a wild, exotic
or dangerous animal. Under no circumstance shall a wild, exotic or dangerous
animal be returned to or placed with a non-exempt entity within the city
limits. If a wild, exotic or dangerous animal is ever again found to be within
the city in violation of this section, it shall be immediately confiscated and
disposed of as the humane society deems appropriate.
   (G)   Any person keeping wild, exotic or dangerous animals prior to the
enactment of this chapter shall be allowed to keep such animals for the
duration of the animal’s natural life. Upon the death of a wild, exotic or
dangerous animal, the owner of such animal shall not be allowed to replace such
animal except as otherwise allowed by this section. The burden of proving the
prior ownership of a wild, exotic or dangerous animal prior to the enactment of
this chapter lies with the person keeping such wild, exotic or dangerous
animal. Nothing herein shall be deemed to exclude the enforcement of nuisance
or other laws on the owner of such animals.
§ 12.00 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall keep or maintain any dog that has been declared
a vicious and/or dangerous dog unless such dog is kept in an enclosure or on a
run line located within a fenced area. The fencing material shall not have
openings of more than two inches. Wooden fences shall not have openings of more
than two inches. Any gates shall be securable and of such design as to prevent
the entry of small children or the escape of the animal and shall be kept
secured. Kennels shall have double walls to prevent the insertion of fingers,
hands or other objects. The enclosure must not be located nearer than ten feet
to adjoining property lines or public rights-of-way. The floor of the enclosure
must consist of concrete or a similar material that will prevent the animal
from digging its way out of the enclosure.
      (2)   The run-line shall consist of a chain or cable having a tensile
strength of at least 300 pounds which does not allow the dog to get closer than
ten feet from adjoining property lines or public right-of-way. In addition, if
the dog is kept on a run-line within a fenced area, the dog shall be muzzled at
all times. If the dog is confined indoors, it shall not be confined on a porch,
patio or in a structure with open windows, screen windows or screen doors.
   (B)   If a vicious dog is not within an enclosure or on a run-line within a
fenced area, the dog shall be either within the owner’s residence or muzzled
and restrained with a chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of
at least 300 pounds that is no more than four feet in length. If the dog is on
a leash, the leash must be controlled by an adult who can control the dog.
   (C)   No person shall keep, use or maintain any dangerous or vicious dog on
any premises unless the premises is posted to warn of the presence of dangerous
or vicious dogs. Said warning shall consist of a sign placed at each entrance/
exit for the premises in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground
level adjacent to the sign. If the premises are not enclosed by a fence and the
dog is kept within an enclosure, a sign shall be posted on every side of the
enclosure in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level.
   (D)   No person shall sell, exchange, transfer or give a vicious dog to
another person.
   (E)   Owners and custodians of vicious dogs shall post their property with
conspicuous signs warning of the presence of a vicious dog.
   (F)   A vicious dog must be neutered or spayed.
   (G)   A vicious dog that inflicts bodily injury on a person or other animal
by biting after it has been declared vicious, or a vicious dog not kept or
maintained in compliance with this section, constitutes a public hazard and may
be seized and destroyed.
   (H)   This section shall not apply to police canines and guard dogs. Guard
dogs must be registered with the humane society and licensed and are restricted
to property zoned non-residential. The annual fee for registration of a guard
dog shall be $10. The registration form shall include the dog’s location by
address; the dog’s gender and general description; the dog’s current city
license number; the dog’s current rabies vaccination number; and the name of an
emergency contact person who is available 24 hours a day. Guard dogs shall be
confined to a fenced in area that is adequate to prevent the dog from escaping
the fenced area. The fenced area shall be clearly posted with warning signs.
   (I)   Any dog declared vicious must have an identification microchip
inserted by a veterinarian and to have at least two color photographs taken of
said dog to be placed on file with the animal control office. This shall be
done within ten days of the dog being declared vicious and at the expense of
the dog’s owner or custodian.
   (J)   A violation of any of the provisions of this section may be charged as
a simple misdemeanor offense. Additionally, any animal control or police
officer shall have the right to seize and impound the dog if any of the
conditions and specifications established by this section for the keeping of
vicious dogs are not being met.
§ 13.00 WORKING SERVICE DOGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HANDLER. Any person who has custody and control of a working service dog
within the city.
      WORKING SERVICE DOG. Any dog trained to detect or to guard, protect,
patrol or defend any premises, area or yard in the custody and control of a
handler.
      WORKING SERVICE DOG SERVICE. Engaging in the business of providing
working service dogs in the city.
   (B)   No person shall engage in the business of providing working service
dog service in the city or to act as a handler, unless said person has obtained
a license as required by this section prior thereto.
   (C)   No person shall own or have the care or custody of a working service
dog unless the person has secured a working service dog license, tag and
identification number from the city or its agent. The fee for each working
service dog license shall be $10. No working service dog license or tag shall
be issued unless said working service dog is currently vaccinated for rabies.
   (D)   An application for a license to operate, maintain and conduct working
service dog service in the city shall be filed, together with an application
fee of $200, with the city or its agent. The application shall state the name,
address, type of organization of working service dog service, its method of
operation, the names and addresses of its officers and the names of its
employees and include evidence that the applicant is a bona fide security
service licensed by any state or federal authority. The application must be
accompanied by an insurance certificate or a surety bond underwritten by a
corporate surety admitted to do business in the state, in a form approved by
the City Attorney, in the sum of $300,000 blanket coverage for the working
service dog service. The working dog service and surety shall be jointly and
severally liable to any person, firm or corporation for damages suffered by
reason of the wrongful acts of the working service dog service. Notice of
proposed cancellation of the insurance or bond shall be provided to the city or
its agent not less than 30 days in advance of the cancellation date.
   (E)   Each applicant for a working service dog handler license shall be a
natural person and shall pay an annual fee of $100 and shall be required to
carry insurance or a surety bond in the amount of $100,000 covering the same
items as set forth in division (D) above. A working service dog service
licensed under division (D) above need not obtain a separate handler license
under this section.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or
occupation licensed under this section in the city unless such person holds a
valid license pursuant to this section. A violation of this section may be
charged as a simple misdemeanor.
   (G)   Every handler or owner of a working service dog shall see to it that
such animal wears a clearly visible tag approved by the city or its agent at
all times it is within the city unless the dog is performing a working service
which requires not wearing a tag in order to perform the service safely. Such
tag shall have stamped thereon “Working Service Dog, Tag No., City of
Eldridge”, and the year the tag was issued for. Lost or stolen tags shall be
immediately reported to the city or its agent and shall be replaced by the city
or its agent at the cost provided for other tags as stated in this chapter.
   (H)   Any working service dog service or handler that sells or otherwise
transfers ownership of any working service dog shall, not less than ten days
after the transfer, file a report with the city or its agent containing the
name and address of the person to whom such dog was transferred, a description
and identification tag number of the dog and any other information the city or
its agent deems necessary.
   (I)   Any person whose working service dog is lost or stolen or whose dog
has died shall, within 24 hours of the loss or theft, or within ten days of the
death, file a report with the city or its agent containing a description and
identification tag number of the dog, and any other information the city or its
agent deems necessary.
   (J)   A working service dog, properly registered as required by this
section, in the custody and control of a licensed working service dog service
or handler, shall not be declared to be a dangerous or vicious dog; provided
that at the time of attack said dog was under the direct supervision of a
working service dog service or licensed handler.
§ 14.00 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   No person shall allow or permit his or her animal to damage, injure or
destroy any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass, fence or anything whatsoever
upon public or private property without prior permission from the property
owner or authorized person.
§ 15.00 BARKING DOGS REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any dog which, by frequent, regular,
habitual or continued barking, yelping or howling, shall cause serious
annoyance to the surrounding neighborhood. Such action is a violation of this
chapter and is also hereby declared a public nuisance. The animal control
officer or a city police officer shall have the authority to use all reasonable
means to abate such nuisance, including, but not limited to, requiring that the
owner or custodian make bona fide efforts to quiet the dog and impoundment of
the dog if the owner or custodian is absent from the premises. If the dog is
impounded, the officer shall attempt to locate and notify the absent owner or
custodian by any reasonable means as soon as possible.
§ 16.00 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Animal shelter. The city may establish and maintain a municipal animal
shelter or the city may contract with any non-profit incorporated society or
association which shall provide and maintain an animal shelter for the
enforcement of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the persons authorized by
the city to operate such animal shelter to supervise and control such facility;
to cause the shelter to be kept in a sanitary condition and free from offensive
odors; to provide for adequate food, water and shelter; to provide for the
collection of animals; to handle the destruction or disposition of animals not
redeemed; and to assist in the enforcement and operation of this chapter. The
provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable by any animal control officer
and by members of the City Police Department.
   (B)   Impoundment procedure. Unrestrained animals found running at large,
nuisance animals, neglected animals, abandoned animals and cats or dogs running
at large without license tags or rabies vaccination tags shall be taken and
impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.
   (C)   Notice. Upon impounding a licensed animal, the owner or custodian of
the animal shall be given a written notice of the impoundment by the
impoundment authority within two days and the owner shall then have five days
to redeem the animal not counting the day of impoundment. If an impounded
animal is unlicensed or not displaying a license pursuant to §
3.00 of this chapter, the impoundment authority shall have no obligation to
search for or provide notice to the owner or custodian.
   (D)   Redemption and boarding fees.
      (1)   A person redeeming an impounded dog or cat shall pay the required
redemption fee, as stated in §
7.00 of this chapter, for a first, second or third offense and the required
boarding fees, as provided for by this section. In addition, before an
unlawfully unlicensed animal may be redeemed, the person redeeming the animal
must obtain a license as stated in this chapter. In addition, a person
redeeming an animal shall pay any additional fees required under the provisions
of this chapter, including any monies expended for the provision of medical
treatment provided to the animal.
      (2)   The boarding fees for other animals shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each dog, cat, ferret or similar animal, a fee of $6.50 per
day for the animal’s care, food, water and shelter;
         (b)   For each domestic fowl, chicken, goose, duck or waterfowl, a fee
of $10 per day for the animal’s care, food, water and shelter;
         (c)   For each horse, mule, jack, cow, bull, steer, ox, swine, sheep,
goat or similar animals, a fee of $30 per day for the animal’s care, food,
water and shelter; and
         (d)   For any animal not specified herein, a fee of $25, plus actual
expenses incurred for the animal’s care, food, water and shelter.
   (E)   Euthanasia. No animal need be kept for the period of notification or
impoundment if a licensed veterinarian or an animal control officer certifies
that the animal is so diseased or injured that it is unduly suffering or cannot
survive. In such cases, the animal may be subjected to humane euthanasia.
   (F)   Unclaimed animals. Animals not reclaimed or redeemed within the time
limitations provided by this chapter shall become the property of the city or
animal shelter and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or subjected
to humane euthanasia. No unclaimed dog or cat shall be released for adoption to
a suitable home without being sterilized, or without a written agreement from
the adopter, secured by a cash deposit, guaranteeing that such animal will be
sterilized.
   (G)   Refusal. The refusal to redeem or reclaim any impounded animal shall
not relieve the owner of the duty to pay the impoundment fees, boarding fees,
veterinarian expenses or any other costs incurred in the care of the animal. An
owner or custodian who refuses to pay such expenses shall be in violation of
this chapter and subject to citation for the same.
   (H)   Liability. Neither the city nor the animal shelter, nor their agents
and officers, enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any
accident or subsequent disease that may occur in connection with the
impoundment of any animal pursuant to this chapter.
§ 17.00 ENFORCING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Enforcement. Humane society employees, animal control officers and
city police officers are authorized to issue municipal infraction citations or
notices of violations for violations of the provisions of this chapter. If
provided for by a section of this chapter, a city police officer may enforce a
violation of a section as a simple misdemeanor.
   (B)   Interference with enforcement. It is unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder, willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any police
officer, animal control officer or person authorized to enforce this chapter by
the City Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   Inspection procedures. Whenever it becomes necessary to make an
inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or to perform any duty imposed
by this chapter or other applicable law, or whenever the animal control officer
or other authorized person has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in
any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law, the officer is authorized to enter such
property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty
imposed upon the officer by this chapter or other applicable law. If the
property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the
occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons entry is sought. If the
property is unoccupied, the officer shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other person in control of the property and request entry
explaining the reason therefore. If entry is refused, or the owner or person in
control of the property cannot be located after due diligence, the officer
shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and
inspect the property.
   (D)   Immediate inspection. Notwithstanding §
21.00(B) of this chapter, if the animal control officer or police officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or the maintenance of any animal
is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to
safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall have the
right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any
reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such investigation,
whether the property is occupied or unoccupied. If occupied, the officer shall
first present proper identification and demand entry explaining the reasons
therefor and the purpose of the inspection.
§ 18.00 NOTICE OF VIOLATION, CONFISCATION, REVOCATION.
   (A)   An animal control officer, police officer or the legal department may
send a notice of violation to an animal’s owner or keeper. A notice of
violation initiates administrative sanction procedures for violations of this
chapter, revocation of a person’s privilege to license or keep animals,
extension of the period of revocation, confiscation of an animal or a
declaration that a dog is declared dangerous or vicious. A notice of violation
under this section shall be sent upon the request of a victim of a vicious dog
attack, as defined in §
1.00(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   The notice of violation shall briefly state the type of notice it is,
the facts prompting the notice, the administrative sanction imposed, the notice
recipient’s appeal rights and the date by which the recipient must request a
hearing, not less than five days after the date of the notice, or waive his or
her right to a hearing.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall be either hand-delivered by the animal
control officer or police officer or be sent by certified mail.
   (D)   The notice recipient may appeal a notice of violation by requesting a
hearing in writing before the Animal Hearing Commission and paying an
administrative fee of $20. If the recipient of the notice does not appeal, the
notice of violation sanctions imposed are final. If an appeal is properly
requested, then an informal appeal hearing shall be held before the Animal
Hearing Commission as soon as practicable. At the informal hearing, both the
city and the notice recipient or the recipient’s legal counsel may present
evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Animal Hearing Commission may also
ask questions of witnesses. The Animal Hearing Commission shall render a
written decision within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing.
§ 19.00 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Any animal which is not confined or kept under restraint as required
by this chapter, and any wild, exotic, dangerous or vicious animal kept or
maintained within the city in violation of this chapter, any animal, which
barks so frequently, regularly or habitually that it causes serious annoyance
to the surrounding neighborhood, is hereby declared a public nuisance.
   (B)   Whenever an animal control officer or police officer determines that a
nuisance exists, the officer may cause a written notice ordering the abatement
of the nuisance to be served upon the owner or custodian. The notice to abate
shall contain a description of what constitutes the nuisance, the location of
the nuisance, a statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance, a
definite time within which the nuisance shall be abated which time shall be
reasonable under the circumstances and a statement that the city will abate the
nuisance if the nuisance is not abated in the manner and within the time stated
and no request for a hearing is made within the time stated. Notice to abate
shall be served personally upon the owner or custodian by serving the owner or
custodian or any person residing at the residence who is at least 18 years old,
or by serving the owner or custodian by certified mail return receipt
requested. If service is by certified mail, service shall be deemed given when
mailed.
   (C)   (1)   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may request a hearing on
the order to abate by delivering a written request for a hearing to the animal
control officer who ordered the abatement. Such a request must be delivered
prior to the time specified in the notice to abate or it will be conclusively
presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. Any hearing
so requested shall be held within 30 days of the date the written appeal is
delivered to the animal control officer and shall be held by the Animal Hearing
Commission.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Animal Hearing Commission
shall render a decision as to:
         (a)   Whether a nuisance exists;
         (b)   If so, what steps the person must take to abate the same; and
         (c)   The time frame for the abatement.
   (D)   If a person ordered to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate the
nuisance as directed, the city may abate the nuisance. If an animal is
impounded, the owner or custodian of the animal shall be notified of the
impoundment, as provided in §
16.00 of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
impoundment authority shall keep an impounded animal until such time as the
animal control officer who ordered the abatement notifies the impoundment
authority that the owner or custodian has complied with the order to abate or
has abated the nuisance in some other acceptable manner, in which case, the
animal may be released to the owner or custodian upon payment of all the costs,
fees and other expenses incurred in the care of the animal have been paid. If
the impoundment authority is not notified of the owner’s or custodian’s
compliance within three days after the impoundment, in the case of a previously
abated nuisance animal, or from the time specified in a formal order of
abatement, the impounded animal may be disposed of in the discretion of the
humane society.
§ 20.00 ANIMAL HEARING COMMISSION.
   (A)   There shall be established an Animal Hearing Commission to conduct
hearings formerly conducted by the Deputy City Clerk. The Commission shall
consist of five members, two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and three
of whom shall be appointed by the Public Safety Committee of the City Council.
Each member shall be a city resident or owner of a business interest in the
city, be at least 21 years of age and shall serve without compensation.
      (1)   The Commission shall further consist of:
         (a)   A dog owner;
         (b)   A non-dog owner;
         (c)   A board certified veterinarian who works with dogs, a
veterinarian technician or a veterinarian’s assistant or a veterinarian
technician’s assistant;
         (d)   A member of a recognized breeder’s association demonstrating a
tangible means of qualification in one or more of the areas listed below; and
         (e)   An obedience trainer or animal behavior specialist who
demonstrates a tangible means of qualification in at least one of the areas
listed below.
      (2)   Areas of qualification are:
         (a)   Certification in a related field;
         (b)   Formal program of education in a related field; and
         (c)   Work experience of at least three years in a related field.
   (B)   The period of appointment will be four years. However, one member will
initially serve one year with a second member serving two years and a third
member serving three years. This is to avoid having all members being appointed
simultaneously and to keep the appointments staggered. All Commission members
shall be familiar with the city’s animal ordinance and swear to uphold the same
by signature. At least three members shall be present at each hearing conducted
by the Commission. Any member may be recused if the member perceives a conflict
of interest or personal connection involved in any hearing. The Commission
shall provide a written report of its activities and hearings quarterly to the
Mayor and City Council.
§ 21.00 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
municipal infraction and may be cited and punished accordingly.
   (B)   If provided for, a section of this chapter may be charged as a simple
misdemeanor offense and may be cited and punished accordingly, in lieu of the
issuance of a municipal infraction citation, at the officer’s discretion.
   (C)   In addition to a municipal infraction citation or simple misdemeanor
citation for violations under this chapter, a notice of violation for the same
incident may be issued to invoke the procedures pursuant to §
18.00 of this chapter.
   (D)   The following scheduled fines are established for municipal
infractions:
      (1)   Section
2.00 (“Licenses”): $20;
      (2)   Section
3.00 (“Display of tags”); §
4.00 (“Rabies vaccination”); §
7.00 (“At large”); and §
9.00 (“Animal waste”): first offense: $30; second offense: $40; third offense:
$50; fourth or subsequent offense: up to $200; and
      (3)   Section
12.00(A) or (B) (“Vicious dog”): first offense: $250; second offense: $500;
third or subsequent offense: $750.
   (E)   If no scheduled fine is provided for a violation, then the fine
imposed shall not exceed $500 for a first offense and $750 for a second or
subsequent offense.
CHAPTER 11: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Audible alarm requirements
   
4.00   Police alarms
   
5.00   False alarms
   
6.00   Responsibility for alarm response
   
7.00   Violators
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish alarm system guidelines and to
establish a service fee for residences and businesses that have private burglar
and holdup alarm systems and fire alarm systems that have excessive numbers of
false alarms as defined in this chapter.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 2.01.   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure
or facility; for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a
building, structure or facility; or for the detection and signaling the
presence of a fire; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when activated and to which police are expected to respond. In this chapter,
the term ALARM SYSTEM shall include the terms AUDIBLE ALARM, AUTOMATIC DIALING
DEVICE, BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM, HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM and FIRE ALARM SYSTEM as
those terms are hereinafter defined.
§ 2.02.   ANSWERING SERVICE. A telephone answering business providing among its
services receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees, emergency
signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately relaying the message by
live voice over a signal channel circuit to the communication center of the
Police Department.
§ 2.03.   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is
activated. This AUDIBLE ALARM may or may not be combined with method of
transmitting a signal to a remote point. This provision is not applicable to
audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
§ 2.04.   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. An alarm system which automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency
situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
§ 2.05.   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. A method of detecting and signaling presence,
entry or attempted entry of an intruder into protected premises.
§ 2.06.   CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM. A system, or group of systems, usually
operated from its customers by a person, in which the operation of protected
circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and supervised
from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all
times, that have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal
or message including the relaying of messages by a signal channel circuit to
the communication center of the Police Department.
§ 2.07.   CITY. The City of Eldridge, or its authorized employees or agents.
§ 2.08.   FALSE ALARM. The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm
system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the
negligence of the owner or leasee of an alarm system, answering service or
central station system or of his or her employees or agents which necessitates
response by the Eldridge Police Department where an attempted or actual
burglary or holdup or fire does not exist. Such terminology does not include,
for example, alarms caused by tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent
conditions.
§ 2.09.   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. The method of detecting and signaling the presence
of fire, the products of combustion or heat in a protected premises.
§ 2.10.   HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
§ 2.11.   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Police Department of the City of
Eldridge, or his or her authorized representative.
§ 2.12.   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the City of Eldridge.
§ 2.13.   PROTECTED PREMISES. The part of a building, structure or facility to
which protection is afforded by an alarm system.
§ 3.00 AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS.
   All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons
outside the protected building, structure or facility shall conform to the
following requirements.
§ 3.01.   Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the Police
Chief with the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to
render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or
night that the alarm system is activated. It is the responsibility of every
person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone
numbers recorded with the Police Department are kept current. Any changes shall
be reported within 15 days after such change.
§ 3.02.   No person shall install an audible alarm system which creates sound
similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning
system.
§ 3.03.   No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not
automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within one-half hour after
it is activated.
§ 4.00 POLICE ALARMS.
   No alarm system equipment designed to transmit a message on the police base
radio frequency will be allowed. This provision of this chapter does not apply
to police owned and operated equipment.
§ 5.00 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   An alarm system, answering service or central station system that
actuates false alarms constitutes a public nuisance. The maximum permissible
number of false alarms is four in any calendar year. The members of the City
Police Department will always respond as promptly and effectively as possible
to any and all alarm activations. However, a service charge of $50 will be
assessed for each false alarm that the Police Department responds to at any one
location in excess of four per calendar year.
   (B)   A service charge of $50 will be assessed where an alarm is used to
elicit a police response when an actual or suspected robbery situation does not
exist, or a fire situation, nor is there the existence of any other emergency
situation requiring the prompt and immediate response of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police may waive the service charge for good cause.
§ 6.00 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALARM RESPONSE.
   Every person, or his or her agent, who has on premises under his or her
control or ownership an alarm, shall, upon notification that the alarm system
is giving a signal, proceed immediately to the premises and render all
necessary service and assistance.
§ 7.00 VIOLATORS.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.
CHAPTER 12: MULTI-HAZARD EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
Section
   
1.00   Disaster services organization
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Authority
   
4.00   Liability
   
5.00   Penalty
   
6.00   Basic plan
   
6.01   Authorities
   
6.02   References
   
6.03   Salutation
   
6.04   Assumptions
   
6.05   Mission
   
6.06   Organization
   
6.07   Concept of operations
   
6.08   Operations policies
   
6.09   Operations and assignments
   
6.10   Lines of succession
   
6.11   Support by military
   
6.12   Federal and state agencies
   
6.13   Mutual aid agreements
   
6.14   State Disaster Contingency Fund
   
6.15   Temporary housing
   
6.16   Crisis counseling
   
6.17   Disaster assistance center
   
6.18   Pub. Law No. 93-288 Assistance (Presidential Disaster)
   
6.19   Testing and exercising
   
6.20   Warning
   
6.21   Direction and control
   
6.22   Authority
   
6.23   Emergency public information
   
6.24   Resource management
   
6.25   Law enforcement services
   
6.26   Fire protection
   
6.27   Search and rescue
   
6.28   Emergency medical services
   
6.29   Ambulance service
   
6.30   Emergency public health and mortuary services
   
6.31   Public health operations
   
6.32   Emergency morgue facilities
   
6.33   Utilities restoration
   
6.34   Debris clearance
   
6.35   Evacuation and mass transportation
   
6.36   Evacuation or transportation of people
   
6.37   Transportation of material
   
6.38   Operations assignments
   
6.39   Damage assessment
   
6.40   Outlining the affected area
   
6.41   Emergency welfare services
   
6.42   Emergency telephone list
   
7.00   Chart A - Eldridge Organizational Chart
§ 1.00 DISASTER SERVICES ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created a disaster services organization for carrying out
the responsibility of the municipality in times of disaster and a city multi-
hazard emergency operations plan as outlined in the following sections. The
Mayor shall be the executive director of the disaster services organization and
shall be responsible for the direction of all operations for the protection of
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Said organization
shall function in accordance with the city disaster plan which shall be
coordinated with the plan adopted by the county and the state, in accordance
with state law.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 2.01.   CITY DISASTER PLAN. A plan developed to describe city emergency
operations, and emphasize the responsibilities of the city government forces,
or other emergency response organizations and individuals.
§ 2.02.   DISASTER. Human-made catastrophes and natural occurrences, such as
fire, flood, earthquake, tornado and windstorm which threaten the public peace,
health and safety of the people or which damage and destroy public or private
property. The term includes enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action from
within or without the state, including, but not limited to, domestic or foreign
terrorism.
§ 2.03.   DISASTER SERVICES. Preparations for, operations during and recovery
from natural or human-made disaster. These actions are broad in scope and
include, but are not limited to, disaster plans, mitigation, warning, emergency
operations, training, exercising, research, rehabilitation and recovery.
§ 3.00 AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor may delegate such portions of the details of the operation as will
best serve the carrying out of the city disaster plan. The Mayor shall
designate the order of his or her succession, subject to approval by the
Council, to serve in his or her place in the event he or she is unable to act
due to absence or disability.
§ 4.00 LIABILITY.
   Insofar as permitted by state law, the municipality, when acting in
consonance with the city disaster plan, shall not be liable for failure to
provide protection or to prevent damages to persons or property, the purpose of
such plan being to improve conditions arising from the disaster by organized
effort. The municipality shall carry such insurance on voluntary disaster
workers as deemed advisable by the City Council upon recommendation of the City
Attorney.
§ 5.00 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate the orders of the Mayor, or of duly constituted
officers, when carrying out a disaster plan during a disaster, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or a fine not to
exceed $500.
§ 6.00 BASIC PLAN.
§ 6.01 AUTHORITIES.
   The Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2251
through 2297). Emergency Management, Iowa Code Chapter 29C, 1995, which
provides the authority for disaster services and emergency planning matters
within the state, including county and local disaster services.
§ 6.02 REFERENCES.
   Pub. Law No. 81-920 and 93-288; Iowa Code, 1995; Federal Civil Defense
Guide; Iowa Emergency Plan and Civil Preparedness Guides.
§ 6.03 SALUTATION.
   (A)   The city has capabilities which, if effectively used in the event of
any emergency, would maximize the preservation of life and property. These
capabilities include the fallout, tornado and windstorm protection offered by
larger structures and home basements, as well as the human-power, equipment and
skills of the city forces; the medical, health and allied professions; and
other non-government professions and groups. Finally, they include knowledge of
survival actions possessed by the population.
   (B)   The objective of the city’s emergency operations plan is to ensure
effective use of these capabilities should a disaster affect any area of the
city. Increased readiness actions taken by city government in anticipation of
nuclear attack, natural disaster or civil disturbance situations could further
increase these capabilities.
§ 6.04 ASSUMPTIONS.
   Tornadoes, floods, blizzards and other forms of natural disaster can affect
the city. The calculated initiation of nuclear war by any current power is
considered unlikely. Nevertheless, general war could occur through accident,
miscalculation and irrational act, or the unplanned escalation of a limited
war, as well as by a deliberate act. (See county-wide nuclear attack
contingency plan.) Major accidents such as train wrecks, plane crashes,
explosions or accidental releases of hazardous substances are possible
occurrences within the city. Civil disturbances and other public disorders are
considered unlikely, but could occur in the city. Outside assistance from
adjacent and higher levels of government, the military and non-government
organizations may be available under localized emergency conditions. However,
during de-spread disasters affecting large areas of the state or nation,
outside aid could be severely limited or unavailable for long periods of time.
In either case, the immediate, lifesaving aid must come from the jurisdiction
most affected.
§ 6.05 MISSION.
   The emergency mission of local government is to protect life and property,
ensure the continuity of government, sustain survivors, repair essential
facilities and utilities, provide support to all areas and political
subdivisions in the county and support and assist areas outside the city when
possible.
§ 6.06 ORGANIZATION.
   Existing government is the basis for emergency operations. The organization
of city government is represented in Chart A incorporated in § 7.00.
§ 6.07 CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS.
   In time of major disaster, the Mayor may take command of the police and
govern the city by proclamation (Iowa Code § 372.14(2)). In that case, he or
she shall be responsible for providing overall direction and control, and shall
receive assistance in this effort from all departments and personnel. The
County Disaster Services Coordinator shall serve in a staff capacity to the
Mayor. He or she shall also serve in a liaison role with respect to the
procurement of county, state and federal level resources.
§ 6.08 OPERATIONS POLICIES.
   It is recognized that protection of life and property during an emergency is
the primary responsibility of government at all levels. Existing agencies of
government will perform emergency activities relating to those they perform
under non-emergency conditions. Within city limits, city officials will be
responsible for the direction and control of emergency operations, and will
utilize the regular, auxiliary or volunteer resources of city government. They
will also be responsible for coordinating with others to provide for those
emergency operations not within the capabilities of city government forces.
Within county boundaries, but exclusive of incorporated cities, county
officials will be responsible for directions and control of emergency
operations, and will utilize the regular, auxiliary or volunteer resources of
county government forces. In an emergency affecting more than one political
jurisdiction, officials of all jurisdictions involved will coordinate their
services to the maximum extent possible. The disaster services organization
will provide coordination between levels of government and will provide the
unique disaster services skills and activities not available in existing
organizations. The disaster services organization will also provide resource
coordination between government agencies and the private sector. Each agency,
department or service of government shall provide for the maintenance of
records during an emergency. These records should include work-hours, equipment
hours, supplies and material consumed, injuries to personnel and damage to
public facilities and equipment.
§ 6.09 OPERATIONS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   Chart B lists the functions which must be performed or coordinated
during an emergency situation. Responsibilities have been assigned by a code
letter “P”, “S” or “C”. “P” designates primary operational responsibility,
which means the official or agency is in charge of and responsible to make
provision for that function. “S” designates support responsibility, which means
the agency so assigned will, if possible, support and assist the official or
agency designated primarily responsible. “C” designates coordination
responsibility and is assigned when several agencies have support capability
but no one official or agency has obvious primary responsibility. This will be
especially true when non-government agencies are involved. As a general rule,
county officials will be primarily responsible for carrying out emergency
functions outside city limits and city officials will have the corresponding
responsibility within their city limits. Exceptions are organizations such as
fire departments, schools and medical facilities whose geographical boundaries
do not coincide with corporate limits. Persons or agency assigned code letter
“P” are responsible for development of operational procedures for that
function. Also, they are responsible for keeping that functional information
up-to-date or for its revision.
   (B)   If any function does not have a person or agency assigned primary
responsibility, the assignment of the letter “C” means those persons or
agencies shall form a committee for preparation of the information of that
function. Also, the Committee is responsible for keeping the functional
information up-to-date or for its revision.
§ 6.10 LINES OF SUCCESSION.
   The following lines of succession have been established: Mayor, Mayor Pro-
Tem and City Administrator.
§ 6.11 SUPPORT BY MILITARY.
   Support by military units may be made available through the state at the
request of the County Sheriff or the Mayor to the Governor. Requests should be
coordinated through the County Municipal Civil Defense and Disaster Services
Director/Coordinator. In a civil disturbance situation, the Department of
Public Safety can expedite the transmission of the request to the Governor.
Military assistance will complement and not be a substitute for city and/or
local participation in emergency operations. Military forces, if made
available, will remain under military command at all times, but will support
and assist city and/or local forces, and may receive task assignments,
objectives, priorities and other directions necessary to accomplish missions in
the city.
§ 6.12 FEDERAL AND STATE AGENCIES.
   Available support from federal and state agencies is normally offered
automatically. Information and assistance in securing federal and state support
may be obtained through the (State) Office of Disaster Services. Federal
agencies have been assigned emergency preparedness functions by Executive
Orders. (See Civil Preparedness Guide CPG 101, which is available in the
County/Municipal Disaster Services Coordinator’s office.) State agencies and
local government emergency responsibilities and support functions are described
in the state’s emergency plan. This plan is available in the county/municipal
disaster service coordinator’s office and the sheriff’s office. A state
“disaster analysis team” may be sent to the affected area for the purpose of
determining support required from state and federal agencies. The State
Department of Public Safety has developed a mobile communications van which can
be moved to the scene of an emergency to provide a communication link with the
state government. The County Hazardous Materials Management Response Team may
be called as required, and used if available.
§ 6.13 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   Verbal agreements exist between local fire departments and between law
enforcement agencies to provide all possible assistance when called upon by
other agencies in the county or by adjoining counties. A written mutual aid
agreement should be on file with the Secretary of State between the county and
all municipalities of the county.
§ 6.14 STATE DISASTER CONTINGENCY FUND.
   Every effort shall be made to recover from any disaster with city resources.
All departments of city government shall maintain detailed accounts of disaster
expenses. If it is necessary, an application for a disaster loan shall be filed
with the State Office of Disaster Services. Action shall be initiated to
implement annual emergency levy, as authorized by Iowa Code §§ 24.6 and
384.110, in order to expedite repayment of loan, if approved.
§ 6.15 TEMPORARY HOUSING.
   Emergency Welfare Coordinator compiles data on temporary housing need which
cannot be met locally and forward to the State Office of Disaster Services
through the County Municipal Civil Defense and Disaster Services Director/
Coordinator.
§ 6.16 CRISIS COUNSELING.
   Emergency Health Coordinator develops system to conduct an outreach program
to screen for affected individuals in coordination with local mental health
centers and clinics; provides crisis counseling services in the disaster area
and within the Federal Disaster Assistance Center (DAC), if it is established;
and provides the State Mental Health Authority (IMHA) with information
describing the counseling needs of the citizenry and the requirement for
additional assistance.
§ 6.17 DISASTER ASSISTANCE CENTER.
   The County/Municipal Civil Defense and Disaster Services Director/
Coordinator shall coordinate office of disaster services requests for space
needed to house a disaster assistance center and provide local logistical
support to the DAC to meet local needs and provide coordination of local
assistance activities.
§ 6.18 PUB. LAW NO. 93-288 ASSISTANCE (PRESIDENTIAL DISASTER).
   City Engineer to evaluate and determine city needs and eligibility
concerning public damage eligible under § 402, “Repair and Restoration of
Damaged Facilities”. Also, coordinate activities and public information for
other eligible public jurisdictions located inside of city limits. Mayor, in
coordination with the City and County Assessor, shall determine eligibility
under § 414, “Community Disaster Loans”. Mayor, in coordination with City and
County Assessor, shall determine eligibility under Title VIII, “Economic
Recovery for Disaster Areas”.
§ 6.19 TESTING AND EXERCISING.
   This plan and its supporting documents (annexes and SOPs) are to be
exercised or tested, evaluated and, if necessary, revised and updated at least
annually. This is necessary to keep the plan from becoming outdated beyond
usability, to continually refine the plan and to keep those responsible for
implementing the plan familiar with its contents.
§ 6.20 WARNING.
   It shall be the responsibility of the following individuals to provide
warning on the imminent approach of any situation that would create danger to
the people of the city. The warning signal will be a steady tone of the civil
defense siren and the city’s fire siren. The warning may also include mobile
sirens. Officials responsible for the warning are: Eldridge Police Department
(“E.P.D.”), Eldridge Volunteer Fire Department Inc. (“E.V.F.D.”) and the County
Sheriff Department and County Civil Defense Director.
§ 6.21 DIRECTION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   Emergency Operations Center Primary: Fire Station; Secondary: City
Shop - Office Area. If the primary EOC is damage beyond immediate use,
emergency personnel should gather at the secondary EOC. If EOC and
communications equipment are intact, standard radio procedure should be used to
contact the County Sheriff’s Department and the County/Municipal Civil Defense
and Disaster Services Director. If the secondary EOC must be used, steps should
be taken to locate and utilize other communication resources.
   (B)   The following persons or groups will move immediately to the EOC:
      (1)   Mayor, City Administrator;
      (2)   Representative of medical profession;
      (3)   Fire department radio operator; and
      (4)   Representatives of the main utilities.
§ 6.22 AUTHORITY.
   Authority and responsibility have been outlined on Chart B entitled,
“Emergency Responsibilities”, following a disaster, it must be assumed gaps
will be found among personnel. Under these conditions, primary (“P”) and
support (“S”) personnel will be used interchangeably. All mention of the county
references the county in which the city is located.
§ 6.23 EMERGENCY PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   News releases and other public information should be cleared through the
Mayor or, in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro-Tem, or the City Administrator.
W.O.C. is the Emergency Broadcast Station. That station should be contacted for
news releases and other public information.
§ 6.24 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.
   Nearby governmental units, owners of heavy equipment, the Red Cross and the
National Guard are the most likely sources of assistance. Outside assistance
must be properly controlled before any benefits can be gained. A civil defense
representative will screen incoming vehicles to keep unnecessary personnel and
equipment out of the disaster area and to get necessary personnel and equipment
to the proper location and authorities. City Police Department will coordinate
CD volunteers. Resource needs will be direct from the E.O.C. The E.O.C. radio
operator will maintain contact with city departments to find out what
assistance is necessary. He or she will then direct needed assistance to
appropriate locations. Two Civil Defense, Highway Patrol or Sheriff’s office
personnel will be stationed at the E.O.C., and will be under the E.O.C.
director. Two Civil Defense personnel will be stationed at each of the
necessary distribution centers (city shop or fire station). All assistance will
be held at the E.O.C. until requested, except emergency vehicles. All food,
clothing and personal supplies will be sent to the fire station or city shop.
All heavy equipment with volunteer operators will be sent to the city shop.
Inventory reports will be sent to the E.O.C. at designated intervals.
§ 6.25 LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES.
   (A)   In the event of a major disaster, the following shall apply: if the
disaster is of a nature too large for the city’s resources to effectively
handle, the Mayor may call on the following agencies for support:
      (1)   The County Sheriff’s Office;
      (2)   State Highway Patrol;
      (3)   The County Civil Defense;
      (4)   Area Fire Departments; and
      (5)   State National Guard.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of E.P.D. or Chief of E.V.F.D. to
determine who to call for assistance. When necessary, with advisement from the
Mayor, they may call on the County Civil Defense for assistance. It is the duty
of the Fire Department to determine which streets are to be sealed off, that an
area may be isolated with barricades furnished by the Street Department.
Barricades will be manned by volunteers when necessary, under the direction of
the Chief of Police, to keep out sightseers.
§ 6.26 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   In the event of any fire, the Eldridge Volunteer Fire Department, Inc.
shall have the responsibility for providing firefighting equipment and
personnel under the direction of the Fire Chief, his or her assistant chief,
captains or other designated firefighters.
   (B)   If the situation warrants, the officer in charge may ask for
assistance from nearby fire departments. Upon the request from the Fire Chief
or the Mayor, the Fire Department may volunteer personnel to aid any other
agencies. The following is a list of fire departments that may be called for
assistance, but not necessarily in this order:
      (1)   Long Grove;
      (2)   Donahue;
      (3)   Davenport;
      (4)   Princeton, LeClaire/Pleasant Valley;
      (5)   McCausland; and
      (6)   Riverdale.
§ 6.27 SEARCH AND RESCUE.
   (A)   Responsibility of rescue shall be placed with the Eldridge Volunteer
Fire Department, Inc. with assistance from the other fire and police
departments of the county, the County Sheriff’s Department and the County Civil
Defense Volunteers. All rescue units shall report the names, if possible, of
any assumed dead or injured persons to the E.O.C., who shall in turn notify the
county coroner. These names shall not be given on the radio.
   (B)   The E.O.C. shall have designated one person to handle incoming calls
and inquiries for injured persons.
§ 6.28 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   In the event of a major disaster, the primary medical facility or a
first aid station can be established in one or more of the following places:
      (1)   Genesis Medical Group of Eldridge;
      (2)   North Scott School Administration Office;
      (3)   School gym;
      (4)   Medic EMS; and
      (5)   Eldridge Community Center.
   (B)   The injured shall be treated at first aid stations by doctors or
nurses with the help of trained first aid personnel and Red Cross volunteers.
The triage officer or doctor in charge shall be in charge of sending the most
severely injured to the hospital most capable of caring for that person. The
injured shall be taken to hospitals in Davenport, Bettdndorf or DeWitt. The
person in charge of the first aid station will appoint one individual, at the
first aid station, to keep a record of all persons taken to the hospital and to
which hospital they were taken. This person is then to forward this information
back to the E.O.C.
§ 6.29 AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   It shall be the duty of the ambulance services in the county to provide
transportation from the first aid stations to the hospitals. A triage officer
shall be on the scene to direct the ambulances.
§ 6.30 EMERGENCY PUBLIC HEALTH AND MORTUARY SERVICES.
   The following missions are appropriate for the emergency public health
function: examination of food and water supplies, inspection of sewage and
solid waste disposal systems, inspection of feeding and housing facilities,
control of disease vectors, epidemic control, public relations and collecting,
identifying and disposing of the dead.
§ 6.31 PUBLIC HEALTH OPERATIONS.
   The County Public Health Officer and his or her staff will maintain regular
surveillance of the public water supply and sanitation system and issue
appropriate instructions or warnings to the public through the E.O.C., maintain
regular surveillance of all mass feeding and canteen operations to ensure
proper food handling practices and disease prevention procedures, maintain
regular surveillance of the health of the population and institute all
necessary preventive programs of inoculation with the assistance of the E.O.C.
and voluntary agencies such as the Red Cross.
§ 6.32 EMERGENCY MORGUE FACILITIES.
   A mortuary coordinator should be chosen from one of the following groups:
local Red Cross chapter, Funeral Home Association, County Medical Society or
public health agency. Duties of the Coordinator should include making
arrangements with local funeral homes concerning the possible use of their
facilities; designation of temporary morgue facilities in the area; procurement
and maintenance of a morgue kit(s), including such items as: plastic body bags,
bags for personal belongings, identity record sheets, tags and the like;
maintenance of a policy and procedure to be used in connection with the release
of information about disaster victims. Said policy should be cleared with local
hospital(s), the Red Cross and the other appropriate health-medical groups in
the community.
§ 6.33 UTILITIES RESTORATION.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the city’s utilities to repair and
maintain the water supply. If necessary, the municipal water works may enter
into contracts with private contractors providing for the purchase and hauling
of safe and sanitary drinking water. Emergency power may not be available at
this time; therefore, the Director of the Municipal Water Works, in the event
of a serious power loss, shall determine if an emergency condition exists. If
he or she so determines, he or she and the Mayor shall be responsible for
enacting a water conservation and rationing program until service can be
restored. It is the duty of the Public Works Director to oversee the sewage
treatment facility in order that it may be kept in as good a working order as
possible under the circumstances.
   (B)   In the event of any major disaster, it shall be the responsibility of
the E.O.C. Director to notify the utility companies affected that there is a
problem with their utility. The city, not having its own gas and telephone
utilities, shall call upon the services of the following:
      (1)   MidAmerican Energy Company (electric power);
      (2)   MidAmerican Energy Company (natural gas);
      (3)   Central Scott Telephone (telephone service);
      (4)   Alliant Energy (electric service); and
      (5)   Northern Border Pipeline (natural gas).
   (C)   These companies will then repair any damage to the parts of their
systems. Upon receiving the call, these utilities shall contact the EOC
Director when they arrive on the scene to determine where the most critical
areas may be. The forward commands shall maintain communication with the EOC as
to the discovery of any new hazards.
§ 6.34 DEBRIS CLEARANCE.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the City Street Department to clean and
maintain passable city streets. They shall also communicate with the police and
fire departments in order that they might effectively seal off an entire area.
They shall notify the State Highway Commission of any state highways that are
blocked.
   (B)   Further assistance can be obtained from the County Engineer and
private contractors.
§ 6.35 EVACUATION AND MASS TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   Evacuation or transportation of people. The E.O.C. will secure the
necessary buses. Evacuation and transportation will be conducted by the Police
Department. Once secured, the buses will be under Police Department control.
Whenever possible, mass transportation (buses) will be used by individuals.
   (B)   Transportation of material. The E.O.C. will secure the necessary
vehicles. Thereafter, the vehicles will be assigned to the agency needing the
transportation.
   (C)   Pets. Pets will not be evacuated to evacuation shelters. Civil defense
personnel will be assigned to locate and secure pets as quickly as possible
after the immediate emergency has passed, all human needs cared for and it is
safe to do so.
§ 6.36 EVACUATION OR TRANSPORTATION OF PEOPLE.
   (A)   Priorities for evacuation will be established by Police and Fire
Departments based upon the degree and immediacy of the threat, ability of those
threatened to evacuate themselves and the number of persons housed in the
facility, except that school buses will be used to evacuate schools first.
First source of buses will be the public schools. Private vehicles will be
utilized as appropriate, determined by the E.P.D. The supplier(s) of the buses
will supply drivers.
   (B)   Prior to evacuation, coordination will be made by the Civil Defense
Director or the receiving community for sheltering of evacuees.
§ 6.37 TRANSPORTATION OF MATERIAL.
   Those industries and contractors willing to supply equipment and drivers at
the lowest cost will be contacted first. The Public Works Director will
determine the availability and cost of equipment from various sources.
§ 6.38 OPERATIONS ASSIGNMENTS.
   The County Civil Defense Director and/or the City Administrator is
responsible for maintaining the names and phone numbers of persons to contact
to secure buses needed for evacuation of people, regardless of the day of the
week or the time of day. The Public Works Director is responsible for
maintaining information on contacts for securing vehicles for transporting
large quantities of material and on the stipulations associated with the use of
those vehicles.
§ 6.39 DAMAGE ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor and/or the City Administrator shall be responsible for
contacting the County Civil Defense Director to secure the service of the
county damage assessment team.
   (B)   Early assessment by the team will be gathered as a byproduct of radio
communication from police, fire and other units which are first in the field.
When the general areas have been outlined from the information gathered from
radio communication, the data shall be further refined and analyzed by field
examination. Such field work to be done by the damage assessment team and
volunteers or support personnel who have been released from other primary
duties.
§ 6.40 OUTLINING THE AFFECTED AREA.
   (A)   The basic outline of the affected area is of prime importance in
determining the magnitude of the disaster and in dispersing other operation
units to the field. The outlining of the damaged area shall be given high
priority and other operations are expected to cooperate fully in supplying the
basic information.
   (B)   The reduction of damage assessment to a dollar value is to be
considered as a secondary function and is to be carried out in a manner which
will not interfere with emergency activities.
§ 6.41 EMERGENCY WELFARE SERVICES.
   It shall be the duty of the County Civil Defense Director to contact the
welfare service organization and to set up a meeting place so that they may be
directed into town via the safest and most accessible route. The city may
provide to the agencies the use of several buildings about the city in which
emergency services can be made; they are as follows: schools, River Valley Coop
Elevator Basement, Firstar Bank Basement and Eldridge Community Center. The
city, not having facilities for feeding and caring for disaster victims, must
rely upon the Red Cross, Salvation Army and the County Social Services. See the
county-wide multi-hazard plan for additional information.
§ 6.42 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE LIST.
   A complete listing of all persons and agencies, complete with current
telephone numbers, shall be kept on file in the city office. All key personnel
shall have a copy of the emergency plan and the telephone list.
 
ELDRIDGE VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY, INC.
MOBILE ALERT – TRUCK ASSIGNMENTS
 
Location #1
 
South of West LeClaire Road to Valley Drive and west of South 5th Street (Prairie
Vista, Brookview, etc. and Gary Ewolt’s Addition). Then go to Spotters Position
at first crossroad west of Eldridge (corner of Buttermilk Road and West LeClaire
Road).
 
Location #2
 
Take Donahue Street west to North 9th and the area north of Donahue Street. Then
go to Spotters Position at the crossroad north of Eldridge on Eldridge-Long Grove
blacktop.
 
Location #3
 
Inform managers at Eldridge Community Center. Then go to Spotters Position at
Eldridge Corners (Old 61 and East LeClaire Road).
 
Location #4
 
Go to Spotters Position at South 1st Street and Lincoln Road.
 
Location #5
 
Take West LeClaire Road to North 9th Street area, north to Donahue Street
including Dammann’s Addition, then return to Fire Station.
 
§ 7.00 CHART A - ELDRIDGE ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1755.png]
 
CHAPTER 13: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
1.00   Violations of this code
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Criteria for determining drug paraphernalia
   
4.00   Possession prohibited
   
5.00   Manufacture or delivery prohibited
   
6.00   Advertisement prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Inhaling toxic vapors and chemicals, see
Title B, Chapter 6, § 2.08
   Transport or convey of controlled substance, see
Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.11
§ 1.00 VIOLATIONS OF THIS CODE.
   Commission of any of the acts named in the following sections by any person
will constitute a violation of this city code.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 2.01.   ACT. The Uniform Controlled Substances Act, being 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et
seq., Iowa Code Chapter 204 and regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 2.02.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A controlled substance as defined in the Act.
§ 2.03.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act.
It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled substances into the
human body; and
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls, water pipes, carburation tubes and devices, smoking and
carburation masks, roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand, miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials, chamber pipes,
carburetor pipes, electric pipes, air-driven pipes, chillums, bongs and ice
pipes or chillers.
§ 3.00 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court and the
Police Department should consider the following factors in addition to all
other logically relevant factors:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object, in time and in space, to a direct
violation of the Act or of this chapter;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of the Act or this chapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control
of the object, as to a direct violation of the Act or this chapter should not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as
drug paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 4.00 POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act.
§ 5.00 MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or
manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the Act.
§ 6.00 ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill
or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or
in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
CHAPTER 14: SOCIAL HOST
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Prohibited acts
   
4.00   Exceptions
   
5.00   Enforcement
   
6.00   Penalty
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public interest, welfare,
health and safety within the City of Eldridge by prohibiting the consumption of
alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 21 at premises located in the
city. The Eldridge City Council finds that the occurrence of social gatherings
at premises where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by persons
under the age of 21 is harmful to such persons themselves and a threat to
public welfare, health, and safety. The City Council further finds that persons
under the age of 21 often obtain alcoholic beverages at such gatherings and
that persons who are in control of such premises know or have reason to know of
such service and/or consumption and will be more likely to ensure that
alcoholic beverages are not served or consumed by persons under the age of 21
at these gatherings. Based on these findings, the City Council has deemed it
necessary to enact the following regulations in Eldridge.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer.
   EMERGENCY RESPONDERS. Firefighters, law enforcement officers, emergency
medical service personnel, and other personnel having emergency response
duties.
   ENFORCEMENT SERVICES. The salaries and benefits of emergency responders for
time actually spent responding to or remaining at an event, gathering, or party
and administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs for
medical treatment for any injured emergency responder, and the costs of
repairing any damage to equipment or vehicles.
   EVENT, GATHERING, OR PARTY. Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity where an
underage person has consumed or possessed an alcoholic beverage.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      (1)   As natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian; or
      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or any association of one
or more individuals.
   PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel
or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any
other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or
other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or
without permission or compensation.
   SOCIAL HOST. Any person who aids, conducts, allows, entertains, organizes,
supervises, controls, or permits an event, gathering, or party. This includes
but is not limited to:
      (1)   The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of
the premises where the event, gathering, or party takes place;
      (2)   The person(s) in charge of the premises; or
      (3)   The person(s) who organized the event.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under the age of 21.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 3.00 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any social host to host an event, gathering, or party on
premises when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person has consumed an alcoholic beverage, or possessed an alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take reasonable steps to
prevent the possession or consumption by the underage person. A social host who
hosts such an event, gathering, or party does not have to be present at the
time the prohibited act occurs.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 4.00 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and
his or her parents while present in the parents’ household, to legally
protected religious observances, and to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 5.00 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by officers of the Eldridge
Police Department. The Eldridge Police Department shall have primary but not
exclusive enforcement responsibility for this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
§ 6.00 PENALTIES.
   A $500 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host’s first offense. A
$750 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host’s second offense. A
$1,000 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host’s third or subsequent
offense. In addition, the city may seek reimbursement for enforcement services
provided by emergency responders related to the event, gathering, or party.
Multiple violations of this chapter may be considered by the city for purposes
of approving licenses applied for by the social host, or for any other
requirements that are subject to approval by the city.
(Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-19-2024)
TITLE C: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
1.   SEWERS
      
2.   SEWER RATES
      
3.   SANITATION
      
4.   PLANTING AND CARE OF TREES
      
5.   REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES AND MINIMUM STANDARDS
FOR USE
      
6.   RECOVERING COSTS ON SEWER AND WATER SERVICES
      
7.   [RESERVED]
      
8.   ADOPTION OF SPECIFIC CODES
      
9.   APPLICATION OF SPECIFICATIONS
      
10.   STANDARD CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
      
11.   [RESERVED]
      
12.   [RESERVED]
      
13.   STREET IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
      
14.   STREET LIGHTING
      
15.   CITY BASE OR DATUM PLANE
      
16.   STREET GRADES
      
17.   SIDEWALKS
      
18.   CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
      
19.   [RESERVED]
      
20.   RIGHT OF WAY/UTILITY EASEMENT MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1: SEWERS
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Use of public sewers required
   
3.01   Depositing excrement, garbage and waste
   
3.02   Discharging wastewater and polluted water
   
3.03   Constructing privies
   
3.04   Installation of facilities
   
4.00   Private wastewater disposal
   
4.01   Connection
   
4.02   Written permit
   
4.03   Effectiveness of permit
   
4.04   Compliance
   
4.05   Direct connection
   
4.06   Maintaining private wastewater disposal facilities
   
4.07   Other regulations
   
5.00   Building sewers and connections
   
5.01   Unauthorized activities
   
5.02   Costs to be borne by owners; indemnification
   
5.03   Separate building sewers
   
5.04   Old building sewers
   
5.05   City building and plumbing codes
   
5.06   Elevations
   
5.07   Surface runoff
   
5.08   Connection requirements
   
5.09   Notification of inspection
   
5.10   Excavations
   
6.00   Use of the public sewers
   
6.01   Discharge; violations
   
6.02   Storm water
   
6.03   Provision for inspection
   
6.04   Other remedies
   
6.05   Prohibited discharges
   
6.06   Limited discharges
   
6.07   City actions regarding discharges
   
6.08   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
6.09   Pretreatment
   
6.10   Excess wastes
   
6.11   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
6.12   Surcharge
   
6.13   Special agreements
   
7.00   Damage to equipment
   
7.01   Entry on premises
   
7.02   Obtaining information
   
7.03   Safety
   
7.04   Entry
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   This chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains,
private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers
and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewage system(s) and
provides penalties for violations thereof in the city.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 2.01.   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
§ 2.02.   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
§ 2.03.   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal; also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
§ 2.04.   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm
or surface water.
§ 2.05.   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.
§ 2.06.   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
§ 2.07.   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business, including businesses engaged in the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food or food products as distinct from domestic or sanitary
wastes.
§ 2.08.   MAY. Is permissive. (See SHALL, §
2.19 of this chapter.)
§ 2.09.   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body surface or
groundwater.
§ 2.10.   OIL, FAT AND GREASE. That which is in a free, floating or emulsified
state as determined by laboratory procedure and expressed in milligrams per
liter. A wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE FAT if it is properly
pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
§ 2.11.   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, group, state agencies or political subdivisions thereof.
§ 2.12.   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per
liter of solution. Neutral water shall be considered as having a pH value of
seven and hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
§ 2.13.   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater that one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
§ 2.14.   PUBLIC DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the City of Eldridge,
Iowa, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative or an official
so authorized and designated by the City Council.
§ 2.15.   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency of
public utility. This shall include sewer mains and manholes.
§ 2.16.   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
§ 2.17.   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
WASTEWATER. (See §
2.24 of this chapter.)
§ 2.18.   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
§ 2.19.   SHALL. Is mandatory. (See MAY, §
2.08 of this chapter.)
§ 2.20.   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than four or five times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
§ 2.21.   STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any
source.
§ 2.22.   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that
is removable by laboratory filtering, referred to as nonfilterable residue and
expressed in milligrams per liter.
§ 2.23.   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
§ 2.24.   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of
source, it may be a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
§ 2.25.   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
§ 2.26.   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WATER
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
§ 2.27.   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continually or intermittently.
§ 3.00 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
§ 3.01 DEPOSITING EXCREMENT, GARBAGE AND WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
§ 3.02 DISCHARGING WASTEWATER AND POLLUTED WATER.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 3.03 CONSTRUCTING PRIVIES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 3.04 INSTALLATION OF FACILITIES.
   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days
after the date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is
within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property line.
§ 4.00 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
§ 4.01 CONNECTION.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
3.04 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
§ 4.02 WRITTEN PERMIT.
   (A)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit from the city.
   (B)   The application for such permit along with plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the City Public Works Director and City Building Official
for review and approval. The permit application form (furnished by the city)
and inspection fee of $25 shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed.
§ 4.03 EFFECTIVENESS OF PERMIT.
   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Board of Health
and the city has been officially notified of its acceptance.
§ 4.04 COMPLIANCE.
   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater treatment or
disposal system shall comply with all the rules and regulations of the County
Health Board and the State Department of Water, Air and Waste Management. No
permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
one acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet. Facilities which discharge to natural outlets shall comply with
applicable county, state and federal agency water quality requirements.
§ 4.05 DIRECT CONNECTION.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property which is
served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
3.04 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
within 90 days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge
and filled with sand or other suitable material.
§ 4.06 MAINTAINING PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain, at no expense to the city, the
private wastewater disposal facilities in accordance with city, county, state
and federal regulations.
§ 4.07 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by other local, county, state
or federal regulations.
§ 5.00 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
§ 5.01 UNAUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.
   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, extend or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Building Official.
§ 5.02 COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNERS; INDEMNIFICATION.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by
the installation of the building owner. Any lateral connected to the main or
system is the responsibility of the property owner.
§ 5.03 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the front
building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as
one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
§ 5.04 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers shall not be used in connection with new buildings.
§ 5.05 CITY BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODES.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
city building and plumbing codes, applicable rules and regulations of the city
and other regulatory agencies.
§ 5.06 ELEVATIONS.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 5.07 SURFACE RUNOFF.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to
a public sanitary sewer.
§ 5.08 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing. All deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the City Building Official before
installation.
§ 5.09 NOTIFICATION OF INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City Building
Official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and testing shall be observed by the City Building
Official, or his or her representative.
§ 5.10 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
§ 6.00 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
§ 6.01 DISCHARGE; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer system by means of
any pipe, downspout, tile or other connection device.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation, which shall be found in violation of
this section, shall be subject to one or more of the following:
      (1)   Imposition of a surcharge of $25 per month upon the customer’s
sanitary sewer bill;
      (2)   Upon conviction, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days;
and
      (3)   Upon conviction, imposition of a fine not to exceed $100.
   (C)   Each day that a violation of this section is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6.02 STORM WATER.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Public Works Director and City Building Official and other
regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may
be discharged, on approval of the Public Works Director and City Building
Official, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 6.03 PROVISION FOR INSPECTION.
   There is hereby established a city-wide inspection program to determine the
existence and location of all foundation drains connected to the sanitary sewer
system within the city.
   (A)   Failure of any person, firm or corporation to voluntarily permit
inspection by July 1, l983 of any real estate under the control of said person,
firm or corporation shall result in the imposition of a surcharge of $25 per
month to be added to the customer’s sanitary sewer bill until such inspection
is permitted.
   (B)   In the event a surcharge is levied in accordance with division (A)
above, said surcharge shall constitute a lien against the real estate subject
to the surcharge and the same shall accumulate interest at the rate of 10% per
annum until paid.
§ 6.04 OTHER REMEDIES.
   Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the City Council is
empowered to bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate a
nuisance, to wit, the discharge of storm water, surface drainage, ground water
or other unmetered, free waters into any sanitary sewer by means of any pipe,
downspout, tile or other connecting device.
§ 6.05 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person(s) shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, turpentine, paint thinner, fuel oil,
mineral oil or other flammable liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any waste treatment process constitute public nuisance
or degrade the receiving waterways;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 nor higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel or the wastewater works; and
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 6.06 LIMITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall
be limited in discharges to the municipal system to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process
or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or will
not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
The City Public Works Director and the City Building Official will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other
pertinent factors.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Public Works Director and the City Building
Official are as follows:
      (1)   In accordance with environmental quality standards set forth in
I.A.C. § 567, the admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having:
         (a)   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams
per liter;
         (b)   Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of total suspended
solids;
         (c)   Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in this section; or
         (d)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
daily sewer flow of the city.
      (2)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 130°F;
      (3)   Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of free,
floating or emulsified biodegradable fat and grease;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see §
2.13 of this chapter). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, lead,
selenium, mercury, arsenic, barium, cadmium, cyanide, nickel and similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Public Works Director or the City Building
Official for such materials;
      (6)    Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the City Building Official;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Public Works Director or
the City Building Official in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
      (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a
“slug”, as defined herein;
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters; and
      (10)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
§ 6.07 CITY ACTIONS REGARDING DISCHARGES.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers which waters contain the substances, possess the
characteristics or exceed the limits enumerated in §
6.06 of this chapter and which, in the judgment of the Public Works Director
and the City Building Official, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
may:
   (A)   Reject the wastes after being notified by the City Building Official
that such wastes are in violation of this chapter;
   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   (C)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
   (D)   Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provision of §
6.13 of this chapter; and
   (E)   Require a treatment agreement between the city and discharger
stipulating limitations in waste materials constituent concentrations,
quantities and flows. If the City Director of Public Works determines that
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is required, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
§ 6.08 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the City Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing constituents and quantities in excess of those amounts
as specified in §
6.07 of this chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and the City Building
Official and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s)
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the City Director of Public Works. Any
removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s)
personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 6.09 PRETREATMENT.
   Where pretreatment, testing, monitoring or flow equalizing facilities are
provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his or
her expense.
§ 6.10 EXCESS WASTES.
   When required by the city, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying wastes in excess of that specified in §
6.07 of this chapter shall install a suitable structure together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City Building Official. The structure
shall be installed by the owner(s) at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 6.11 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, as
determined by the Director of Public Works to establish compliance or non-
compliance with §§
6.06,
6.07,
6.08,
6.09 and
6.10 of this chapter.
   (B)   The cost of sampling, testing and analysis shall be an integral part
of the pretreatment cost or surcharge in
Title C, Chapter 2.
§ 6.12 SURCHARGE.
   If required by the Public Works Director and the City Building Official, the
owner shall pay a surcharge as set forth in
Title C, Chapter 2 or shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to meet the requirements stipulated in this
section or comply with any treatment agreement between the city and discharger.
§ 6.13 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement or other agencies, whereby the wastes are of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment,
commensurate with acceptable pretreatment surcharges.
§ 7.00 DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT.
§ 7.01 ENTRY ON PREMISES.
   The Public Works Director, and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 7.02 OBTAINING INFORMATION.
   The Public Works Director, or other duly authorized employees, are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in advantage to competitors.
§ 7.03 SAFETY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
7.02 of this chapter, the Public Works Director shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to the property by the city
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in §
6.11 of this chapter.
§ 7.04 ENTRY.
   The City Director of Public Works, and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
CHAPTER 2: SEWER RATES
Section
   
1.00   Charges, rates or rentals
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Residential rates
   
3.01   Commercial and industrial rates
   
3.02   Bills
   
3.03   Industrial pretreatment requirements
   
4.00   Exceptions
   
5.00   Service discontinued
   
6.00   Schools
   
7.00   Connection charges
   
8.00   Implementation guidelines
   
9.00   Special treatment requirements
   
10.00   Storm water disposal
Cross-reference:
   Recovering costs on sewer services, see
Title C, Chapter 6
§ 1.00 CHARGES, RATES OR RENTALS.
   There is hereby established as just and equitable charges, rates or rentals
(referred to as rates) for the use of the service rendered by the sanitary
utilities of each and every lot, parcel of real estate or building or premises
be connected with and uses said sanitary facilities by or through any part of
the sewage system of said city or that in any way uses or is served by said
sewage treatment plant or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial
waste, water or other liquid either directly or indirectly into the sewage
system of said city in accordance with the schedule set forth in the following
sections.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 2.01.   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l).
§ 2.02.   NH3 or NH3-N (denoting AMMONIA). The portion of nitrogen in the form
of proteins or intermediate decomposition products which is determined by
standard laboratory procedure for analysis of ammonia nitrogen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
§ 2.03.   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has a BOD concentration
of not more than 200 mg/l average and 250 mg/l maximum; and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than 250 mg/l average and 300 mg/l maximum; and an
ammonia concentration of not more than 20 mg/l average and 40 mg/l maximum.
§ 2.04.   OPERATIONAL MAINTENANCE. Those functions that result in expenditures
during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities
and other items which are necessary for managing and for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement, as defined below.
§ 2.05.   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
§ 2.06.   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any contributor to the city’s treatment works whose
lot, parcel or real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes
only.
§ 2.07.   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
§ 2.08.   SS (denoting SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering, as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1).
§ 2.09.   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the collection, storage,
treatment recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
liquid wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage
collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site
acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process
or land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems
before land application; or any other method or system for preventing, abating,
reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or
industrial waste.
§ 3.00 RESIDENTIAL RATES.
   (A)   Sewer rates for all single residential properties including property
owned by any religious organization and used as a church, synagogue, or other
place of worship, shall be based upon average water consumption as billed in
the months of January, February and March according to the schedule below. A
SINGLE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY is defined as a single-family home, an individual
townhouse or row house, an apartment within a larger building, a mobile home or
any grouping of rental rooms using a common bathroom. All residential users
shall be charged the same rate regardless of the location where wastewater is
treated.
 
Rate              Usage
$0.91/100 gallons 0 to 90,000 gallons
$0.79/100 gallons Over 90,000 gallons
$40.55            Minimum billing
 
   (B)   The bill, as determined by the average consumption described above,
shall become effective with the April 1 billing of each year, and remain in
effect until April 1 of the following year. Prior to April 1 of each year,
average consumption shall be recalculated to determine if the residential
customer’s bill should be adjusted. Properties connected to sewer, but without
metered water consumption, shall be subject to the minimum billing amount.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-19-2018; Ord. 2019-01,
passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-1-2021;
Ord. 2022-05, passed 2-8-2022; Ord. 2023-02, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2024-05,
passed 3-4-2024; Ord. 2025-07, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 3.01 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL RATES.
   (A)   Sewer rates for non-residential users, including schools, shall be
based upon monthly water consumption. All non-residential rates shall be
charged the same rate regardless of the location where wastewater is treated.
   (B)   A non-residential user may be using water for production, or other
purposes, that results in water purchased not entering the City sewer system.
At their option and expense, they can install a separate deduct meter system
approved by both the sewer and water superintendents to monitor this
consumption.
 
Rate              Usage
$0.91/100 gallons 0 to 90,000 gallons
$0.79/100 gallons Over 90,000 gallons
$40.55            Minimum billing
 
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-19-2018; Ord. 2019-01,
passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-1-2021;
Ord. 2022-05, passed 2-8-2022; Ord. 2023-02, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2024-05,
passed 3-4-2024; Ord. 2025-07, passed 3-24-2025; Ord. 2025-08, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 3.02 BILLS.
   Bills are mailed on the first of each month and are due upon receipt. After
the twentieth of each month, a late penalty of 1.5% will be applied to the
bill.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-19-2018; Ord. 2019-01,
passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2020)
§ 3.03 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All discharges of wastewater, gases or solids which are not similar to
domestic sewage shall meet the following pretreatment requirements.
   (A)   This section adopts by reference the “General Pretreatment- Treatment
Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution”, promulgated by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Title 40, Chapter I, Part 403,
as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 46, No. 18, Wednesday, January 28,
1981, and amended on April 7, 1993, as the city pretreatment regulation.
   (B)   (1)   Any industrial, commercial or other utility customer which
discharges any sewage, industrial waste or other waste to the municipal
sanitary sewer system shall comply with all regulations or requirements of the
State Department of Natural Resources and/or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
      (2)   Where regulations have not been set by those agencies, the Director
of Public Works shall establish pretreatment requirements to obtain the
following objectives:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants which will interfere
with the treatment plant operation or contaminate the resulting sludge;
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants which will pass
through the system, inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; and
         (c)   To improve opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
   (C)    Any costs for pretreatment flow measuring or monitoring facilities or
analytical systems or tests to meet the pretreatment regulations shall be the
responsibility of the customer.
   (D)   Any cost to the city, including increased operation or maintenance
expenditures or fines levied by the state or federal agencies, which result
from the discharge from any utility customer, shall be assessed to that
customer. In the event more than one utility customer is responsible, the cost
shall be prorated among those responsible based upon percent of total pounds of
pollutants.
   (E)   No utility customer may expand his or her process or operation if that
expansion results in a discharge or results in a discharge which exceeds any
limitation established for their discharges or results in the discharge of some
other substance which will violate any provision of the pretreatment
regulations unless their plans for expansion are approved by the Director of
Public Works at least six months prior to the planned expansion.
§ 4.00 EXCEPTIONS.
   Upon approval by the City Council, sewer charges shall be waived where the
water metered by a specific meter is used in such a way that it does not
normally enter the sanitary sewer system.
§ 5.00 SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Normal procedure shall be that sewer rentals continue during periods when a
building or apartment are vacant. In the event of an extended vacancy, sewer
rentals may be discontinued; but, in that event, a new connection charge shall
be made when the building or apartment is again occupied. Such a disconnection
shall be made only with the approval of the City Administrator.
§ 6.00 SCHOOLS.
   Sewer rates for school buildings and offices shall be the same as for
commercial/industrial users.
§ 7.00 CONNECTION CHARGES.
   A connection charge shall be paid for each new service connection to the
sewer system according to the schedule below. Connection fee will be collected
at the time a permit is obtained for the plumbing connection.
 
Residential $200 per bedroom
Commercial  $70 per 1,000 square feet
Industrial  $100 per 1,000 square feet
Commercial and industrial charges are determined by the intended use at the
time of new service, not zoning.
 
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-1-2021)
§ 8.00 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES.
   The following guidelines shall apply in the establishment of sewer rates.
§ 8.01.   Sewer rentals are charged on the first of the month following the
provision of service.
§ 8.02.   Each apartment unit or grouping of sleeping rooms around a common
restroom facility shall be a residential sewer rental.
§ 8.03.   Each office or grouping of offices around common restroom facilities
shall be a commercial/industrial customer even under those circumstances where
more than one such grouping may be served by a single water meter.
§ 8.04.   Disputes over sewer rates and charges shall be resolved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2024-13, passed 11-4-2024)
§ 9.00 SPECIAL TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Other ordinances require special or pre-treatment of other than domestic
type wastes. Such special treatment and all expense of monitoring and testing
such sewage shall be borne by the customer.
§ 10.00 STORM WATER DISPOSAL.
   No property owner or occupancy of any property which is connected to the
city’s sanitary sewer system shall knowingly allow storm water to enter the
sanitary sewer system by means of any part of the sewers or drains which are a
part of any structure or lot in said city. Specifically prohibited are
connections leading to the sanitary sewers from any sump pump or footing or
other sub-drains, as defined in the State Plumbing Code (1973), Chapter 13,
“Storm Drains”.
CHAPTER 3: SANITATION
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Responsibility
   
3.00   Prohibited disposition
   
4.00   Burning refuse
   
5.00   Collection of refuse
   
6.00   Storing refuse
   
7.00   City waste collection
   
8.00   Preparation of refuse
   
8.01   Garbage
   
8.02   Rubbish
   
8.03   Recyclable material
   
8.04   Ashes
   
8.05   Yard waste
   
8.06   Lead acid batteries
   
8.07   Waste motor oil
   
8.08   Tires
   
8.09   White goods
   
9.00   Containers
   
9.01   Garbage
   
9.02   Rubbish
   
9.03   Mixed refuse
   
9.04   Ashes
   
9.05   Building debris
   
9.06   Yard waste
   
9.07   Recyclable material
   
10.00   Collection
   
11.00   Non-household waste
   
12.00   Rates
   
13.00   Gratuities
   
14.00   Licensed waste collection
   
14.01   Application for license
   
14.02   Inspection by Street Superintendent
   
14.03   Issuance or denial of license
   
14.04   Insurance
   
14.05   Licenses
   
14.06   License fee
   
14.07   Renewal of license
   
14.08   Revocation of license
   
14.09   Vehicles
   
14.10   Containers
   
14.11   Collection
   
14.12   Pick-up service
   
14.13   Hauling
   
14.14   Disposal
   
14.15   Charges
   
15.00   Private waste collection
   
16.00   Violations
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 1.01.   ASHES. The residue of the combustion of solid fuels.
§ 1.02.   BUILDING DEBRIS. Any refuse or residue resulting from minor non-
commercial repairs to a private dwelling made by the owner or occupant thereof
himself or herself.
§ 1.03.   BUILDING WASTE. Any and all refuse or residue resulting directly from
building construction, reconstruction, repair or demolition; from grading,
shrubbing or other incidental work in connection with any premises; or from
replacement of building equipment or appliances.
§ 1.04.   BULK REFUSE. Articles more than eight feet in length or more than 50
pounds in weight, tree trimmings and hedge trimmings over five inches in
diameter or over four feet in length, tree roots or stumps larger than can be
contained in a bushel basket.
§ 1.05.   CITY WASTE COLLECTORS. Persons or firms employed by the city from
time to time to collect and dispose of household waste, institutional waste,
commercial waste or building debris from within the confines of the city.
§ 1.06.   COMMERCIAL WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse and cool ashes
originating in and around commercial establishments, industrial establishments,
hotels, restaurants, cafeterias, grocery stores, non-public institutions and
multiple housing facilities with more than two dwelling units.
§ 1.07.   DEAD ANIMALS. Animals that have died naturally or have been
accidently killed. Animals or parts of animals from slaughter houses are not
included in this category.
§ 1.08.   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the City of Eldridge.
§ 1.09.   GARBAGE. All putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food in any private
dwelling house, multiple dwelling, hotel restaurant, building or institution.
§ 1.10.   HAZARDOUS REFUSE. Any refuse the handling or disposal of which, in
the opinion of the Street Superintendent, would constitute a danger to city
employees or to city property.
§ 1.11.   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, recyclable material, mixed refuse
and cool ashes originating in and around private dwellings and multiple
dwellings, excluding multiple housing facilities with more than two dwelling
units.
§ 1.12.   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any and all residue resulting directly from
industrial or manufacturing operations. It shall not include waste originating
from commercial operations of an industrial establishment, nor shall it include
waste resulting from the commercial operation of persons, firms or corporations
engaged in the construction of buildings, the repairing of streets or
buildings, demolition or excavation. Residue or waste resulting from tree or
landscaping services shall also be excluded.
§ 1.13.   INSTITUTIONAL WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse and cool ashes
originating in and around tax exempt hospitals, excluding multiple housing
facilities with more than two dwelling units, and public, charitable,
philanthropic or religious institutions conducted for the benefit of the public
or a recognized section of the public. Institutions not covered by the
foregoing definition shall be considered commercial establishments.
§ 1.14.   LICENSED WASTE COLLECTOR. Any person, firm or corporation who has
obtained a license as specified herein from the city to collect or transport,
for a consideration, bulk refuse, household waste, institutional waste,
commercial waste, industrial waste, building waste or building debris,
regardless of the place of origin, over the streets of the city.
§ 1.15.   MIXED REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish placed and stored together.
§ 1.16.   PRIVATE WASTE COLLECTOR. Any person, firm or corporation who collects
bulk debris from premises owned or occupied by him or her within the
corporation limits of the city and transports said wastes over the streets of
the city.
§ 1.17.   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Material having an economic value in the
secondary materials market. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL shall include, but not be
limited to, cardboard, paper, magazines, newspaper, plastic containers, tin,
steel, aluminum, bi-metal cans and glass containers. Other material may become
recyclable as new markets develop. Such material will be determined by the
County Material Recovery Facility (MRF).
§ 1.18.   REFUSE. All solid wastes.
§ 1.19.   RUBBISH. All waste paper, rags, sweepings, small pieces of wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, articles not more than eight feet in length nor
more than 50 pounds in weight, small rocks and similar waste materials that
ordinarily accumulate around a home, business or industry. It shall not include
garbage, ashes, bulk refuse, dead animals, hazardous refuse, industrial waste,
yard waste, recyclable material or building waste.
§ 1.20.   STREET SUPERINTENDENT. The Street Superintendent of the City of
Eldridge.
§ 1.21.   WHITE GOODS. Appliances which are durable in nature and which do not
readily degrade. Examples of WHITE GOODS shall include, but not be limited to,
washers, dryers, dishwashers, microwave ovens and refrigerators.
§ 1.22.   YARD WASTE. Debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste,
brush and trees. YARD WASTE shall not include tree stumps.
§ 1.23.   YARD WASTE BAG. A special degradable bag as specified by the city
with not less than 20 gallon capacity and not more than 30 gallon capacity.
This bag shall be capable of decomposing within 60 days of exposure to aerobic
bacteria or ultraviolet light.
§ 2.00 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city may employ persons or firms as city waste collectors and may
license private waste collectors. The Street Superintendent shall be
responsible for the collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse and
he or she is hereby authorized to adopt reasonable regulations to carry out the
intent of this chapter.
§ 3.00 PROHIBITED DISPOSITION.
   No person shall throw, litter, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown,
dropped or deposited, within the confines of the city any refuse (including,
but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, bulk refuse, dead animals,
hazardous refuse, building waste or debris, putrescible matter or anything
injurious to health) on any premises, vacant property, street or alley, or
into, about, around or near any stream, ditch or body of water, regardless of
size; provided, however, that the prohibitions contained in this section shall
not apply to the depositing of refuse on a public disposal site nor to the
construction of embankments and the filling in or grading of property with
earth, mud and similar materials nor to refuse placed and stored for
collection. Garbage shall not be deposited in public wastepaper receptacles.
§ 4.00 BURNING REFUSE.
   No burning of paper or rubbish will be allowed within the city limits.
§ 5.00 COLLECTION OF REFUSE.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for anyone, except licensed waste collectors,
private waste collectors or city waste collectors, to collect refuse or
transport refuse over the streets of the city. It is further declared unlawful
to permit refuse to be collected by anyone, except licensed waste collectors,
private waste collectors or city waste collectors.
§ 6.00 STORING REFUSE.
   Each owner, tenant, housekeeper or other person, firm or corporation
producing or responsible for refuse shall provide sufficient containers or
other storage facilities to hold refuse accumulating therein so that such
refuse does not cause or create a nuisance or offensive odor or atmosphere or
rodent or fly harborage, or thereby to be or to become, or cause to create a
public nuisance. Containers for refuse and refuse not in containers shall be
stored on private property except on collection days. Notwithstanding the
above, garbage or mixed refuse shall not be retained for a period of time
longer than seven days on any premises, except a public disposal site
designated to receive garbage nor shall rubbish, ashes, bulk refuse, building
waste or building debris be retained for a period of time longer than 15 days
on any premises, except a public disposal site or any other legal site upon
which such refuse may be retained.
§ 7.00 CITY WASTE COLLECTION.
   City waste collectors shall collect and remove all household waste at least
once each week on such schedule as the Street Superintendent prescribes, when
such waste is prepared and stored as provided in this section. Yard waste shall
be prepared and collected separately. City waste collectors shall not collect
and remove bulk refuse, dead animals, hazardous refuse, industrial waste or
building waste, except as may be necessary in the enforcement of §
3.00 of this chapter. Refuse, garbage, rubbish, cool ashes and building debris
shall be separated and stored in separate containers except that garbage and
rubbish may be combined in a container as mixed refuse.
§ 8.00 PREPARATION OF REFUSE.
§ 8.01 GARBAGE.
   All garbage shall be thoroughly drained of its moisture and wrapped in
substantial paper or deposited in sanitary paper or plastic bags when placed in
containers for collection.
§ 8.02 RUBBISH.
   Rubbish shall have all liquids removed when placed in containers for
collection. Paper scraps, letters, sweepings, excelsior, rags and other similar
rubbish shall be dry and shall be secured in tight packages or plastic bags
when placed in containers for collection. Empty wooden crates in excess of four
feet for any dimension shall be knocked down when placed for collection.
§ 8.03 RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Recyclable material shall be separated from garbage and refuse
accumulated on the premises.
   (B)   All plastic containers shall be rinsed, flattened and the lids
removed. All cans, regardless of type of metal composition, shall be rinsed and
flattened. Newspapers, magazines and paper shall be placed in paper sacks.
Cardboard shall be flattened and placed in paper sacks. Glass containers shall
be rinsed and have the lids removed.
§ 8.04 ASHES.
   Ashes shall be cool and dry when placed in containers for collection.
§ 8.05 YARD WASTE.
   (A)   Yard waste, as defined in §
1.22 of this chapter, shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all
other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises.
   (B)   Yard waste shall be composed on the premises or placed in special
bags, marked as specified by the city. Such yard waste bags shall be collected
by the city as set forth in §
7.00 of this chapter.
§ 8.06 LEAD ACID BATTERIES.
   Such material shall not be included in the garbage and refuse accumulated on
the premises. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points
designated by the city or the State Department of Natural Resources. Drop-off
points and provision regulating the points will be set forth by resolution.
§ 8.07 WASTE MOTOR OIL.
   Such material shall not be included in the garbage and refuse accumulated on
the premises. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points
designated by the city or the State Department of Natural Resources. Drop-off
points and provision regulating the points will be set forth by resolution.
§ 8.08 TIRES.
   Such material shall not be included in the garbage and refuse accumulated on
the premises. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points
designated by the city or the State Department of Natural Resources. Drop-off
points and provision regulating the points will be set forth by resolution.
§ 8.09 WHITE GOODS.
   Such material shall not be included in the garbage and refuse accumulated on
the premises. Such material shall only be disposed of at drop-off points
designated by the city or the State Department of Natural Resources. Drop-off
points and provision regulating the points will be set forth by resolution.
§ 9.00 CONTAINERS.
   Each owner, tenant, housekeeper or other person, firm or corporation
occupying any room dwelling, house, apartment, institution, commercial
establishment or any other building or portion hereof, and producing or
responsible for garbage, rubbish, recyclable material, mixed refuse, ashes,
yard waste or building debris which is intended to be collected by city waste
collectors shall provide a sufficient number of containers of the types as
specified herein to hold garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse, ashes or building
debris accumulating therein between collection periods. Any container that does
not conform to the following specifications or that may have ragged or sharp
edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the
contents thereof must be promptly replaced upon receipt of notice to that
effect from the Street Superintendent to the responsible person or agent. If
the non-conforming or defective container is not replaced within ten days after
notice is served, such non-conforming or defective container shall be
considered rubbish and shall be collected and disposed of by the Department.
Containers shall meet the specifications in the section below.
§ 9.01 GARBAGE.
   A garbage container shall be a portable sanitary, watertight receptacle of
substantial construction with a close-fitting cover and adequate handles on the
receptacle and cover. The container shall be of such dimensions that it can be
easily handled by one person and in any case shall not have a capacity in
excess of 20 gallons nor weight more than 50 pounds when placed for collection.
§ 9.02 RUBBISH.
   Containers for rubbish shall be identical to garbage containers except as
otherwise specified herein. Containers for small rocks and other rubbish which
are not susceptible to being windblown may be bushel baskets, small metal
containers or similar containers that, when placed for collection, have a
weight not in excess of 50 pounds and which have adequate handles. Empty wooden
crates, tree roots and stumps all prepared as required herein need not be
placed in containers.
§ 9.03 MIXED REFUSE.
   Containers for mixed refuse shall be identical to garbage containers.
§ 9.04 ASHES.
   An ash container shall be a portable metal receptacle of substantial
construction with a close fitting cover and adequate handles on the receptacle
and cover. The container shall be of such dimensions that it can be easily
handled by one person and when placed for collection not weigh more than 50
pounds.
§ 9.05 BUILDING DEBRIS.
   Containers for building debris shall be identical to rubbish containers.
§ 9.06 YARD WASTE.
   Containers for yard waste shall be degradable bags, marked as specified by
the city.
§ 9.07 RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Containers for recyclable material shall be a specially marked 18-
gallon container as specified by the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as preventing the Street
Superintendent from approving other receptacles or devices that, in his or her
opinion, meet the requirements of §
8.03 of this chapter.
§ 10.00 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Where a property abuts a public alley, refuse prepared for collection
shall, on collection days, be placed together in plain view adjacent to the
alley. Where a property does not abut a public alley, refuse prepared for
collection shall, on collection days, be placed together in plain view adequate
to and in back of the curb line or on the shoulder of a public street. Refuse
shall be placed for collection prior to 7:30 a.m. of the day of collection but
in no case prior to 12 hours preceding the day of collection. All containers
shall be removed from a public street within 12 hours after refuse is
collected. Containers other than the type required for garbage (whether used
for garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse, ashes or building debris) will be collected
as rubbish unless clearly marked to be retained. City waste collectors shall
not enter houses, enclosed porches, garages or similar enclosures to make
collections nor shall city waste collection equipment enter private property to
make collections.
   (B)   Recyclable material shall be placed at the curb for collection. If
recyclable material is not separated from rubbish and garbage and placed for
collection in the appropriate place, the city waste collector has the right to
refuse to collect any refuse from that household until that household complies
with the separation requirements. Repeated violations may subject the household
to penalties as provided in §
16.00 of this chapter.
§ 11.00 NON-HOUSEHOLD WASTE.
   It shall be the duty of all establishments that produce institutional waste,
commercial waste and industrial waste to provide for the collection of all
solid waste produced on any such premises.
§ 12.00 RATES.
   The City Council shall hereby be empowered to enact by resolution, rate
schedules for sanitation pick-up for residential and commercial uses within the
limits of the city.
§ 13.00 GRATUITIES.
   Tips or gratuities shall not be offered to city employees to perform special
or unlawful service in connection with city waste collection. Solicitation of
tips or gratuities by city waste collectors is prohibited.
§ 14.00 LICENSED WASTE COLLECTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to collect refuse
within the city, except from premises within the city owned or occupied by him
or her, without first obtaining a license from the city. This requirement shall
not apply to city waste collectors.
§ 14.01 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a license to collect garbage and/or rubbish and/or
other refuse within the city and/or to transport garbage and/or rubbish and/or
other refuse over the streets of the city shall be made at the office of the
City Clerk on forms provided by said office. With his or her application, the
applicant shall file a certificate or affidavit of insurance as hereinafter set
forth and shall deposit the required license fee.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such application properly executed by the applicant,
the City Clerk shall refer same to the Street Superintendent for his or her
review and approval.
§ 14.02 INSPECTION BY STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   Upon receiving the application from the City Clerk, the Street
Superintendent shall, as expeditiously as possible, make, or cause to be made,
an inspection of the applicant’s equipment proposed to be used, his or her
methods of operation, the pick-up service to be maintained and the certificate
or affidavit of insurance filed. If the Street Superintendent determines that
the applicant meets the requirements set forth herein, he or she shall file his
or her approval with the City Clerk. If the Street Superintendent Determines
that the applicant does not meet the requirements set forth herein, he or she
shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies of his or her application.
   (B)   The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of such notice of
deficiency from the Street Superintendent to the applicant to correct the
deficiency or deficiencies. If the deficiencies are corrected within this
period, the Street Superintendent, after making a further inspection, shall
file his or her approval with the City Clerk. If the deficiencies are not
corrected within this period, the Street Superintendent shall file his or her
disapproval with the City Clerk.
§ 14.03 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of approval from the Street Superintendent, the City
Clerk shall issue the applicant a license. An applicant receiving such a
license is referred to herein as a “licensed waste collector”.
   (B)   Upon receipt of disapproval from the Street Superintendent, the City
Clerk shall notify the applicant that his or her application is denied. The fee
filed by an applicant whose application has been denied shall be retained by
the city and deposited in the Sanitation Fund.
   (C)   An applicant whose application has been denied may appeal such denial
to the City Council within 30 days from the date of the notice of denial. The
City Council may issue a license after review of the application and review of
the Street Superintendent’s disapproval.
§ 14.04 INSURANCE.
   The certificate or affidavit to be filed with the application shall be
executed by representatives of a duly qualified insurance company evidencing
that said insurance company has issued liability and property damage insurance
policies covering the following: first, all operations of the applicant, or any
other person, firm or corporation employed by him or her in garbage and refuse
collection and/or transportation within the corporate limits of the city;
second, the disposal of such garbage and refuse to and within any area
designated as a sanitary landfill by the city; third, protecting the public and
any person from injuries or damages sustained by reason of carrying on the work
of garbage and refuse collection and disposal. The certificate or affidavit
shall specifically evidence the following amounts of insurance coverage which
shall remain in effect for the term of the license, and shall provide that
written notice shall be given the City Clerk 30 days prior to any change in the
conditions of the certificate or affidavit, or any expiration or cancellation
thereof.
   (A)   Public liability insurance: $250,000 per person, $500,000 per
accident;
   (B)   Motor vehicle bodily injury liability: $250,000 per person, $500,000
per accident; and
   (C)   Property damage: $100,000 per accident.
§ 14.05 LICENSES.
   Each vehicle used by a licensee shall be licensed to be operated and shall
be operated only for the purpose(s) stated in the licensee’s application. A
license number for each vehicle approved shall be issued with each license and
shall be plainly displayed on the left front of each vehicle. A duly issued
license is not transferable from vehicle to vehicle or from collector to
collector. A license expires on December 31 of the year of issuance.
§ 14.06 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be $25 per license, plus $5 per year, per vehicle. If
issued after July 1 of any year, the license fee per vehicle for the remainder
of that year shall be $3 per vehicle.
§ 14.07 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   The annual license shall be renewed from year to year by making application
for renewal in the same manner as prescribed herein for making application for
license. Application may be made on or after December 1 of the year preceding
the year for which the license is required.
§ 14.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may, for violation of requirements contained herein or for
violation of other city ordinances, revoke a duly issued license after notice
to the licensee affected.
§ 14.09 VEHICLES.
   (A)   Vehicles used by licensed waste collectors for the collection of
refuse from within the city and/or the transporting of refuse over the streets
of the city shall be of a type that the public health, safety or welfare shall
not be jeopardized by their use. Any vehicle used in the collecting or
transporting of refuse within the city shall be kept in a sanitary condition
and shall be so constructed and so used that no leakage or spillage occurs when
the vehicle is collecting or transporting refuse.
   (B)   Vehicles licensed for the purpose of collecting and/or transporting
garbage or mixed refuse shall be packer type trucks or other approved type
trucks.
   (C)   Vehicles licensed for the purpose of collecting and transporting
rubbish, ashes, bulk refuse, building waste and/or building debris shall be
tightly constructed and shall be equipped with a top or canvas cover, tailgate
and sideboards as required such that the contents will be retained therein and
will not spill, leak or blow out of the vehicles.
   (D)   Vehicles licensed for the purpose of collecting and transporting other
kinds of refuse shall be tightly constructed and shall be appropriate for the
collection and hauling of the particular kind of refuse being collected and
shall be approved by the Street Superintendent for such purpose.
§ 14.10 CONTAINERS.
   Each owner, tenant, housekeeper or other person, firm or corporation
occupying any room, dwelling, house, apartment, institution, commercial
establishment or any other building or portion thereof and producing refuse of
any kind which is intended to be collected by licensed waste collectors shall
provide sufficient containers to hold such refuse accumulating therein between
collection periods. A garbage or mixed refuse container shall be sanitary and
watertight with a close-fitting cover. Containers for all other refuse shall be
appropriate for the refuse contained therein.
§ 14.11 COLLECTION.
   Collection of garbage or mixed refuse by a licensed waste collector from any
room, dwelling, house, apartment, institution, commercial establishment or any
other building or portion thereof which he or she has agreed to service shall
be made not less than once each week.
§ 14.12 PICK-UP SERVICE.
   Each licensed waste collector shall maintain an adequate and prompt pick-up
service and to service all complaints from his or her patrons on missed service
and/or improper handling. Such service shall be promptly available for
servicing complaints from the city or any material improperly deposited within
the city.
§ 14.13 HAULING.
   All garbage and other refuse collected shall be transported such that no
leakage or spillage occurs. All refuse shall be contained within the vehicles
such that no refuse drags upon or makes contact with the roadway and such that
no refuse extends beyond the sides or ends of the vehicle while being hauled.
§ 14.14 DISPOSAL.
   All garbage and other refuse collected shall be disposed of at a sanitary
landfill site or other site approved by the Street Superintendent.
§ 14.15 CHARGES.
   Fees and rates for the collection of refuse by licensed waste collectors
shall be determined by said collector and not by the city and shall be charged
by said collector to the user of the licensed waste collector’s service.
§ 15.00 PRIVATE WASTE COLLECTION.
   Refuse may be collected and transported over the streets of the city by any
person, firm or corporation from premises owned or occupied by him or her
within the corporation limits of the city. Vehicles used by a private waste
collector for the collection and hauling of refuse shall be of a type such that
the public health, safety or welfare shall not be jeopardized by their use. All
refuse transported by a private waste collector shall be hauled such that no
leakage or spillage occurs, nor refuse drags upon or makes contact with the
roadway and no refuse extends beyond the sides or ends of the hauling vehicles.
All garbage and other refuse collected by a private waste collector shall be
disposed of at a sanitary landfill site or other site approved by the Street
Superintendent.
§ 16.00 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each day of
violation or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment.
CHAPTER 4: PLANTING AND CARE OF TREES
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Arboricultural specifications and standards of practice
   
2.01   Planting size
   
2.02   Planting grade
   
2.03   Placement
   
2.04   Method of support
   
2.05   Spacing
   
2.06   Trimming and pruning
   
3.00   Removal of trees
   
4.00   Duty to trim trees
   
5.00   Trimming of trees under supervision of Street Superintendent
   
6.00   Definitions
   
7.00   Trees interfering with utilities
   
8.00   Notice to remove trees
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance of
the city, by requiring street trees to be uniformly located and maintained. The
primary responsibility for maintaining street trees is placed upon the abutting
property owner or his or her agent, but the Street Superintendent shall
personally supervise any cutting or trimming of said trees.
§ 2.00 ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.
§ 2.01 PLANTING SIZE.
   All trees planted on the streets shall be of sufficient size to warrant
satisfactory results and stand the abuse common to street trees.
§ 2.02 PLANTING GRADE.
   Unless otherwise allowed for substantial reasons, all standard sized trees
shall have comparatively straight trunks, well-developed leaders and top and
root characteristics of the species or variety showing evidence of proper
nursery pruning. All trees must be free of insects, disease, mechanical
injuries and other objectionable features at the time of planting. To
compensate for any serious loss of roots, the top of the tree should be reduced
by thinning or cutting back as determined by the growth characteristics of the
tree species. The leader shall not be cut off in such trimming.
§ 2.03 PLACEMENT.
   Trees shall not be planted on the parking if it is less than nine feet in
width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil surface. Trees
shall not be planted closer than 20 feet to street intersections (property
lines extended) and ten feet to driveways. If it is at all possible, trees
should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and
the curb.
§ 2.04 METHOD OF SUPPORT.
   Trees may be guyed or supported in an upright position according to accepted
arboricultural practices. The guys or supports shall be fastened in such a way
that they will not girdle or cause serious injury to the trees or endanger
public safety.
§ 2.05 SPACING.
   All trees hereafter planted in any street shall be planted midway between
the outer line of the sidewalk and curb. In the event a curb line is not
established, trees shall be planted not less than four feet inside the private
property line side of the sidewalk.
§ 2.06 TRIMMING AND PRUNING.
   All cuts are to be made sufficiently close to the parent stem so that
healing can readily start under normal conditions. All dead and diseased wood
shall be removed. All limbs one inch in diameter or more must be precut to
prevent splitting. All branches in danger of injuring the tree in falling shall
be lowered by ropes. A crossed or rubbing branch shall be removed where
practicable, but removal shall not leave large holes in the general outline of
the tree. Crossed or rubbing branches may be cabled apart. All cuts, old or
new, one inch in diameter or more, shall be painted with an approved tree wound
dressing. On old wounds, care shall be taken to paint exposed wood only. Where
there is a known danger of transmitting disease by tools, said tools shall be
disinfected with alcohol before use on another tree. Improperly healed scars,
where callous growth is not established, are to be traced and painted, unless
the Street Superintendent designates other treatment. No topping or dehorning
of trees shall be permitted except by special written permission of the Street
Superintendent. Trees becoming stag-headed may have the dead portions removed
back to sound green wood, with a proper 45 degree cut only. Elm wood trimmed,
pruned or removed shall not be used for any purpose, but shall be disposed of
immediately by burning or burying.
§ 3.00 REMOVAL OF TREES.
   The Street Superintendent shall remove, on the order of the Council, any
tree on the streets of this municipality which interferes with the making of
improvements or with travel thereon. If the abutting property owner refuses to
remove trees which have become diseased, or which constitute a danger to the
public, or which have been declared a nuisance, he or she shall be subject to
the penalties set out in §
8.00 of this chapter.
§ 4.00 DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging, the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least 13 feet
above the surface of the street and nine feet above the sidewalk.
§ 5.00 TRIMMING OF TREES UNDER SUPERVISION OF STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   Except as allowed in §
4.00 of this chapter, no person may trim or cut any tree in a street or public
place unless the work is done under the personal supervision of the Street
Superintendent.
§ 6.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 6.01.   PARKING. Includes that part of the street or avenue or highway in the
city not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb lines;
or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying
between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by
vehicular traffic.
§ 6.02.   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, corporation, trust,
association or any other organized group.
§ 6.03.   PROPERTY OWNER. Includes a person owning private property in
Eldridge, Iowa.
§ 6.04.   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes any and all property located within the
confines of the city and owned by the city or held in the name of the city by
any of the department, commissions or agencies within the city government.
§ 6.05.   STREET. Includes the entire width between property lines of avenues
or highways.
§ 6.06.   STREET TREE. Includes any tree planted between the property lines of
streets or highways.
§ 7.00 TREES INTERFERING WITH UTILITIES.
   When it is determined by the Street Superintendent that the planting of any
trees in a certain area of the city would, in fact, interfere with the
operation of any utilities within the city, this will be sufficient reason not
to issue a permit for the planting of said trees. This provision applies both
to easements presently in existence and any future easements dedicated for such
purposes.
§ 8.00 NOTICE TO REMOVE TREES.
   If the Street Superintendent of the city, upon examination and inspection in
person or by some qualified person acting for him or her, shall determine, with
reasonable certainty, that violation of this chapter exists, he or she shall
immediately serve, or cause to be served, upon the owner, occupant or person in
charge of such property a written notice to remove, trim or prune the offending
tree or trees, including that such must be done within ten days of service of
said notice; and if such owner, occupant or person in charge of said property
failed to comply with said notice within ten days of receipt thereof, the
Council, upon notice and hearing, may cause the same to be removed, trimmed or
pruned and the cost thereof assessed against the property.
CHAPTER 5: REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES AND MINIMUM
STANDARDS FOR USE
Section
   
1.00   Applicability
   
2.00   Construction permits
   
2.01   Bond
   
2.02   Certificate of insurance
   
2.03   Construction permit fee
   
2.04   Primary electric system
   
3.00   Plans and specifications
   
4.00   As-built plans
   
5.00   Suspension of contractor and subcontractor licenses
   
5.01   Informal notice
   
5.02   Written notice
   
5.03   Second notice
   
5.04   Suspension
   
5.05   Reinstatement
   
6.00   Underground electric systems
   
6.01   Casings
   
6.02   Locating wire
   
6.03   Red warning tape
   
6.04   Installation below grade level
   
6.05   Switch gear
   
6.06   YRD line markings
   
7.00   Gas main and services
   
8.00   Work performed by the city
§ 1.00 APPLICABILITY.
   Save where otherwise specifically stated, the terms of this chapter shall be
applicable to all public utility companies, contractors, subcontractors,
subdividers and all persons and firms engaged in the installation, construction
or reconstruction of public utility improvements within the city.
§ 2.00 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   A construction permit shall be required before the work is commenced.
Application therefor shall be made to the City Public Works Department. The
application shall be accompanied by a license permit bond, a certificate of
insurance and the permit fee. The Public Works Department shall issue the
permit or reject the application in writing within ten days of the date of
application.
§ 2.01 BOND.
   The license permit bond shall be in the amount of $10,000 or 5% of the
contract price, whichever is higher.
§ 2.02 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   (A)   The certificate of insurance shall show liability limits of no less
than the following:
 
Bodily injury     $300,000 per person
                  $500,000 per accident
Property damage   $300,000 per person
                  $300,000 per accident
General liability $500,000
 
   (B)   The city shall be named as an insured. The Street Superintendent may,
in his or her discretion, require or accept an agreement to indemnify and hold
harmless the city.
§ 2.03 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   Construction permit fees are as follows:
 
Total Valuation  Fee
$1 to $50,000    $50
50,000 and above $50 for the first $50,000 of valuation and $1 for each
                 additional $1,000 of valuation or fraction thereof
 
   (B)   The fee shall be submitted with the application for a construction
permit and will cover work by the Street Superintendent and City Inspector.
§ 2.04 PRIMARY ELECTRIC SYSTEM.
   No primary electric systems shall be installed within the street right-of-
way, unless permission has been expressly granted by the Public Works
Department and the Electric and Water Utility Board.
§ 3.00 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   At least ten days prior to the time of application for construction
permit, unless it is an emergency or minor repairs, two sets of plans and
specifications shall be filed with the Public Works Department. The Public
Works Department shall review the same and make corrections or revisions as to
location and conflicts with other utilities that are deemed necessary. Permits
are not required for services but if a conflict is apparent, it shall be
reviewed by the Public Works Department. Applications are available at the City
Clerk’s office.
   (B)   One set of plans and specifications, showing any corrections or
revisions required by the Public Works Department, will be returned with the
construction permits. The ten days required to file for construction permit may
be reduced to three days where no major conflicts occur.
   (C)   Location of utilities within easements or rights-of-way shall be
subject to the approval of the Public Works Department in order to minimize all
conflicts. All plans and specifications shall comply with the State Electric
Safety Code; N.E.C. Code; all local, state and federal codes; and regulations
as now adopted or adopted in the future. No primary electric systems shall be
installed within the street right-of-way, unless prior approval has been
granted by the Public Works Department and the City Utility Board.
§ 4.00 AS-BUILT PLANS.
   Within 30 days after completion of the work, the permit holder shall file
with the Public Works Department two sets of as-built plans. As-built plans
shall show all easements, public or private, and the exact location within the
easement of the improvement, including distance from the property line and
depth. Conflicts with all other utilities must be clearly shown. Failure to
file the required as-built plans shall be grounds for suspension of a
contractor’s license as set forth below.
§ 5.00 SUSPENSION OF CONTRACTOR AND SUBCONTRACTOR LICENSES.
   Contractors and subcontractors, including those installing, constructing or
reconstructing public improvements within the city, are licensed by the city
and must perform satisfactorily as a condition of the license. The City
Administrator, City Engineer, Building Inspector and Street Superintendent
shall follow the procedure set forth below when a question of licensee
performance arises.
§ 5.01 INFORMAL NOTICE.
   The licensee shall be given notice verbally or by means of informal notes
regarding conditions where workmanship should be improved, work items need to
be completed or situations must be corrected. No records of the informal notice
need be kept.
§ 5.02 WRITTEN NOTICE.
   When a licensee fails to respond to the informal notice, a written notice
shall be given. This written notice shall be dated and shall call attention to
specific items of concern. The notice shall be either hand delivered to the
licensee or mailed to the licensee at its address as shown on its license. The
procedure set forth in this chapter shall be clearly printed on the back of
such notice.
§ 5.03 SECOND NOTICE.
   The second notice shall relate to the same or similar items noted in the
written notice set forth in Step Two. It shall be in writing and hand delivered
or mailed as set forth in Step Two. This notice shall contain the following
information: “This is a Second Notice. It is active for thirty days. No permits
will be issued to you during this time unless the items below have been
corrected. If the items are not corrected within thirty days, your license to
work in Eldridge will be suspended.”
§ 5.04 SUSPENSION.
   Suspension shall be automatic if the 30-day period set forth in Step Three
expires without the correction of the items or without further agreement
between the city and the licensee. Notice of the suspension shall be in writing
and shall be either personally delivered to the licensee or mailed to the
licensee at its address as shown on the license. If this suspension is not
appealed to the City Council within 15 days of the suspension notice, the
license will be revoked. A licensee may appeal to the City Council at any step,
but, in any event, no later than 15 days after the date of the suspension
notice. The City Council may sustain the action of the city’s staff or may
excuse the notice either with or without conditions.
§ 5.05 REINSTATEMENT.
   A license which has been revoked will be reinstated only by the City Council
and only after the licensee in question has personally appeared before the
Council.
§ 6.00 UNDERGROUND ELECTRIC SYSTEMS.
§ 6.01 CASINGS.
   Rigid ferrous metal casing or conduit shall be used in all areas where
electric URD systems are located under or cross under public streets, private
streets, alleys, railroads, public ways and the like and shall further be used
where electric URD systems are laid over or under water mains, sewer mains or
other utility services, all subject to the review of the Public Works
Department and the City Utility Board.
§ 6.02 LOCATING WIRE.
   A locating wire of the type T.W. #12, solid copper, minimum shall be
installed 12 to 18 inches below ground level, except where concentric wire is
installed and only on primary routes.
§ 6.03 RED WARNING TAPE.
   A red warning tape, four inches wide, shall be installed 12 to 18 inches
below the ground level only on primary and secondary.
§ 6.04 INSTALLATION BELOW GRADE LEVEL.
   All primary URD electrical systems shall be installed 42 inches below grade
level. Secondary services shall be installed a minimum of 36 inches below grade
level.
§ 6.05 SWITCH GEAR.
   All transformer, primary switch gear and secondary switch gear shall be of
the above ground type and shall be installed with tags and a sign with the
following language: “Danger High Voltage”.
§ 6.06 YARD LINE MARKINGS.
   (A)   All primary and secondary URD lines, exclusive of service wires, shall
be marked with a sign at least 12 inches by 18 inches in size and worded as
follows:
   “Before digging or driving post call or contact                            .
Telephone during working hours                            ,/after
hours                               . Company
name                                         .”
   (B)   Such signs shall be of metal, with black lettering on a yellow
background and shall be affixed to a post which is a minimum of 48 inches long.
The sign shall be at least 32 inches above the ground level after installation
and shall not be further than 250 feet apart.
   (C)   Adhesive signs shall be affixed to all secondary pedestals, all
transformers, switch gears and the like located at ground level stating “Danger
High Voltage”. Letters should be red on white background.
§ 7.00 GAS MAIN AND SERVICES.
   Gas mains and services installed in the city shall be of the ferrous metal
type or plastic type approved for that use. If plastic gas mains and services
are installed, the following shall be required.
§ 7.01.   A locating wire of the type T.W. #12 minimum, solid copper, shall be
installed in the same trench as the main or service near the bottom.
§ 7.02.   A yellow warning tape, four inches wide, shall be installed 12 to 16
inches below finished grade level.
§ 7.03.   Plastic gas mains shall be installed within rigid metal conduit, or
other casing as may be required by the City Public Works Department, when the
gas main is located under or crosses under any public street, private street,
alley, railroad and the like and where the main crosses over or under any water
main, sewer main, underground electric utility or other public utility. Conduit
shall be right-of-way to right-of-way when possible.
§ 7.04.   Plastic gas mains shall meet ASTM Standard D-2513, or as may be
required or approved under the auspices of the State Commerce Commission, and
all other local, state or federal codes and regulations.
§ 8.00 WORK PERFORMED BY THE CITY.
   Whenever employees of the city are required to supplement or repair any part
of construction performed under this chapter or repair any damage to city
utilities or streets resulting from work performed under this chapter, the city
shall be entitled to reimbursement at the rate of $14 per work-hour. The
charges shall be assessed against the holder of the construction permit. If the
charges so assessed are not paid, further construction permits will not be
issued to that person or firm, and the license permit bond shall be used to
satisfy the charges.
CHAPTER 6: RECOVERING COSTS ON SEWER AND WATER SERVICES
Section
   
1.00   Scope
   
2.00   Construction costs
   
3.00   Recompense
   
4.00   Project enactment
   
5.00   Standards
§ 1.00 SCOPE.
   This chapter applies to water and sewer lines installed to bridge land which
has not yet been subdivided. With the approval of the Utility Board of Trustees
(water) or the City Council (sewer), developers may install such services and
be recompensed for same under the terms set forth below.
§ 2.00 CONSTRUCTION COSTS.
   The developers shall provide documentation of the estimated and actual costs
of said construction.
§ 3.00 RECOMPENSE.
   The Utility Board of the City Council shall establish reasonable connection
charges designed approximately to cover the actual costs of construction.
Connection charges for water mains shall be on a front foot served basis;
connection charges for sewers shall be on an area served basis with the
influence area clearly defined. For a period of up to ten years following the
acceptance of the construction, 75% of said connection charges collected shall
be paid to the developers, their heirs or assigns.
§ 4.00 PROJECT ENACTMENT.
   The Utility Board or the City Council shall establish the specific terms for
any project of this type by resolution. Such resolution shall have the force of
contract on both the developers involved and the city.
§ 5.00 STANDARDS.
   The same standards shall apply as apply in subdivisions.
CHAPTER 7: RESERVED
[Reserved]
CHAPTER 8: ADOPTION OF SPECIFIC CODES
Section
   
1.00   Title and adoption
   
2.00   Scope and purpose
   
3.00   Administration/powers and duties of the building official
   
3.01   Contractors license/permit bond and certificate of insurance
   
4.00   Specific technical codes adopted
   
5.00   Amendments to the 2021 International Building Code
   
6.00   Amendments to the 2021 International Residential Code
   
7.00   Amendments to the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code
   
8.00   Iowa Plumbing Code
   
9.00   National Electrical Code
   
10.00   Iowa Mechanical Code
   
11.00   Amendments to the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code
   
12.00   Amendments to the 2015 International Existing Building Code
   
13.00   Amendments to the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
14.00   Amendments to the 2021 International Fire Code
   
15.00   Building permit fees
   
15.01   Amending permit fee schedules
   
15.02   Applications
   
15.03   Fee for plumbing, mechanical and electrical installations
   
15.04   Fee for works governed by International Fire Code
   
15.05   Building permit fees
   
15.06   Mechanical permit fees (heating and air)
   
15.07   Plumbing permit fees
   
15.08   Electric permit fees
   
15.09   Housing code fees
   
16.00   International Fire Code
   
17.00   General amendments
   
18.00   Specific structures
   
18.01   Swimming pools
   
18.02   Fences
   
18.03   House movers
   
18.04   House movers defined
   
18.05   License required
   
18.06   Bond and insurance required
   
18.07   Flagger, warning devices
   
18.08   Utilities
§ 1.00 TITLE AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   The City Council does ordain as follows: that specific technical codes
listed for adoption in this chapter, two copies of each, which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated collectively as: “the
City of Eldridge Building Code”, for the city, be and are hereby adopted in
full, excluding their appendices (except as may herein be amended, modified,
revised, changed or deleted) and further being placed in
Title C: Public Works,
Chapter Eight: Adoption of Specific Codes. This adoption repeals and supersedes
all previous codes and ordinances or parts of codes and ordinances in conflict
herewith, and provides for an effective date. If any conflict exists between
requirements in the specific technical codes, state codes or municipal codes
adopted, the municipal code requirement shall apply.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall certify the adoption of these specific technical
codes and this chapter and shall cause the same to be published as required by
law. These specific technical codes and this chapter shall take effect and be
in force, from and after its approval and publishing as required by law, with
an enforcement date of January 1, 2025.
   (C)   All buildings shall be required to comply with the code in force at
the time the building permit was issued, and the city retains the right to
prosecute owners of buildings for code violations under those codes, even if
the codes are amended or replaced by newer versions.
   (D)   Remodeling or reconstruction of buildings shall comply with the codes
as prescribed therein.
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 2.00 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   These specific technical codes and this chapter establish the minimum
regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all properties,
buildings and structures, as regulated herein, by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy
and use and includes provisions for the condemnation of buildings and
structures which are unfit for human occupancy and use, including the
demolition of structures.
   (B)   These specific technical codes and this chapter also include
regulations for controlling the development, enlargement, conversion,
occupancy, use, height, area, design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to and maintenance of, the building envelope, all plumbing, mechanical
and electrical systems, including the safeguarding of life and property from
fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises and providing for
the issuance of permits, collection of associated fees, authority to inspect
and apply the provisions as herein set forth, within the jurisdiction of the
city.
   (C)   All of the provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of these
specific technical codes and those existing in this chapter are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
revisions, additions, insertions, deletions and changes as herein prescribed in
this chapter.
   (D)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these
specific technical codes and/or this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of these specific technical codes and/or ordinance. The city hereby
declares that it would have approved these specific technical codes and this
chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrases thereof,
irrespective of any findings that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases be asserted to be potentially, or found and
declared to be unconstitutional.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter or the specific technical codes hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act, code or ordinance hereby repealed, as cited
in this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character
be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
   (F)   The city’s building code has been adopted and is used in conjunction
with all other codes and ordinances adopted by the city, including, but not
limited to, the applicable provisions of the State Building Code, the County
Board of Health, the State Department of Natural Recourses and the State Fire
Marshal’s office. Compliance with each of these regulations and those of other
agencies shall be required.
   (G)   The provisions contained herein shall not be construed to include all
of the regulations pertaining to buildings and developments. The city’s
building code shall be applied to all of the aforementioned specific technical
codes and ordinances and nothing contained herein shall be interpreted as
prohibiting or limiting enforcement by the building official or other
authorized personnel of the city or any other authorized agencies, in the
performance of their duties.
§ 3.00 ADMINISTRATION/POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Administration and enforcement of these specific technical codes and
ordinances pertaining hereto is a function of the building inspection division
of the city. Whenever the term or title administrative authority, authority
having jurisdiction, authorized representative, building inspector, building
official, code enforcement officer, code official, Fire Chief, inspector or
similar designation is used herein, or in any of the specific technical codes,
such term or title shall be construed to mean the Building Official, designated
by special appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the
appointing authority, the Building Official may appoint related technical
officers, inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to
time. He or she may deputize such inspectors or employees as may be necessary
to carry out code related duties.
   (C)   The Building Official (or other related technical officers, inspectors
and designees, as may be appointed) shall, upon proper inspection request and
notification from the permit holder, perform such specified inspections as
indicated by the respective codes and this chapter. Such work shall be made
ready and complete and shall stand and pass any tests as prescribed by the
respective codes. Upon such inspection, if the work being inspected conforms to
the requirements for such installation, the Building Official shall approve
that portion of work. If such work is found to be incomplete, or fails any
prescribed tests or is not in conformance with code provisions pertaining to
such work, the Building Official may provide verbal or written notice of the
necessary corrections. Such work shall be made to comply as required and may be
subject to a re-inspection (with re-inspection fees as may be warranted) upon
completion of such necessary corrections.
   (D)   The Building Official shall also provide business license inspections
for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the business license for
those new and existing properties where the proposed business is to be located.
This inspection is intended verify the present conditions of the buildings or
structures, which the new business is utilizing, are in conformance with
specific code provisions pertinent to the use and occupancy of the proposed new
business. If code violations are identified, a correction notice (verbal or
written) shall be issued, indicating the violations and such violations shall
be corrected prior to a certificate of occupancy and or business license being
issued. When no change in occupancy or use is encountered, such inspection need
not be performed unless there is reason to believe a violation exists.
§ 3.01 CONTRACTORS LICENSE/PERMIT BOND AND CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in a contracting for
hire or the implementation of any works regulated by the specific technical
codes within the city must comply with the licensing, bonding and insurance
requirements contained in
Title A, Chapter 18.
§ 4.00 SPECIFIC TECHNICAL CODES ADOPTED.
§ 4.01.   The following codes are hereby adopted in full except for such
portions as may hereinafter be deleted, modified or amended and all subsequent
supplements to the below mentioned international codes as published.
   (A)   2021 International Building Code;
   (B)   2021 International Residential Code;
   (C)   2015 International Property Maintenance Code;
   (D)   Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Iowa;
   (E)   2020 National Electric Code;
   (F)   International Mechanical Code, as adopted by the State of Iowa;
   (G)   2015 International Energy Conservation Code;
   (H)   2015 International Existing Building Code;
   (I)   2021 Swimming Pool and Spa Code; and
   (J)   2021 International Fire Code.
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 4.02.   An official copy of the above codes are on file in the office of the
City Clerk for inspection.
§ 4.03.   To establish flood hazard areas, the City Council has adopted a flood
hazard map and supporting data. This flood hazard map includes areas of special
flood hazards as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on FIRM
Map #190574 for the city, dated September 1, 1991. The adopted flood hazard map
and supporting data are hereby set forth in
Title D, Chapter 3.
§ 4.04.   If any conflict exists between the adopted international codes,
uniform codes and other city ordinances, the more restrictive code requirement
applies.
§ 4.05.   This code adoption shall take effect on January 1, 2025. The city
retains the right to prosecute code violations under previous codes. Remodeling
or reconstruction of buildings shall comply with the codes as prescribed
therein.
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 5.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
§ 5.01.   The International Building Code, 2021 edition, published by the
International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL
60478, is hereby adopted as the requirements for the design, construction,
alteration, relocation, demolition, installation, use and occupancy of every
building structure or appurtenances attached to such structures with the
following amendments.
   (A)   101.2 Title. Insert “City of Eldridge, Iowa” as [NAME OF
JURISDICTION].
   (B)   101.4.2 Mechanical. Replace “International Mechanical Code” with “Iowa
Mechanical Code”.
   (C)   101.4.3 Plumbing. Replace “International Plumbing Code” with “Iowa
Plumbing Code”.
   (D)   103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. Insert “Building Safety
Department” in place of “insert name of department”.
   (E)   105.2 Building. Delete “(2) Fences” in its entirety.
   (F)   105.2 Building. Delete “(6) Sidewalks and driveways” in its entirety
and replace with the following: “(6) Concrete flatwork on private property”.
   (G)   105.3.2 Time limitation of Application. Change “180 days” and “90
days” to “30 days”.
   (H)   105.5 Expiration. Delete and replace with “105.5 Expiration. Every
permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire twelve (12) months
from the date of issue. Exception: a permit application that is accompanied by
construction schedule of a longer specific duration may be issued for the term
of the construction schedule with approval of the Building Official. If the
work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner or owners
agent and by payment of the renewal fee as established by Resolution of the
City Council, and provided no changes have been made in plans or location”.
   (I)   Chapter 11 Accessibility. Add “Where the provisions of this code
conflict with the Iowa State Building Code, Division VII, Accessibility Rules
and Regulations for the Physically Handicapped Section 661-16.700 (103A), the
latter shall apply”.
   (J)   Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete all references to the
“International Plumbing Code” and replace with “Iowa State Plumbing Code”.
   (K)   3303 Demolition. Add “3303.8 Site clearing. The demolition site shall
be cleared of all debris associated with the structures being removed. All
mechanical groundwork shall be removed from the site of demolition. Foundation
walls may be used as solid fill provided a site plan providing notice of the
location and depth of the foundation is recorded on the parcel with the Scott
County Recorder, and a recorded copy is filed with the Eldridge Building Safety
Department. In all cases, concrete shall be removed or collapsed so as to allow
burial 24” below final grade. Basement and on grade concrete slabs shall be
removed or substantially pulverized to allow adequate drainage. Demolition work
shall include site work as necessary to fill all excavations and to create a
smooth and even finish grade capable of supporting vegetation.
      Materials and specifications for filling and final site work are as
follows: Only material that will not decompose in the ground shall be used for
filling all excavations to within 24” of the top of the surrounding grade. The
top 24” of fill material shall be tillable soil, of which the formed aggregate
does not exceed 1-1/2 inches. An earthen crown shall be provided at the center
of the demolition site to allow for proper site drainage. Final site work shall
include stabilization with a vegetative cover of at least 70% over the entire
site.”
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 6.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
§ 6.01.   The International Residential Code, 2021 edition, published by the
International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL
60478, is hereby adopted as the requirements for the design, construction,
alteration, relocation, demolition, installation, use and occupancy of one- and
two- family dwellings and townhouses and attached or unattached accessory
structures with the following amendments.
   (A)   All references to building line and zoning are void, and the subject
matter of the zoning ordinance (
Title D, Chapter 2 of the City Code) shall be applicable.
   (B)   R101.1 Title. Insert “City of Eldridge, Iowa” as [NAME OF
JURISDICTION].
   (C)   R101.2 Scope. Add “demolition projects will meet the requirements of
Section 3303 Demolition of the 2021 International Building Code as amended”.
   (D)   R105.2 Building. Delete (1) in its entirety and replace with the
following:
“(1) One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and garden sheds,
playhouses and similar uses provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square
feet”.
   (E)   R105.2 Building. Delete “(2) Fences” in its entirety.
   (F)   R105.2 Building. Delete (5) in its entirety and replace with “(5)
Concrete flatwork on private property”.
   (G)   105.3.2 Time limitation of Application. Change “180 days” and “90
days” to “30 days”.
   (H)   R105.5 Expiration. Delete and replace with “105.5 Expiration. Every
permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire (12) months from
the date of issue. Exception: a permit application that is accompanied by
construction schedule of a longer specific duration may be issued for the term
of the construction schedule with approval of the Building Official. If the
work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner or owner’s
agent and by payment of the renewal fee as established by Resolution of the
City Council and provided no changes have been made in plans or location”.
   (I)   Table R301.2 (1) Climate and geographical design criteria. 
 
        Wind Design                        Seismic  Subject to Damage From
Ground                      Special Wind-  Design              Frost
Snow    Speed d Topographic Wind    borne  Category Weathering line    Termite
Level   (mph)   Effects k   Region  Debris f        a          depth b c
                            i       Zone m
p s =
30 psf,
alcs
for
drift
loads                                                                  Moderate
shall   115     NO          NO      NO     A        SEVERE     42”   to Heavy
use a
ground
snow
load p
g = 25
psf
 
 
Winter Ice Barrier                                                                              Air      Mean
Design Underlayment Flood Hazards g                                                             Freezing Annual
Temp e Required h                                                                               Index i  Temp j
                    a.   Initial NFIP 03/01/1991
-4°F  YES          b.   Community #190574                                                   2000     50.5°F
                    c.   Panel date 3/23/2023 on panels 19163C0200G, 0215G, 0220G, and 4/11/
                    2024 on panels 0335H, 0355H and 0360H.
 
   (J)   R302.13 Fire Protection of floors. Delete in its entirety.
   (K)   R311.3.2 Floor elevations at other exterior doors. Exception. Change
“two” to “three”.
   (L)   R311.7.8.2 Continuity. Add: “Exception 3. Handrails within an
individual dwelling unit or serving an individual dwelling unit that has one
(1) offset or interruption per flight of stairs six inches (6”) in total length
shall be considered, for the purpose of this code, to be continuous”.
   (M)   R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Exception, Add: “Or
have 4 or fewer units in a building.”
   (N)   R313.2 One and two-family dwelling automatic sprinkler systems. Delete
in its entirety.
   (O)   R320 Accessibility. Delete and replace with “R320 Accessibility. Iowa
Administrative Code 661, Chapter 302 shall apply.”
   (P)   Table R403.1(1) Delete and replace with the following table R403.1(1).
 
Table R403.1 Thickness of   Minimum                           Minimum Depth of
Number of    Foundation     Thickness        Minimum Width of Foundation Below
Floors       Walls (inches) Footing (inches) Footing (inches) Finish Grade
Supported                                                     (inches)
             Unit Concrete  Masonry
1            8              8                16               42
2            8              8                16               42
3            10             12               18               42
 
      1.   Foundations may support a roof in addition to the stipulated number
of floors. Foundations supporting roofs only shall be as required for
supporting one floor. Footings shall be continuous and contain a minimum of two
½-inch reinforcement bars, and have a minimum compressive strength of 2,500
pounds per square inch at 28 days.
         A one-story wood frame building used as a private garage detached,
accessory to a single family dwelling and not over 720 square feet in floor
area may be constructed on a floating slab-on-grade provided the following
conditions are met: A concrete perimeter grade-beam, twelve inches deep and
twelve inches wide and reinforced with two ½-inch reinforcement bars shall be
installed to support the exterior walls. A minimum four-inch thick concrete
floor slab reinforced with wire mesh or fiber mesh shall be installed within
the perimeter beam and shall be formed to allow a continuous pour consisting of
the required grade beam and floor.
      2.   Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be concrete having a
minimum compressive strength of 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per
square inch. In addition, the following shall apply:
         A.   The minimum thickness of a wall shall be 7 ½ inches.
         B.   Walls shall be reinforced with no less than three half-inch
diameter, deformed ASTM A615 grade 40 steel bars placed horizontally at the
center of the wall, with one bar located near the top, one bar located near the
bottom and one bar located near mid-height of the wall.
   (Q)   R403.1.1 Minimum Size (Footings). Add “Exception 1. Deck footings not
supporting a roof or overhead structure may be a minimum 12 inches in diameter
and 42 inches below finished grade. Exception 2. All covered decks, screened
porches, three season rooms, four season rooms, room additions and similar
structures shall be supported on foundations compliant with Table R403.1 or
conforming to one of the following methods:
      (1)   Pier footings designed and stamped by a design professional.
      (2)   12 inch wide reinforced trench footing 42 inches in depth.
      (3)   16” wide spread footings 42 inches in depth with a minimum 8 inch
masonry or concrete foundation wall as per Figure 403.1.1”.
   (R)   R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection Exception 1, delete “600” and replace with
“720”. After “(3048 mm) or less” add: “, and where wall lengths do not exceed
30’ long.”
   (S)   R507.3.1 Delete table in its entirety and replace with “507.3.1 Deck
and Addition Footing Requirements.”
      “All decks and additions (screened porches, 3 seasons rooms, 4 seasons
rooms, etc.) with roof and flood loads combined shall have one of the
following:
      1.   Pier footings designed by a professional engineer.
      2.   12” wide trench footing 42” in depth extended out 12” past point
load.
      3.   Spread footings 42” in depth with a minimum 8” masonry wall or
concrete foundation wall.”
   (T)   Chapter 11. Energy efficiency. Delete in its entirety and replace with
“Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency. The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code,
Residential Provisions as amended, shall apply.”
   (U)   M1601.1.1 Above ground duct systems. Delete “7.3 Stud wall cavities
shall not convey air from more than one floor”.
   (V)   Chapters 25-32 (Plumbing requirements) Delete in their entirety and
replace all references to these chapters with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 7.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 7.01.   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, published
by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club
Hills, IL 60478, are hereby adopted as the minimum requirements for the
condition of properties and existing structures with regard to the use,
occupancy and condition with the following amendments:
   (A)   101.1 Title. Delete the section and replace with “101.1 Title. These
regulations shall be known as the Eldridge Housing Code which includes the 2015
International Property Maintenance Code with amendments, hereinafter referred
to as “this code”.
   (B)   102.3 Application of other codes. Delete the section and replace with
“102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the Eldridge Municipal Code, which includes, but
is not limited to the Building Code, Fire Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Residential Code, Plumbing Code, and the Electrical Code. Nothing in this code
shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside provisions of the Zoning
Code adopted by the City Council of Eldridge, Iowa”.
   (C)   103.1 General. For purposes of this code, the Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection shall be the Eldridge Department of Building Safety and
the Code Official shall mean the Eldridge Building Official.
   (D)   103.5 Fees. Insert the City of Eldridge Fee Schedule.
   (E)   106.3 Prosecution of violation. Add to last sentence “or may be filed
as a special assessment with the Scott County Assessor’s Office”.
   (F)   106.4 Violation penalties. Delete the section and replace with “106.4
Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or
fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Nothing herein
will prevent prosecution of violations of laws in addition to this code.
Violations of this code shall be considered a municipal infraction and civil
offense punishable by a civil penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars for each violation or if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil
penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars for each repeat offense. (Iowa Code
§ 364.22) Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. Continued violations of this code for non-
compliance may result in suspension or revocation of a City of Eldridge issued
Rental Property Permit and occupants may be required to vacate the property.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from taking action as
prescribed in other portions of the Code of Ordinances, including City funded
corrections and cost reclamation through a special assessment”.
   (G)   107.2 Form. “Add: 7. Be effective notice to anyone having interest in
the property whether recorded or not at the time of giving such notice and
shall be effective against any subsequent owner of the premises as long as the
violation exists and there remains an official copy of the notice in a file
maintained by the code official.”
   (H)   108.1.5 Dangerous Structure or premises: Add:
      “12.   Any building, structure or portion thereof that upon the
determination of the Eldridge Chief of Police has been illegally used to
manufacture, grow or otherwise produce a “controlled substance” as defined in
Iowa Code Chapter 124 shall be considered unfit for human occupancy. This
determination shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. Occupancy may
be approved by the Building Official upon evidence being provided by the person
(s) responsible for compliance under this code that contamination levels are
safe for human habitation. In the event of the manufacture of methamphetamines
is determined to have taken place within a structure or portion thereof,
testing and evidence shall be done through an entity actively engaged in the
business of providing this information within the State of Iowa and shall be
completed under the supervision of an Industrial Hygienist.
      13.   Any residential structure that, due to an accumulation of objects,
goods, materials or substances inside, has inadequate light, ventilation,
livable space, unsanitary condition or lacks proper egress, or becomes an
unsafe fire threat due to an unusual amount of flammable or combustible
material that the building official declares the dwelling uninhabitable. (NOTE:
This situation may occur due to a “Hoarding Disorder” as listed in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The City of Eldridge may
contact family members if a suspicion of hoarding is discovered.)”
   (I)   108.2 Closing of Vacant Structures. Add to the end of the last
sentence: “including a special assessment”.
   (J)   Add new section: “111.1.1 Waiver. Failure of any person to file an
appeal request in accordance with the provisions of this code shall constitute
a waiver of the right to a Board of Appeals hearing and adjudication of the
notice or order, or any portion thereof”.
   (K)   111.2 Membership of Board. Delete 111.2 through 11.2.5 in its entirety
and replace with: “111.2 Membership of Board. The Eldridge City Council shall
be the Board of Appeals”.
   (L)   111.3 Notice of Meeting. Change “20 days” to “30 days”.
   (M)   202 General Definitions. Add the following definitions:
      “201.1 CONDOMINIUM: A multi-family complex, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or sleeping unit which is recognized by the County Assessor’s
office as a Condominium (typically in compliance with Chapter 499B of the Code
of Iowa).
      201.2 COOPERATIVE. A multi-family complex, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or sleeping unit which is recognized by the County Assessor’s
office as a Cooperative (typically in compliance with Chapter 499A of the Code
of Iowa).
      201.3 OCCUPY. The living or sleeping in a premises regulated by this
Chapter, and shall not require that the person living or sleeping be included
in any rental agreement concerning the premises.
      201.4 PROPERTY MANAGER. See “Operator” section 202 of this code.
      201.5 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION. A registration with the City of
Eldridge of a rental property by the operator of every rental unit.
      201.6 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY; RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. A structure
containing one or more dwelling units, rooming units, or sleeping units which
is not eligible for the Iowa Homestead Credit for tax purposes; also any
structure or part of a structure used as a home, residence, or sleeping unit by
a single person, household unit, or any person other than the legal owner of
the property, which is let, leased or rented from or otherwise occupied by
permission of the owner or other person in control of such unit, whether by
day, week, month, year or any other term, regardless of monetary exchange. The
term Rental Unit or Residential Rental Unit may refer to a unit within a
residential rental property, a single family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit or premises as the context requires.
      Exceptions:
      a.   Hotels and Bed and Breakfast Inns as defined by Iowa Code Chapter
137.
      b.   All facilities that are licensed or certified by the Iowa Department
of Inspections and Appeals.
      c.   Condominiums subject to private association agreements prohibiting
use as a rental property.
      d.   An owner occupied dwelling unit where all occupants live as one
family unit, regardless of familial relationship. Interior door locks are of
the non-key type and the kitchen, halls, storage and utility spaces are not
segregated for separate use between occupants.
      201.7 RENTAL PERMIT. A certificate obtained by an owner or operator from
the City of Eldridge authorizing the use of a property as a rental property by
providing a registration application and vouching for the compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter. Permits not renewed shall expire after
24 months following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as
hereinafter provided”.
   (N)   302.1 Sanitation. Delete and replace with “302.1 Sanitation. All
exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition
that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls.
This provision shall not relieve the owner of responsibility under 301.2. No
exterior accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, household goods, materials
or equipment including but not limited to appliances and furnishings
manufactured for interior use, shall be permitted. For purposes of this
section, an unenclosed porch is an exterior portion of a property or premises”.
   (O)   302.1.1 Rubbish/Garbage Containers. Add new section: “302.1.1 Rubbish/
Garbage Containers. Effective June 1st, 2018, all rubbish, garbage and refuse
containers stored outside and intended to be utilized by more than a single
residential unit or a commercial or industrial business shall be shielded from
view of the public and surrounding properties by a fence or other approved
obstruction. Rubbish, garbage, and refuse shall not be stored outside of the
containers inside or outside of the shielded area.
      Rubbish, garbage and refuse containers shall be capable of closing fully
at all times. In the event the amount of rubbish, garbage and/or refuse
prevents the proper closing of the containers, the operator shall cause the
container to be collected, emptied or replaced with an empty one, regardless of
the normal pick up schedule”.
   (P)   302.4 Weeds. Insert “10 inches” as the height in inches.
   (Q)   302.8 Motor Vehicles. Delete in its entirety and replace with “302.8
Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations for a business
legally engaged in a business allowing such use, no inoperable or unlicensed
motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises outside of an
enclosed structure, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. The
storage of vehicle parts outside of an enclosed building including but not
limited to bumpers, engines, exhaust pipes, doors, fenders, hoods, mufflers or
any other structural, mechanical or decorative vehicle part is prohibited.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth. A tarp shall not be considered an enclosed structure.
      Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work and storage of parts, provided that such work and/or
storage is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes”.
   (R)   302.9 Defacement of Property. Add to the end of the last sentence:
“within 14 days of being notified of graffiti, carving mutilation or defacement
that is a violation of this code”.
   (S)   303.2 Enclosures. Exception. After “cover”, add “and pools with an
automatic, powered safety cover”.
   (T)   304.14 Insect screens. Delete in its entirety and replace with “304.14
Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or
any area where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored shall be supplied
with approved, tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per
25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
      Exception 1: Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed.
      Exception 2: From October 31st to March 31st screens may be replaced with
storm windows. Screens shall be used in place of storm windows outside of these
dates”.
   (U)   307.1 Handrails and guardrails. General, and Figure 307.1 Change “more
than four risers” to “four or more risers”.
   (V)   309.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and
rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall
be promptly exterminated by a process that will not be injurious to human
health. If, after any additional inspection within the next 6 months show that,
in the opinion of the code official, adequate extermination measures have not
been taken, then an approved plan of action shall be provided to the code
official within 5 business days. An approved plan of action must include an
approved certified pest control agency for extermination. After pest
elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
   (W)   402.1 Habitable spaces. Add:
      “Exception 2. Windows designed to be openable shall be capable of being
opened. (Double hung, crank out etc.) Windows need not be of openable design
where the opening is not required by IPMC 702.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue
Openings.
      Exception 3. The glazed areas need not be installed in rooms where
exception 1 is satisfied and artificial light is provided that is capable of
producing an average illumination of 6 foot-candles (65Lux) over the area of
the room at a height of 30 inches above the floor level”.
   (X)   404.3 Minimum Ceiling Heights. Exception 3. Change “7 feet” to “6 feet
and 8 inches”.
   (Y)   602.3 Heat supply. Delete the first paragraph only and replace it
with: “Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one
or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied,
shall furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply heat to maintain a
minimum temperature of 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to maintain
temperature”.
   (Z)   602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Delete and replace with: “Indoor
occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature
not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
      Exception 1.   Processing, storage, and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.
      Exception 2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities”.
   (AA)   605.2 Receptacles. Add to the end of the section “All outlets within
6 feet of a water source shall be GFCI protected”.
   (BB)   702.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Add before first sentence
“All sleeping rooms shall have one operable Emergency Escape and Rescue
opening”.
   (CC)   Add new chapter:
      Chapter 9: Rental Permits Required.
      Section 901
      General
      901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all premises
used or to be used as a residential rental property or unit as defined in this
code.
      Section 902
      Rental Permits
      902.1 Rental Permit Required. No person shall lease, rent, or let for
occupancy a residential rental property or unit in the City of Eldridge, Iowa
without first obtaining a Rental Permit. A separate rental permit shall be
issued for each dwelling unit or rooming unit. A separate Rental Permit shall
be issued for premises where common areas such as yards, parking or storage are
provided. Rental Permits shall not be transferred from one owner to another.
Each owner of rental property shall register and obtain a permit with the code
official within 30 days of transfer of title or possession of rental property.
It shall be the responsibility of the operator to provide to the code official
complete registration information, including contact information, within 30
days of any change of owner or operator. Permits shall be valid for two (2)
years, notwithstanding means of denial, revocation or suspension provided in
this code.
      902.2 Registration Requirements. Registration shall be made for each
dwelling unit and rooming unit and be considered an application for a Rental
Permit. Registration shall be made to the code official by completing such form
and detail as prescribed by the code official. In the event a firm,
corporation, LLC or other entity is listed as the owner or operator, a person
shall be named as the contact for the organization and full contact information
shall be provided.
      902.3 Permit Denied; Appeal. Any person whose registration for a permit
to lease, rent, let, permit, or allow occupancy of a rental property results in
the permit being denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Eldridge City Council under the procedure provided by section
111 of this code.
      902.4 Permit Fee. Before the Building Official shall issue a rental
permit under the provision of this chapter, there shall be paid by the owner or
operator a rental permit fee, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of
the Council. A Permit that has been expired or revoked shall require the fee
prior to re-issuance.
      902.5 Permit Suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any rental dwelling
unit, the Building Official finds that conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of any provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall
give notice in writing to the owner and/or manager of such unit that unless the
conditions or practices causing the violation are corrected within a reasonable
period, to be determined by the Building Official, the permit shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, the Building Inspector shall re-inspect
such unit and if the Building Official finds that the violations continue to
exist may suspend the rental permit by providing by written notice to the
operator that the permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of
suspension, such owner/operator shall immediately cause occupants to vacate the
premises until the building official determines the violations have been
corrected. In instances where violations of this chapter are confined to one
(1) of multiple dwelling units or rooming units within a premises and in the
judgment of the Building Official do not constitute a hazard to health or
safety elsewhere, the Building Official shall limit the application of the
requirement to vacate the premises to the areas and/or units in which the
violations exist.
      902.6 Permit Suspended; Appeal. Any person whose permit to operate a
rental dwelling unit has been suspended or who has received notice from the
building official that a permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions
or practices are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Eldridge City Council under the procedure provided by section
111 of this code.
      Section 903
      Background Checks
      903.1 Mandatory Background Checks. Permit holders shall perform a
background check on all persons 18 years of age or older who newly occupy a
rental unit as of the effective date of this ordinance, whether or not the
person(s) has signed a lease. This requirement shall not apply with regard to
persons already occupying a given rental unit prior to the effective date of
this requirement.
      903.2 Minimum Requirements of Background Checks. Background checks may be
obtained through the Eldridge Police Department, through a third party engaged
in the business of providing background checks or through other approved means.
Background checks as referenced here shall include the following at a minimum:
      a.)   A report of activity from Iowa Courts Online.
      b.)   A report from the Iowa Sex Offender Registry and the National Sex
Offender Website maintained by the United States Department of Justice.
      Permit holders are encouraged, but not required, to obtain additional
background information they deem appropriate. Nothing herein shall be construed
to indicate any preference or recommendation on the part of the City as to the
selection of a tenant. Operators are free to use the information discovered to
the degree they see fit.
      903.3 Proof of Background Check. Upon the City’s request, operators shall
show proof that the background check requirement has been met by providing a
receipt, cover sheet or other means that includes the tenants name. The
background check is the property of the person ordering the check, and it is
within the rights of the operator to withhold the information within once proof
of a background check being completed has been provided.
      Section 904
      Mandatory Written Lease
      904.1 Mandatory written lease. Owners and operators of all Rental
Properties for which a Rental Permit is required must have written leases or
written rental agreements with all tenants.
      904.2 Lease Information. Written lease agreements must contain the
following information:
         904.2.1   The full name of all occupants of the dwelling unit;
         904.2.2   The street address and unit number to be occupied;
         904.2.3   The terms of the agreement including the amount of rent and
when it is due;
         904.2.4   The party responsible for utility costs;
         904.2.5   The terms for the operators access to the dwelling unit,
such as 24-hour notice, emergencies, and welfare checks;
         904.2.6   The method for the operator and tenant to provide written
notices to each other, including complete contact information for each party;
         904.2.7   A notice to the tenants that it shall be a violation of the
lease to commit any act or allow any activity to occur on the leased premises
which violate any Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
which are in effect or which may be enacted during the term of the lease or
rental agreement;
         904.2.8   Provide a description of the arrangement or responsibilities
for emergency relocation of tenant(s), if ever needed.
      904.3 Proof of Lease. Upon the City’s request, operators shall show proof
that a lease or rental agreement is currently in force.
         Exception - The requirement for a written lease or rental agreement is
waived in the event the landlord and tenant have a familial relationship
(defined as spouse, parents, children, brothers, sisters, grandparents,
grandchildren, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
step-family and foster children.)
      Section 905
      Inspections
      905.1 Inspections. The Building Official is hereby authorized to enter
and make inspections to determine the condition of rental property located
within the City in order to perform the duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of the occupants and of the general public. Inspections shall be made:
         905.1.1   Upon receipt of a complaint from a person or party
identifying themselves, made or filed with City officials;
         905.1.2   When just cause is found and a warrant has been obtained
after a request to enter has been denied;
         905.1.3   A public health, safety or welfare emergency is observed or
is reasonably believed to exist;
         905.1.4   A tenant makes a request for an inspection. If a non-
emergency inspection is requested by a tenant, the tenant shall provide written
notice to the owner per Iowa Code § 562A.21. Seven (7) days after tenant
notification to the owner, an inspection may be conducted by the building
official.
         904.1.5   An operator makes a request for an inspection. A non-
emergency inspection may be made following the terms for accessing the unit
provided in the lease.
         905.1.6   When a request for a welfare check is made due to concerns
for the occupants wellbeing. When making a welfare check, the Eldridge Police
shall be present and follow protocol established for such occurrences.
      For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Official is
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all such
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises with the
consent of the owner, tenant or operator. Such inspections shall be at
reasonable times on week days when the owner, operator or responsible occupant
is present. In the event that there is sufficient evidence to indicate a
violation of this code, and the operator or occupant refuses to allow the
Building Official access at reasonable times, the Building Official or a
designee shall secure a warrant to inspect the dwelling on the basis of the
refusal to allow entry.
      Section 906
      Emergency Order
      906.1 Emergency Order. Whenever the Building Official finds that an
emergency exists which threatens immediately the public health, the building
official may issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as the building official deems necessary to
meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately. However, upon petition for an appeal to the
building official, shall be afforded a hearing at the earliest expedient time.
After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with, the Appeals Board shall continue such
order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
      Section 907
      Conflict
      907.1 Conflict. Enforcement of the Housing Code shall not be construed
for the particular benefit of any individual or group of persons, other than
the general public. In the event of a conflict between this section and any
other section of the Housing Code, this section shall govern insofar as
applicable.
      Section 908
      Liability
      908.1 Liability. The City of Eldridge and it’s employees is not liable
for damages to a person or property as a result of any act - or failure to act
- in the enforcement of this Code. The Housing Code shall not be construed to
relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or
controlling any equipment or structure regulated herein for damages to a person
or property caused by its defects, nor shall the City or any City employee be
held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by
this Code or any approvals issued under this Code.
      Section 909
      Effective Date
      909.1 Effective Date. The effective date of Chapter 9 shall become
effective on October 1st, 2017. All other portions of this code shall take
effect upon approval by the Eldridge City Council as provided for in Iowa Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2317.png]
 
§ 8.00 IOWA PLUMBING CODE.
   The Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by 641 I.A.C. Chapter 25, is
hereby adopted by reference as the plumbing code for the city, subject to the
amendments and adoptions by the State Department of Public Safety. Fees for
permitting shall be required as adopted in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 9.00 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The National Electrical Code (NFPA-70), as adopted and amended by the state,
is hereby adopted by reference as the Electrical Code for the city, subject to
the amendments and adoptions by the State Department of Public Safety. Fees for
permitting shall be as required as adopted in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 10.00 IOWA MECHANICAL CODE.
   The State Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by 641 I.A.C. Chapter 61,
is hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code for the city, subject to
the amendments and adoptions by the State Department of Public Safety. Fees for
permitting shall be as required as adopted in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 11.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
§ 11.01.   The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015
edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road,
Country Club Hills, IL 60478, is hereby adopted regulating and governing energy
efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient systems for
buildings and structures with the following amendments.
   (A)   C101.1/ R101.1 Title. The Jurisdiction shall be the City of Eldridge,
Iowa.
   (B)   R402.1.1 Vapor Retarder. Delete in its entirety.
   (C)   Table R402.1.2 Insulation and fenestration requirements by component.
Change “Climate Zone 5 Fenestration U-Factor” from “.32” to “.35”, “Skylight U-
Factor” from “.55” to “.60”, “Ceiling R Value” from “R49” to “R38”, “basement
wall value” from “R15/19” to “R 10/13” and “Crawl Space Wall Value” from “15/
19” to “10/13”. Footnotes shall be amended to match the above values.
   (D)   Table R402.1.4 Equivalent U-Factors. Change “Climate Zone 5
Fenestration U-Factor” from “.32” to “.35”, “Skylight U-factor” from “.55” to
“.60”, “Ceiling U-factor” from “.026” to “.030”, “basement Wall U-factor” from
“.50” to “.59” and “Crawl Space Wall U-Factor” from “.055” to “.065”. Footnotes
shall be amended to match the above values.
   (E)   R402.4.1.2 Testing. Add to beginning of the section “When required by
the Building Official”. Change “three air changes per hour” to “seven air
changes per hour”.
   (F)   R402.4.2 Fireplaces. Delete section.
   (G)   R403.3.1 Duct Insulation (prescriptive) Delete section and replace
with “R403.3.1 Duct Insulation (prescriptive) Supply ducts in attics shall be
insulated to a minimum of R-8. All other ducts shall be insulated to a minimum
of R-6. Exception - Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the
Building Thermal Envelope”.
   (H)   R403.3.3 Sealing Duct testing. Add to beginning of the section “When
required by the Building Official”.
   (I)   R403.3.5 Building Cavities. Add the word “supply” after “as”.
   (J)   R403 Systems. Delete R403.5 through R403.12 in their entirety.
   (K)   Table C402.1.3 Opaque Thermal Envelope Insulation Component Minimum
requirements, R-Value Method. Change “Group R and All Other in Climate Zone 5 -
Roofs - Insulation Entirely Above Deck” from “.30” to “.20”, “Roofs - Metal
Buildings” from “R19+ R11LS” to “R13+ R13”, “Roofs - Attic and Other” from
“R49” to “R38”, “Walls above Grade - Metal building” from “R-13+ R-13ci” to “R-
13+ R-5.6 ci”, “Slab on Grade Floors- Unheated slabs” from “R-10 for 24” below
to NR, Heated Slabs - from R-15 for 36” below” to “R-15 for 24” below”, “Opaque
Doors - Nonswinging” from “R4.75” to “U-0.21 OR R-4.75”.
   (L)   Table C402.1.4 Opaque Thermal Envelope Assembly Maximum Requirements,
U-Factor Method. Change “Group R and All Other in Climate Zone 5 - Roofs -
Insulation Entirely Above Deck” from “U-0.032” to “U-0.048”, “Roofs - Metal
Buildings” be changed from “U-0.035” to “U-0.55”, “Roofs - Attic and Other” be
changed from “U-0.021” to “U-0.27”, “Walls above Grade - Metal Building” be
changed from “U-0.52” to “U-0.69”, “Slab on Grade Floors - Unheated Slabs” from
“F-0.54” to “F-0.73”, “Heated Slabs” from “F-65” to “F-0.86” and “Opaque Doors
- Swinging” from “U-0.61” to “U0.70”.
   (M)   C403.2.9 Duct and Plenum insulation and sealing. Change “R-6” to “R-
5”, and “R-12” to “R-8”.
   (N)   C403.2.11 Mechanical System commissioning and completion. Delete
section in its entirety.
   (O)   C404.4 Insulation of piping. Delete in its entirety.
   (P)   C404.5 Efficient heated water supply piping. Delete 404.5 through
404.5.2.1 in their entirety.
   (Q)   C404.11 Service Water- Heating System Commissioning. Delete section in
its entirety.
§ 12.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
§ 12.01.   The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, 2015
edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road,
Country Club Hills, IL 60478, are hereby adopted as the requirements for the
design, installation, maintenance, alteration, use, reuse and occupancy of
existing buildings and structures, with the following amendments:
   (A)   101.1 Title. Insert “City of Eldridge, Iowa” as [NAME OF
JURISDICTION].
   (B)   104.1 Code Official. The term “code official” shall mean the “Building
Official”.
   (C)   105.3.2 Time limitation of Application. Change “180 days” and “90
days” to “30 days”.
   (D)   105.5 Expiration. Delete and replace with “105.5 Expiration. Every
permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire twelve (12) months
from the date of issue. Exception: a permit application that is accompanied by
construction schedule of a longer specific duration may be issued for the term
of the construction schedule with approval of the Building Official. If the
work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner or owner’s
agent and by payment of the renewal fee as established by Resolution of the
City Council and provided no changes have been made in plans or location”.
   (E)   302.2 Additional Codes. Delete “International Plumbing Code” and
replace with “Iowa State Plumbing Code”.
§ 13.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
§ 13.01. The provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021
edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road,
Country Club Hills, IL 60478, are hereby adopted by reference as the
requirements for the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and
inspection of aquatic recreational facilities, pools and spas with the
following amendments:
   (A)   101.1 Title. Insert “City of Eldridge, Iowa” as [NAME OF
JURISDICTION].
   (B)   101.2 Scope. Add “Exception: Residential, on ground, storable pools
supplied by a single pool manufacturer as a kit that includes a pump and motor
that is double insulated with a factory installed 25’ GFCI protected cord shall
be installed per the manufacturers installation instructions and meet the
barrier requirements of chapter 3. It shall be the owner/installers
responsibility to ensure ongoing compliance with the installation for access,
barriers and signage”.
   (C)   103.1 Creation of agency. Insert “Eldridge Building Safety Department”
as [Name of Department]”.
   (D)   105.5.3 Expiration. Delete and replace with “105.5.3 Expiration. Every
permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall expire twelve (12) months
from the date of issue. Exception: a permit application that is accompanied by
construction schedule of a longer specific duration may be issued for the term
of the construction schedule with approval of the Building Official. If the
work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by the owner or owner’s
agent and by payment of the renewal fee as established by Resolution of the
City Council and provided no changes have been made in plans or location”.
   (E)   108.6 Refunds. Delete in its entirety and replace with: “The Building
Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee
paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this
code. Permit fees will not be refunded if $50 or less.”
   (F)   107.4 Violation Penalties. Insert “Simple Misdemeanor” as [SPECIFY
OFFENSE], insert “$650.00” as [AMOUNT], insert “30” as [NUMBER OF DAYS].
   (G)   303 Energy. Delete in its entirety.
   (H)   306 Decks. Delete 306.2 through 306.9.1 in their entirety.
   (I)   307.2.3 Freeze protection. Delete in its entirety.
   (J)   701.1 Scope. Add “Exception: Residential, on ground, storable pools
supplied by a single pool manufacturer as a kit that includes a pump and/or
filter and/or a motor that is double insulated with a factory installed 25’
GFCI protected cord shall be installed per the manufacturers installation
instructions and meet the barrier requirements of chapter 3. It shall be the
owner/installers responsibility to ensure ongoing compliance with the
installation for access, barriers and signage”.
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 14.00 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
§ 14.01. The provisions of the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club
Hills, IL 60478, is hereby adopted regulating and governing the safeguarding of
life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous materials, and from conditions hazardous to life
and property in the occupancy of buildings and premises with the following
amendments:
   (A)   101.1 Title. Insert “the City of Eldridge, Iowa” as [NAME OF
JURISDICTION].
   (B)   101.2.1 Appendices. The following appendices are adopted with this
code:
      (1)   Appendix B Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;
      (2)   Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;
      (3)   Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads;
      (4)   Appendix H Hazardous materials management Plan and Hazardous
Materials inventory Statement Instructions; and
      (5)   Appendix I Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions.
   (C)   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert “Eldridge Building Safety
Department” as [Name of Department]. All references to the Fire Code Official
shall mean the Building Official.
   (D)   105.3.1 Expiration. Delete all EXCEPT the first sentence and replace
with: “Every construction permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall
expire twelve (12) months from the date of issue. Exception: a permit
application that is accompanied by construction schedule of a longer specific
duration may be issued for the term of the construction schedule with approval
of the Building Official. If the work has not been completed by the expiration
date of the permit, no further work shall be done until the permit has been
renewed by the owner or owner’s agent and by payment of the renewal fee as
established by Resolution of the City Council, and provided no changes have
been made in plans or location”.
   (E)   112.4 Violation Penalties. Insert “Simple Misdemeanor” as [SPECIFY
OFFENSE], insert “$650.00” as [AMOUNT], insert “30” as [NUMBER OF DAYS].
   (F)   107.2 Schedule of permit fees. Insert “City of Eldridge Fee schedule”
or “Eldridge Fire Fee schedule” as applicable.
   (G)   113.5 Fee Refunds. Delete (2) in its entirety and replace with: “(2)
The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80% of the
permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance
with this code. Permit fees will not be refunded if $50 or less”.
   (H)   503.2.4 Turning radius. Add: “The turning radius for fire apparatus
access shall be not less than twenty five feet (25’) inside and forty five feet
(45’) outside”.
   (I)   507.5.1.1 Hydrant for standpipe systems. Change “100 feet” to “150
feet”.
   (J)   Appendix D, D101.1 Scope. Add “Specifications in Table D103.4 and
Figure D103.1 may be reduced to those found in Eldridge Standard Design with
the approval of the Fire Code official”.
   (K)   Appendix D, 107.1 exception 2. Add “Appendix D, exception 2. Add “A
City Council approved preliminary plat showing the proposed additional access
shall be required for an increase of up to 30 additional homes, for a total of
60 homes maximum, for this approval.”
(Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 15.00 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
§ 15.01 AMENDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES.
   Amend all adopted technical codes referencing permit fee schedules to
reflect the city’s permit fee schedules as indicated herein.
§ 15.02 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for commercial or industrial building permits shall indicate
the estimated total valuation (costs of construction, including labor) of the
proposed work, including framing, finish work, painting, roofing, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent
equipment. The estimated total valuation is then set to the building permit fee
schedule. Commercial and industrial re-roofing permits are based on valuation.
§ 15.03 FEE FOR PLUMBING, MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS.
   In addition to the building permit fee, separate permits and associated fees
are required for plumbing, mechanical and electrical installations, including
separate utility fees as required. Permits shall be secured prior to
commencement of associated work.
§ 15.04 FEE FOR WORKS GOVERNED BY INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   A separate permit and a permit fee of $10 is required for installations of
works governed by the International Fire Code when such works are not included
in the valuation of a building permit.
§ 15.05 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   The following fees are determined for a building permit, based on the
valuation. The Building Inspector shall have the right to verify or correct the
estimated cost of any building, structure, alteration or addition.
   (A)   Residential. The valuation of a residential building will be based on
cost per square foot.
 
Basements, decks, sun rooms and garages $13.20 per square foot
Second story, finished basements, 3     $33 per square foot
season rooms
First floor                             $59.40 per square foot
Accessory buildings up to 120 square    A permit is not required
feet
Accessory buildings 120 square feet and The valuation and fee will be the same
over                                    as a garage
 
   (B)   Commercial/industrial. The fees will be based on valuation of the
project that will be obtained from the contractor’s cost to complete the work.
   (C)   Plan checking fees.
      (1)   The plan checking fee of 65% of the valuation fee of the building
when completed could be applied if required by the Building Inspector.
      (2)   In addition to the building permit fee, a permit fee is required
for all subcontractors:
         (a)   Plumbing;
         (b)   Electrical;
         (c)   Heating and air conditioning;
         (d)   Other fees added to the building permit when applicable;
         (e)   Sewer connection:
Title C, Chapter 2, § 7.00;
         (f)   Water connection: Res. 23-77W and 165-92W; and
         (g)   Electrical: Res. 184-E.
   (D)   Re-roof or residing of existing building. The following permit fee
schedule shall apply to any residential structure.
 
Re-roof building less than 864 square foot floor space   $19.80
Re-roof building more than 864 square foot floor space   $33
Re-siding building less than 864 square foot floor space $59.40
Re-siding building more than 864 square foot floor space $66
 
TOTAL VALUATION FEES
TOTAL VALUATION        FEES
$1 to $500             $19.80
                       $19.80 for the first $500, plus $2.75 for each
$501 to $2,000         additional $100 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $2,000
                       $59.40 for the first $2,000, plus $12.10 for each
$2,001 to $25,000      additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $25,000
                       $332.20 for the first $25,000, plus $8.58 for each
$25,001 to $50,000     additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $50,000
                       $547.80 for the first $50,000, plus $5.94 for each
$50,001 to $100,000    additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $100,000
                       $844.80 for the first $100,000, plus $4.20 for each
$100,001 to $500,000   additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $500,000
                       $2,692.80 for the first $500,000, plus $3.60 for each
$500,001 to $l,000,000 additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $1,000,000
$1,000,001 and up      $4,672.80 for the first $1,000,000, plus $2.64 for each
                       additional $1,000 or fraction thereof.
 
   (E)   Other inspections and fees.
Inspections outside normal business
hours (minimum charge, 2 hours), per    $39.60
hour
Re-inspection fees assessed per hour    $39.60
Inspections for which no fee is
specifically indicated (minimum charge, $39.60
1/2 hour), per hour
Additional plan review required by
changes, additions or revisions to      $39.60
approve plans (minimum charge, 1/
2 hour), per hour
Moving of building (per day)            $31.90, plus expenses of police and
                                        utility crews
Demolition of structures                $31.90
Fences (with the exception of           $13.20
agricultural)
Renewal or extension of any permit      One-half of original permit fee and in
                                        no event less than $19.80
Signs                                   $33
Satellite                               $33
Sidewalks and driveways                 $13.20
 
   (F)   Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work
requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
fee in addition to the normal permit fee. Such fee shall be equal to twice the
normal permit fee, but shall be no less than $25 or more than $100.
   (G)   Unsatisfactory and/or re-inspection. If the work does not pass
inspection, the permit holder shall be notified in writing or in person. The
work shall be corrected and re-inspected. If extra inspection or additional
trips for inspections are necessary due to inaccurate information or faulty
construction, $39.60 shall be made and collected for each extra inspection or
re-inspection.
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 15.06 MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES (HEATING AND AIR).
 
$1 to $200 valuation     $13.20
$201 to $1,000 valuation $21.12
$1,001 valuation and up  $20.90, plus 1% of balance over $1,000
 
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 15.07 PLUMBING PERMIT FEES.
 
$1 to $500 valuation     $13.20
$501 to $4,000 valuation $13.20, plus 1 1/2% over $500
$4,001 valuation and up  $82.50, plus 1% over $4,000
 
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 15.08 ELECTRIC PERMIT FEES.
 
Commercial and Remodel:
$1 to $1,000 valuation           $19.80
$1,001 to and including $300,000 $19.80, plus 1% of balance over $1,000
valuation
$300,001 and greater valuation   $3,966.60, plus 1/2% of balance over
                                 $300,000
 
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 15.09 HOUSING CODE FEES.
   Fees for registration of residential rental units shall be $20 every two
years with each unit requiring separate registration regardless of being
located in a structure with other units.
(Ord. 2017-10, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 16.00 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code (ICC) are hereby
amended, modified, revised, changed, added or deleted: the following referenced
appendices may be utilized but are not specifically adopted:
   (A)   Appendix B – Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings (as modified
herein);
   (B)   Appendix C – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution (as modified
herein);
   (C)   Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads (as modified herein);
   (D)   Appendix E – Hazard Categories;
   (E)   Appendix F – Hazard Ranking; and
   (F)   Appendix G – Cryogenic Fluids – Weight and Volume Equivalents.
§ 17.00 GENERAL AMENDMENTS.
   The following general amendments are hereby made to each of the specific
technical codes adopted herein (divisions (A) through (K) below):
   (A)   Insert “The City of Eldridge, Iowa” to the appropriate sections of the
adopted codes as applicable;
   (B)   Permit fees: amend all specific technical codes to refer to the city’s
permit fee schedule;
   (C)   All references to building line, setbacks, height and zoning shall be
subject to the zoning ordinance of the city, as applicable;
   (D)   Cooperation with other officials: the Building Official may request,
and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of his or her duties,
the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this or other
jurisdictions, including, but not limited to: the City Attorney, the City
Engineer, the City Police Department, the County Sheriff’s Department, the City
Fire Department, the State Fire Marshal’s office, the County Board of Health,
the State Department of Transportation and other professionals or organizations
as may be warranted;
   (E)   Board of Appeals/Code Review Board: appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Building Official, shall be made directly and
promptly to the City Code Review Board. The Code Review Board shall hear
appeals as may be necessitated by the timely filing of all such appeals. The
Code Review Board shall adopt rules of procedure for consideration of the
validity of such appeals. The Code Review Board shall be provided by the
appellant, all such substantiating and supporting documentation necessary to
show the validity and acceptability of such request for appeal;
   (F)   Limitations on authority: an application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the true intent of the specific technical codes and ordinance, or
the rules legally adopted thereunder, have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the specific technical codes and ordinance do not fully apply or
an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. Neither a Board of
Appeals nor a Code Review Board shall have authority to waive requirements of
the specific technical codes and ordinances;
   (G)   Qualifications of Code Review Board members: the Code Review Board
members shall be qualified to pass on all matters pertaining to such requests
for an appeal of orders, decisions or determinations, relative to the
application and interpretation of the specific technical codes and ordinances
made by the Building Official;
   (H)   Liability:
      (1)   The Building Official, his or her authorized representative(s),
Appeals Board member(s), officers or employees charged with the review of
plans, enforcement or interpretation of the specific technical codes and
ordinances, while acting in good faith and without malice for this
jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable and said
employees are hereby relieved from any and all personal liabilities for any and
all damages occurring and or accruing to any and all persons or properties, as
a result of any act, interpretation, approval, approval in error, oversight or
omission, neither by reason of any act, interpretation, approval, approval in
error, oversight or omission, in the discharge of their duties.
      (2)   Any suit instituted against the City Building Official, his or her
authorized representative(s), appeals board member(s), officers or employees,
because of any act, interpretation, approval, approval in error, oversight or
omission in the review, enforcement or approval of any of the provisions of the
specific technical codes and ordinances, shall be defended and financed by
legal counsel(s) (both appointed and independently secured) by this
jurisdiction, through the final termination of such proceedings, including any
and all provisions of surety, in any and all claims being sought or ordered to
be secured, in any and all such proceedings.
      (3)   The Building Official, his or her authorized representative(s),
Appeals Board member(s), officers or employees of this jurisdiction, acting in
good faith and without malice, shall be free from any and all liabilities for,
and free from any and all costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted due to any pursuance of damages, restitution or claims of hardship
or injury to persons or properties or for financial hardships incurred due to
the enforcement or oversight, interpretation or application of any of the
provisions of the specific technical codes and ordinances of this jurisdiction.
      (4)   The adoption by this jurisdiction of these specific technical codes
and ordinances shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of those persons: (constructing, installing, repairing, owning,
operating or controlling, any and all buildings, structures or building service
equipment’s, appendages and installations in connection therewith), of any and
all damages to persons or properties caused by any defects, inferior
installations or construction applications, equipment or system installations,
found to be the cause of (or) a contributing factor to, any and all such damage
claims, nor shall this jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the issuance or non-issuance of any permits, performance or omissions
of inspections or the interpretations or approvals issued under such specific
technical codes and ordinances.
   (I)   Inspection requests: requests for inspection shall be made to the
building inspection division 24 hours in advance. It shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder of the specific trade involved (or that of
the general contractor) to confirm that such work to be inspected is or will be
completed by the time an inspection is performed. It shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder or general contractor to provide access to
all portions of the work. It is recommended that a representative of the trade
involved be present for the scheduled inspection;
   (J)   Inspections: construction or work for which a permit is required shall
be subject to inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work
shall remain accessible for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a
result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation
of any of the provisions of the specific technical codes and ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Approvals presuming to give authority to violate provisions of
the specific technical codes and ordinances adopted by this jurisdiction shall
not be valid. It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant to cause
the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
Building Official nor this jurisdiction shall be liable for any expense
incurred necessitating by the removal, damage or replacement of any material(s)
as may be required to perform such inspections. City approved plans and permit
card shall be on site for all inspections for review and approval signatures;
and
   (K)   Required inspections and approvals: the following required inspections
shall be scheduled 24 hours in advance:
      (1)   Special inspections: structural test and inspections shall be
provided when required by contract documents and as specified by code;
      (2)   Footing/foundation wall/grout inspections: to be made after all
required horizontal and vertical reinforcements are properly bent, tied and
supported, anchor bolts and tie-down devices on site and necessary forms are
properly braced prior to pour;
      (3)   Sewer, water, underground DWV and supply piping and underground
electrical conduits: to be made upon proper installation of material and while
under test (as may be required) and prior to proper backfill and compaction
operations;
      (4)   Electrical service “power on temporary” inspection: to be made
after the electrical service meter base and the service equipment disconnect is
installed and the grounding electrode conductor is properly connected;
      (5)   Reinforced concrete slab inspection: to be made after all required
reinforcement in place but prior to pour;
      (6)   Roof nail/sheer nail inspections: to be made after all roof
framing, truss bracing, blocking, uplift connectors and sheathings are nailed
off, but prior to dry in or siding applications;
      (7)   Plumbing top-out: inspect upon completed rough in and during test
of the water supply, DWV and gas piping installations as may be required
(preferably with frame);
      (8)   Mechanical top-out inspection: inspect after vents, chimneys,
ducts, draft stops and equipment installations are complete (preferably with
frame);
      (9)   Electrical rough: inspect after rough wiring is complete, grounds
mechanically fastened and metal boxes grounded (preferably with frame);
      (10)   Frame and masonry inspection: inspect after the roof, masonry, all
framing, fire-stopping, draft-stopping and bracing are in place and after the
completed electrical rough, plumbing and mechanical top out inspections are
approved;
      (11)   Gypsum board (sheet-rock) inspection: inspect fire rated
assemblies. Base layer/face layer. Properly fastened, prior to tape;
      (12)   Final inspection: inspect after completion of building, plumbing,
mechanical and electrical trades;
      (13)   Re-inspection: upon completion of work or necessary corrections;
and
      (14)   Other inspections: as may be deemed necessary.
§ 18.00 SPECIFIC STRUCTURES.
§ 18.01 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on which
there is situated a swimming pool, not a portion of a natural watercourse,
which has a water depth of 18 inches or more in any portion thereof, shall
maintain on the lot or premises upon which such swimming pool is situated, a
fence, wall or other adequate structure completely surrounding the pool to make
it inaccessible to small children. The fence, wall or other structure must not
be less than four feet in height, with no openings large enough to admit a
child except through doors or gates.
   (B)   All doors or gates in fences surrounding swimming pools shall be of
such a size as to completely fill any opening in the fence, wall or other
structure and shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
capable of keeping such gate or door securely closed. The closing or latching
devices shall be located not less than four feet above grade or be otherwise
inaccessible from the outside to small children. In lieu of self-closing and
self-latching devices, the doors and gates may be equipped with locks which
shall be kept locked at all times when the pool is not in actual use.
   (C)   The Building Inspector may allow slight modifications for good cause
shown in individual cases with respect to the height of the fence, wall or
other enclosing structure or the nature or position of the latch or other
locking device. The Building Inspector may permit other protective devices or
structures to be used, so long as the degree of protection afforded by the
substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by
the fence, wall or other enclosing structure and the gate, door, latch or other
locking devices required by this division. Upon the application of a property
owner, the Council may grant extensions of time for compliance for good cause
shown in individual cases; such extensions of time shall not exceed 30 days at
a time. The property owner shall agree to indemnify the city against liability
for claims that arise during the time extension.
§ 18.02 FENCES.
   (A)   No fence or wall shall be constructed without first obtaining a
separate building permit for each fence or wall from the building official.
   (B)   A permit is not required for fencing of legal agricultural uses and
which conforms to other city codes.
   (C)   Installation shall be in conformance with
Title D, Chapter 2.
§ 18.03 HOUSE MOVERS.
§ 18.04 HOUSE MOVERS DEFINED.
   Any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon or
across any public right-of-way shall be deemed a house mover.
§ 18.05 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prior to moving a structure upon or across any right-of-way, the house
mover shall make application and receive a license therefor. The application
shall state the location of the building, the future site for the building and
the route to be used to transport. The application shall also contain a copy of
the building permit for the future site, if located in the city. The route
proposed must be approved by the Chief of Police and Director of Public Works
prior to the license being issued.
   (B)   The house mover shall notify all utilities located along the route,
advising them if any temporary relocation will be necessary while the building
is being moved.
§ 18.06 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant for a license required by this division shall post with
the Clerk a penal bond in the sum of $20,000, with good and sufficient sureties
approved by the City Attorney. The bond shall guarantee the applicant’s payment
for any damage done to the city or to public property in the course of moving
the building or similar structure.
   (B)   The applicant for a license required by this division shall be insured
in the sum of $500,000 against bodily injury and $500,000 property damage for
his or her agent’s or his or her employees’ acts in the course of the moving
operations that result in personal injury, and for $250,000 property damage
liability and further naming the city and its officers and employees as
additional insureds on said insurance policy.
   (C)   The applicant shall carry workers’ compensation insurance as required
by law.
§ 18.07 FLAGGER, WARNING DEVICES.
   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, a licensee under this division
shall maintain flaggers at the closest intersections or other possible channels
of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all
times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or public property the licensee shall maintain adequate warning signs
or flares at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and
ahead of the building or structure.
§ 18.08 UTILITIES.
   The house mover shall be responsible for the appropriate plugging or capping
of all utilities to the site from which the building or structure is to be
removed. Utilities shall include sewer laterals. All related costs must be paid
by the mover.
CHAPTER 9: APPLICATION OF SPECIFICATIONS
Section
   
1.00   Where applicable
   
2.00   Revisions/additions
§ 1.00 WHERE APPLICABLE.
   The standard specifications of the city shall apply to all work which
concerns the city, such as work within streets, alleys and easements, new
subdivisions, all public improvements under contract or done by the city and
utility construction within streets, alleys or easements. Such specifications
shall apply equally to city contractors and developers performing such work.
§ 2.00 REVISIONS/ADDITIONS.
   The city’s standard specifications may be revised by the City Council by
resolution. Any such revision shall take effect upon publication.
CHAPTER 10: STANDARD CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
Section
   
1.00   Trench excavation and backfill
   
1.01   General
   
1.02   Excavation classification
   
1.03   Excavation for structures and appurtenances
   
1.04   Trench excavation
   
1.05   Rock excavation
   
1.06   Rubble excavation
   
1.07   Tunneling pipe
   
1.08   Sheeting, shoring and bracing
   
1.09   Dewatering
   
1.10   Existing utilities
   
1.11   Fences
   
1.12   Tree removal
   
1.13   Pavement removal
   
1.14   Backfill for structures
   
1.15   Trench backfill
   
1.16   Access to streets and highways
   
1.17   Pavement replacement
   
1.18   Clean-up
   
1.19   Measurement and pavement
   
2.00   Sanitary sewers, storm sewers and appurtenances
   
2.01   General
   
2.02   Material tests
   
2.03   Pipe materials and joints
   
2.04   Manholes
   
2.05   Catch basins
   
2.06   Sump pump cleanouts
   
2.07   Commencing of work
   
2.08   Pipe installation
   
2.09   Wye-branches
   
2.10   Service connections
   
2.11   Dead end of sewers
   
2.12   Final cleaning and testing
   
2.13   Abandoned structures
   
2.14   Utility obstacles and special conditions
   
2.15   Payment
   
3.00   Water mains, force mains and appurtenances
   
3.01   Installation
   
3.02   Pressure pipe and fitting materials
   
3.03   Gate valves and valve boxes
   
3.04   Fire hydrants
   
3.05   Pipe installation
   
3.06   Setting valves, valve boxes, hydrants and fittings
   
3.07   Sterilization
   
3.08   Testing
   
3.09   Service connections
   
3.10   Tapping sleeves
   
3.11   Separation from existing utilities
   
3.12   Pavement
   
4.00   Earthwork
   
4.01   Description of excavation or grading
   
4.02   Fills
   
4.03   Preparation of subgrade
   
4.04   Waste material
   
4.05   Borrow material
   
4.06   Subgrade repairs
   
4.07   Existing surfaces
   
4.08   Subgrade in cut
   
4.09   Final grading
   
4.10   Payment
   
5.00   Pavement
   
5.01   Drainable granular subbase
   
5.02   Porous backfill
   
5.03   Pipe for longitudinal and transverse subdrains
   
5.04   Portland cement
   
5.05   Fly ash
   
5.06   Air entraining admixtures
   
5.07   Water
   
5.08   Reinforcing steel for joints
   
5.09   Reinforcing mesh for slabs
   
5.10   Fine aggregate
   
5.11   Coarse aggregate
   
5.12   Storage
   
5.13   Portland cement concrete mix design
   
5.14   Tests for concrete
   
5.15   Concrete mixing
   
5.16   Pavement classifications
   
5.17   Forms
   
5.18   Setting and removing forms
   
5.19   Subgrade treatment
   
5.20   Placing drainable granular subbase
   
5.21   Construction of longitudinal and transverse subdrains
   
5.22   Placing reinforcing mesh
   
5.23   Placing of concrete
   
5.24   Expansion joints
   
5.25   Construction joints
   
5.26   Contraction joints
   
5.27   Longitudinal joints
   
5.28   Joint sealing compound
   
5.29   Hot weather protection
   
5.30   Cold weather protection
   
5.31   Final surface finish
   
5.32   Curing methods
   
5.33   Sawing, cleaning and filling joints
   
5.34   Backfilling
   
5.35   Final cleaning
   
5.36   Deficient thickness
   
5.37   Smoothness
   
5.38   Payment
   
6.00   Asphaltic concrete
   
6.01   Pavement classifications
   
6.02   Materials
   
6.03   Submittals
   
6.04   Tests for asphalt
   
6.05   Pavement
   
7.00   Concrete curb and gutter construction
   
7.01   General items
   
7.02   Expansion joints
   
7.03   Contraction joints
   
7.04   Construction joints
   
7.05   Payment
   
8.00   Public sidewalks
   
8.01   Portland cement concrete
   
8.02   Forms
   
8.03   Expansion joints
   
8.04   Contraction or dummy joints
   
8.05   Final finish
   
8.06   Curing methods
   
8.07   Backfilling
   
9.00   Surface restoration
   
9.01   Erosion control along back of curb
   
9.02   Measurement and payment
§ 1.00 TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL.
§ 1.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   Excavation and backfill shall include all excavation, backfilling and
compacting; disposal of surplus material; furnishing additional backfill
material; restoration of all disturbed surface; and all other work incidental
to the construction of trenches, including any additional excavation which may
be required for manholes or other structures forming a part of the pipe line.
   (B)   The contractor shall excavate all materials encountered to the depth
indicated or specified. All excavated material suitable for backfill shall be
deposited in an orderly manner, a sufficient distance (two foot minimum) back
from the edge of the excavation to avoid roll-backs, slides or cave-ins.
Material not suitable for backfill shall be removed to a disposal area provided
by the contractor.
   (C)   All work shall be scheduled to keep streets, sidewalks and utilities
in usable condition and to avoid owner inconvenience insofar as practicable
during construction. All obstructions (i.e., underground and above ground
utilities, bollards, signs, mailboxes and the like) removed to accommodate
construction equipment or to facilitate excavations shall be restored at no
additional cost to the owner. Care shall be exercised in operating equipment
beneath or adjacent to trees, plantings and shrubbery to prevent damage.
   (D)   Unless specifically set forth as a bid item, excavation, bedding and
backfilling for trenches and appurtenances shall be incidental to the
construction.
   (E)   Reference to maximum density shall mean a soil density not less than
the stated percent of optimum density for soil as determined by the latest
revision of ASTM Specifications D-698, “Standard Proctor Density”.
§ 1.02 EXCAVATION CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Earth excavation shall include clay, silt, sand, gravel, hardpan,
disintegrated shale and rock debris, junk, brick, loose stones and boulders and
all materials not classified as rock or rubble as herein specified.
   (B)   Rock excavation shall include solid deposits so firmly cemented
together that their removal requires continuous use of pneumatic tools or
blasting. The use of blasting methods shall be used only with written
permission of the city.
   (C)   Rubble excavation shall include buried concrete foundations, beams,
walls and other materials that require continuous use of pneumatic tools or
blasting. The use of blasting methods shall be used only with written
permission of the city.
   (D)   Payment for trench excavation in rubble or rock, as defined in this
specification, shall be made at the unit price per cubic yard for rock
excavation, if set forth as a bid item.
§ 1.03 EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES AND APPURTENANCES.
   (A)   Excavation for manholes and other appurtenances shall be as required
to firm undisturbed soil. If the excavation is carried below the bottom of the
foundation as shown on the plans, the contractor shall replace the over-
excavation with concrete or stabilizing material as directed by the engineer.
   (B)   When unstable material is encountered which will not provide suitable
foundation, fill with concrete or stabilizing material specified hereinafter,
as directed.
§ 1.04 TRENCH EXCAVATION.
   (A)   The width of the trench shall be six inches minimum on each side of
the pipe bell for a distance at least two feet above the top of the pipe. The
sides of the trench shall be kept as nearly vertical as practicable within the
limits of excavating codes.
   (B)   Trench bottom shall be carefully excavated to the specified, and level
trench bottom to provide uniform bearing and support for full length of pipe;
provide bell holes at each pipe joint; and allow access completely around
circumference of pipe for proper joining operations. Trench bottom shall
conform to best construction practice as recommended by pipe manufacturer.
   (C)   Trench bottoms carried below required grade shall be backfilled to
proper elevations with IDOT gradation three gravel or crushed stone as
specified for pipe bedding, compacted to 95% standard proctor density.
   (D)   When unstable material is encountered which may not provide a suitable
foundation for the pipe, the engineer shall be notified immediately so that he
or she may investigate the questionable material to determine its suitability
for pipe foundation. If the material is considered unsuitable for foundations,
the engineer will specify and authorize remedial measures in writing.
   (E)   If the removal of unsuitable material is authorized, it shall be
replaced with trench stabilizing material. A minimum of four inches of pipe
bedding cushion shall be provided on top of the stabilizing material to prevent
point loading.
   (F)   Over-excavation of unsuitable material and replacement with suitable
bedding material within payment lines shall be measured by the engineer and
paid for by the cubic yard.
   (G)   Any excavation under or around utilities, where overhead clearance
prevents the use of a machine, or under trees and shrubs where shown on the
plans, shall be excavated by hand.
§ 1.05 ROCK EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Rock excavation, where necessary, shall be kept well in advance of the
pipe laying. When rock is encountered, it shall be stripped of earth and the
engineer notified, in order that the same may be cross-sectioned, measurements
made and recorded. Provide minimum clearance of four inches below and on each
side of pipe.
   (B)   Written approval must be obtained from the city before explosives may
be used. If explosives are permitted, detailed plans must be submitted
outlining all proposed blasting operations, locations, methods and use of mats
and other safety measures. The contractor shall provide special hazard
insurance covering liability for all blasting operations. The contractor shall
use only experienced demolition personnel.
   (C)   The contractor shall remove and dispose of excavated rock not suitable
for backfill.
   (D)   Any over excavation below required elevations shall be replaced with
specified pipe bedding.
§ 1.06 RUBBLE EXCAVATION.
   The use of explosives and removal shall be the same as that herein specified
for rock excavation.
§ 1.07 TUNNELING PIPE.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of work, the engineer shall approve the method
to be used, such as auguring or drilling, jacking or hand mining as shown on
the plans.
   (B)   If the pipe is to be augured, the casing shall be thoroughly cleaned
out upon completion of the operation and before the pipe is installed as shown
on the plans.
   (C)   If the pipe is to be jacked, an engineer approved plug shall be used
in the end of the leading pipe.
   (D)   The contractor shall be responsible to maintain the correct vertical
and horizontal alignment. Chocks/spacers will be required and shall be spaced
no less frequently than six foot on center, with an additional spacer within
one foot of each end of the casing pipe.
   (E)   If any voids wider than one inch occur between the bore hole and the
outside of the casing pipe, they shall be filled with sand or flowable mortar.
   (F)   Where tunneling operations are used below or adjacent to building and
structures or under paved surfaces or railroads, the contractor is fully
responsible to use such methods and care to prevent settlement of said
structures or surfaces, and to maintain traffic at all times on such streets or
railroads.
§ 1.08 SHEETING, SHORING AND BRACING.
   (A)   Construct sheeting, shoring and bracing to hold walls of excavation
where shown on plans or at other locations, as required by any governing state
or federal laws, to provide safety for working, to protect existing utilities
or structures or to permit construction in the dry.
   (B)   If wood sheeting is driven below the level of the pipe, it shall be
cut off and left in place to a level of five feet below the finished grade.
Steel sheeting shall be pulled except where shown on the plans. When a movable
trench shield is used below the spring line of the pipe, it shall be lifted
prior to any movement to avoid pipe displacement.
   (C)   Payment for sheeting, shoring and bracing shall be incidental to the
utility installation, unless it is set forth as a separate bid item.
§ 1.09 DEWATERING.
   (A)   The contractor shall keep the trenches free from water during the
progress of the work, and shall, at his or her own expense, provide and operate
all machinery and other appliance necessary to keep down the flow of water. No
pipe shall be laid in and no concrete shall be poured on excessively wet soil.
The city and/or engineer shall determine when dewatering shall be required.
Payment for dewatering shall be incidental to the utility installation unless
set forth as a separate bid item. The engineer shall approve the proposed
method of dewatering.
   (B)   Water shall not be pumped onto adjacent property without approval of
the adjacent property owner. The use of sanitary sewers for disposal of trench
water shall not be permitted.
§ 1.10 EXISTING UTILITIES.
   (A)   The contractor is fully responsible for repairing utilities damaged by
him or her during construction. If there is any damage to sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, private or public drain tiles or water mains, the contractor
shall provide all materials, labor and equipment and perform all work to repair
same at no expense to the owner. Repairs shall be made using like materials as
directed by the engineer. Damage to any other utility shall be repaired by the
utility and billed to the contractor at no expense to the owner.
   (B)   The contractor shall perform the necessary relocation of all
conflicting sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private or public drain tiles, water
mains and services as shown on the plans. When mains or services are
encountered and are not shown on the plans, the engineer shall be notified
immediately so that he or she may direct the contractor to perform the
necessary relocation. Drain tiles not shown on plans shall be repaired by the
contractor immediately at no additional expense to the owner.
   (C)   When other conflicting underground utilities and services are
encountered, the contractor shall make arrangements with said utility to
perform the necessary relocation at no expense to the owner.
§ 1.11 FENCES.
   (A)   All existing fences disturbed during construction shall be repaired by
the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer with the cost incidental to
the cost of the pipe, unless it is included on the form of proposal.
   (B)   Engineer approved temporary fences shall be provided as required when
existing fences are disturbed during construction.
§ 1.12 TREE REMOVAL.
   (A)   The contractor shall obtain authorization from the engineer before he
or she removes any tree. Only those trees in direct conflict with trench
alignment shall be removed with the contractor tunneling or hand excavating
under roots of trees near the trench. Tree removal shall include grubbing and
removing the stump and roots, backfilling and disposal of the debris.
   (B)   Compensation will not be allowed for approved clearing or removal of
trees to provide access to work. The cost of tree removal of trees six inches
and smaller in diameter shall be incidental to the project but trees removed
larger than six inches in diameter shall be paid for as a separate pay item for
each tree or lump sum as noted on the form of proposal.
§ 1.13 PAVEMENT REMOVAL.
   (A)   Pavement, sidewalks and/or curb and gutter shall be removed to a
minimum of one foot from the trench and undercutting shall not be permitted.
Concrete pavement shall be vertically cut with a concrete saw and removed on
straight lines approximately parallel or perpendicular to the center line of
the pavement. Sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest joint to ensure a
minimum of one foot from the edge of the trench. Asphaltic pavement shall be
vertically cut with a concrete saw and removed on straight lines approximately
parallel or perpendicular to the center line of pavements. Seal coat and gravel
surfaces shall be removed with excavating machine.
   (B)   The contractor shall dispose of the waste material in disposal areas
designated by the engineer.
§ 1.14 BACKFILL FOR STRUCTURES.
   After the concrete or masonry structure has cured and has been inspected and
approved by the engineer, the contractor shall backfill with material removed
for the excavation except where sand backfill is specified. No debris, frozen
earth, large clods, stones or other unsuitable material shall be allowed as
backfill material. The contractor shall simultaneously backfill on all sides of
the structure and compact the material in nine inch lifts to a density not less
than that specified for the adjacent trench (95% minimum). Backfill shall be
terminated at finish grade as shown on the plans and prepared for surface
restoration as specified for adjacent trenches. The contractor shall dispose of
all excess material as directed by the engineer in an approved disposal area.
§ 1.15 TRENCH BACKFILL.
   (A)   All sewer trenches shall be backfilled immediately after the engineer
has inspected and approved the work of laying pipe but in no case shall more
than 400 feet of sewer trench be open ahead of the backfilling.
   (B)   (1)   Backfill at the sides of the pipe and to a point 12 inches over
the top of the pipe shall be carefully placed and compacted in not more than
six inch layers. Backfill shall be compacted to 95% standard proctor density.
Backfilling at the sides of the pipe shall be carried on simultaneously on both
sides in such a manner as to prevent displacement of the pipe. Backfill
material around the pipe shall not contain large clods or other foreign matter.
No frozen material, debris or organic matter shall be placed within two inches
of the top of pipe. Compaction should be delayed until 12 inches of backfill is
placed above the pipe if a hoe-mounted plate compactor is to be used.
      (2)   Backfill above the pipe envelope shall be performed in accordance
with the following.
         (a)   Backfill material. All backfill material shall be free from
cinders, ashes or refuse, vegetable organic material, boulders, rocks or stones
in excess of two-inch diameter, or other material that in the opinion of the
engineer is unsuitable.
         (b)   Compaction. In any excavation directly under and within a 1:
1 slope of existing or proposed streets, alleys, drives or sidewalk surfaces,
sand or lime screenings material shall be compacted in nine inch lifts to 95%
of standard proctor density until two and one-half feet below the bottom of
pavement, at which point select native material shall be compacted in nine inch
lifts to 95% of standard proctor density. In lieu of sand or lime screening
backfill, select native material may be compacted in nine inch lifts to 95% of
standard proctor density. Backfill materials in excavations in all other areas
within the street right-of-way and easement areas shall be compacted in nine
inch lifts to 95% of standard proctor density.
         (c)   Backfilling in freezing weather. Backfilling shall not be done
in freezing weather except by permission of the engineer. Backfill shall not
contain frozen material. No fill shall be made when the material already in the
trench is frozen. Backfilling will not be allowed when disturbed ground
temperature is below 35°F, unless approved by engineer.
§ 1.16 ACCESS TO STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The contractor shall maintain suitable means of access for property
owners abutting the streets and highways involved in construction except as
specifically permitted otherwise by the owner. SUITABLE ACCESS shall mean a
roadway of sufficient width free from ruts, potholes and mud holes and capable
of carrying a passenger car without damage to the car. When access must be
denied due to construction, the contractor shall provide suitable access within
24 hours after responsible construction is completed.
   (B)   Whenever construction is stopped due to inclement weather, weekends,
holidays or other reasons, suitable access shall be provided for all property
owners.
§ 1.17 PAVEMENT REPLACEMENT.
   The following replacement requirements shall be applicable to all work done
in the city unless otherwise approved by the city.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Permit required.
         (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall dig, or cause to be dug,
any holes or excavations in the streets, highways, alleys or public places
within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a permit
from the city.
         (b)   No permit shall be required for the following:
            1.   City employees in the regular performance of their duties;
            2.   Persons, firms or corporations under contract with the city
and the special prosecution of their contracts; and
            3.   After office hours, on Sundays and holidays, where the delay
incident to obtaining a permit would result in a loss or damage to the property
and danger to the public may result. On the next regular day of business, such
excavation must be reported to the City Administrator and a permit secured.
      (2)   Bond. Only those persons, firms or corporations that have deposited
two cashiers or certified checks in an amount approved by the city shall be
granted a permit for excavation on public property within the city. One check,
in an amount determined by the city, shall be retained by the city for a period
of two years after completion and acceptance of work.
      (3)   Streets repaired. Applicant shall inform the city of his or her
schedule to ensure timely inspections, cost of said inspections to be borne by
the applicant. When the purpose for which a permit is issued is completed and
accomplished, the holder thereof shall, within 24 hours after completion,
notify the City Administrator or Public Works Director of such completion.
      (4)   Scope of permit.
         (a)   It shall be the duty of the applicant to perform only the work
for which the permit was issued.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of the applicant to replace street pavement
within ten days after completion of the excavation.
         (c)   No permit will be issued to any applicant who is not competent
or does not employ people who are competent in the practices of excavation,
street or pavement surface removal and replacement.
         (d)   The applicant will be required to maintain the excavation and
pavement repairs by reason of the permit for a period of two years.
            1.   City of Eldridge “Standard Specifications” shall apply except
as modified by contract documents.
            2.   Barricades and traffic control.
               a.   A sufficient number of barricades shall be placed around
the excavation to ensure protection of people working in the excavation and
also to ensure protection to the general public and the motorists.
               b.   Barricades shall be equipped with flashing amber lights
during the hours of darkness to ensure visibility by the general public and the
motorist.
               c.   On all local streets, a minimum of one ten-foot traffic
lane must be provided around the excavation, plainly marked for visibility by
the motorist. On all arterial, collector and industrial sheets, a minimum of
two ten-foot traffic lanes (two-way traffic) must be provided around the
excavation, plainly marked for visibility by the motorist. If this is not
possible, one ten-foot traffic lane will be allowed providing that two flaggers
are employed, one at each end of the section, to direct traffic. A minimum of
two ten-foot lanes (two-way traffic) must again be provided during the hours of
darkness. No variations to this requirement will be permitted without special
written permission from the city.
   (B)   Backfilling of excavation.
      (1)   Backfill material. All backfill material shall be free from
cinders, ashes or refuse, vegetable or organic material, boulders, rocks or
stones in excess of two inch diameter or other material that in the opinion of
the engineer is unsuitable.
      (2)   Backfill under streets. Backfill along the sides of the pipe and to
a point 12 inches over the top of the pipe shall be carefully placed and
compacted in not more than six inch layers. After the pipe has been completely
blinded, sand or IDOT gradation 11 or 30 crushed stone shall be placed in
accordance with §
1.15 of this chapter. If, in the opinion of the engineer, the excavated trench
material is satisfactory, the applicant may elect to reuse in lieu of granular
material.
      (3)   Excavations. In any excavation directly under and within three and
one-half feet of existing or proposed streets, alleys, drives or sidewalks
surfaces, the backfill material shall be compacted in nine-inch lifts to 95% of
standard proctor density as determined by ASTM D-698. When select granular
material is used, the trench shall be backfilled to within two and one-half
feet of finished grade with granular material, the remaining backfill shall be
with the natural material excavated from the trench and shall be compacted at
optimum moisture and density in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection. Backfill material in excavations in all other areas within the
street right-of-way shall be compacted in nine inch lifts to 95% of standard
proctor density.
      (4)   Backfilling in freezing weather. Backfilling shall not be done in
freezing weather except by permission of the engineer. Backfill shall not
contain frozen material. No fill shall be made when the material already in the
trench is frozen.
   (C)   Pavement repair.
      (1)   Sidewalks: place new four-inch thickness of concrete; finish to
match existing work; reconstruct joints to match existing work;
      (2)   Curb and gutter: replace with section matching existing cross
section; finish to match existing work;
      (3)   Concrete pavement and drives:
         (a)   The pavement around the excavation shall be cut with a concrete
saw and straight lines to form a rectangle around the hole. The saw cut shall
be made no closer than 12 inches from the furthest extremity of the hole and
should extend full depth.
         (b)   The excavation shall be graded such that replacement concrete is
exactly the same thickness as the existing pavement with a minimum thickness of
six inches.
         (c)   The concrete mix shall be submitted for approval and all
concrete work shall be in accordance with the standard specifications adopted
by the city.
         (d)   Joints shall match existing pavement and drives. Finish to match
existing work.
         (e)   Concrete patch shall remain closed to vehicular traffic for a
minimum of 24 hours.
      (4)   Asphalt pavement and drives.
         (a)   The pavement around the excavation shall be cut with a concrete
saw and straight lines to form a rectangle around the hole. The saw cut shall
be made no closer than 12 inches from the furthest extremity of the hole and
should extend full depth.
         (b)   The excavation shall be graded to provide sufficient depth for a
minimum of seven inches non-reinforced concrete and two and one-half inches
(compacted depth) of hot mix asphaltic concrete.
         (c)   The two and one-half-inch asphaltic concrete shall be a 100,000
ESAL surface mix with PG 58-28 Binder and shall meet all IDOT Standard
Specifications § 2303, “Requirements for Material and Placement”.
      (5)   Sealcoat streets and drives:
         (a)   Provide minimum 12 inch thickness gravel or crushed stone; and
         (b)   Place a minimum two inch compacted thickness of asphaltic
concrete.
      (6)   Gravel streets and drives: provide minimum 12 inch thickness Class
A or county-equivalent crushed stone; and
      (7)   Residential and commercial driveway curb cuts: see Standard Drawing
No. SD-30.
   (D)   Clean-up.
      (1)   All excess dirt and waste material shall be removed from the
construction areas.
      (2)   All areas shall be left in a condition satisfactory to the
engineer.
§ 1.18 CLEAN-UP.
   The contractor shall remove all rubbish, debris and surplus materials and
leave the site in neat condition acceptable to the owner and the engineer on
each portion of construction as it is completed. Clean-up operations in the
public right-of-way shall be kept within 400 feet of construction operations.
The contractor shall re-open backfilled areas to traffic as soon as
practicable.
§ 1.19 MEASUREMENT AND PAVEMENT.
   (A)   No separate payment will be made for the work covered in this part of
the specifications except as set forth below. All other related items are
incidental construction. Contract unit prices shall include all costs for each
item of work.
   (B)   Trench-stabilizing material shall be paid per ton. The unit price
shall include labor, materials, equipment, additional trench excavation, de-
watering, pipe bedding material and incidentals work for providing stabilizing
material in place of unsuitable foundation materials where directed and
authorized by the engineer.
   (C)   Rock excavation shall be paid per cubic yard. The unit price shall
include extra cost of labor, materials, equipment, pipe bedding cushion,
removal and disposal, and incidentals necessary to complete work required for
rock excavation over the cost of earth excavation when authorized by the
engineer. Measurements will include authorized excavation to a depth specified
and will be computed by the average end area method by maximum width limits of
the standard trench section to be determined prior to excavation. At manholes
and other structures, the measurement will be made to one foot outside the wall
line of each structure.
   (D)   Rubble excavation shall be paid per cubic yard. Unit price includes
extra cost of labor, materials, equipment, pipe bedding cushion, removal and
disposal and incidentals necessary to complete work required for rubble
excavation over cost of earth excavation when authorized by the engineer.
Measurement will include authorized excavation to a depth specified and will be
computed by average end area method within maximum width limits of the standard
trench section to be determined prior to excavation. At manholes and other
structures, the measurements will be made to one foot outside the wall line of
the structure.
   (E)   Augering or jacking casing with carrier pipe shall be paid per lineal
foot. The unit price shall include jacking pit, excavation, casing pipe,
jacking, sewer or pressure pipe, bedding and casing backfill, disposal of spoil
material, sheeting, backfill, fill concrete, enclosure, flaggers, warning
lights, barricades and miscellaneous associated work. The length and details of
the crossing shall be shown on the plans or as specified. Measurement will be
made along the length of the casing.
   (F)   Augering or jacking pipe without casing shall be paid per lineal foot.
The unit price shall include jacking pit, excavation, jacking, sewer or
pressure pipe, disposal of spoil material, sheeting, backfill, enclosures,
flaggers, warning barricades and miscellaneous associated work. The length and
details of the crossing shall be as shown on the plans or as specified. The
measurement will be made along the length of the pipe.
   (G)   Sheeting left in place shall be paid per square foot. Unit price shall
include the material cost only of sheeting and shoring left in place as shown
on the plans or at the engineer’s direction. The cost of the transporting and
installing is incidental to the laying of the pipe and shall not be included.
   (H)   No payment will be made for the earth excavation, bedding, shaping of
the trench bottom and backfill treatment around the pipe or for the furnishing
and placement of ordinary backfill from the top of the pipe to the trench
surface under this part of the specifications.
   (I)   Sand backfill above the top of the pipe, if required and approved by
the engineer, shall be paid per ton. Unit price shall include additional costs
over ordinary backfill of furnishing IDOT Gradation 1, 32 or FA-6 sand
materials, disposal of excavated material, equipment, labor and incidentals for
providing sand backfill compacted to the specified density where shown on the
plans or as directed by the engineer. Where special materials or treatment of
the 12 inches of backfill under the pavement is required, the cost shall be
considered as incidental to the sand backfill. There will be no payment made
for the furnishing and placement of compacted backfill from the top of the pipe
to the trench surface under this part of the specifications.
   (J)   Sidewalks shall be paid per square foot. The unit price shall include
all costs of replacing the sidewalk compacting subgrade and a measurement shall
be made of the sidewalk replaced.
   (K)   Curb and gutter shall be paid per lineal foot. The unit price shall
include all costs for the replacing of the curb and gutter and measurement
shall be made along the back of the curb and gutter replaced.
   (L)   Pavements shall be paid per square yard. The unit price shall include
all costs for replacement of the various types of pavement listed in the form
of proposal and a measurement shall be made for the pavement replaced.
§ 2.00 SANITARY SEWERS, STORM SEWERS AND APPURTENANCES.
§ 2.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   The contractor shall furnish and install all pipes, fittings,
structures, intakes and accessories required for the sewer construction as
shown on the plans and/or specified herein.
   (B)   Before installation of new sewer facilities, the contractor shall
verify sizes, measurements, types and locations of existing piping and
appurtenances at all points of connection to the existing system at no
additional cost to the owner. The contractor shall construct all work in
accordance with the best present day installation and construction practices
and manufacturer’s recommendations.
§ 2.02 MATERIAL TESTS.
   The contractor shall incorporate no materials in the work until mill and/or
factory test certifications as requested by the engineer have been furnished
which show that the materials comply with specifications.
§ 2.03 PIPE MATERIALS AND JOINTS.
   (A)   Storm sewer. The contractor may select particular pipe material for a
project from the below listed table, unless otherwise specified on the plans or
in the bid documents. These pipe specifications shall govern subject to
anticipated loading on the pipe. Flared end sections shall be RCP for RCP pipe
and CMP for CMP pipe. Flared end sections for PVC and HDPE pipe shall be HDPE
or CMP.
Type Size        Pipe Material  Joint         Pipe Envelope Use Limitations
     Limitations Specifications Specification
Type       Size        Pipe Material  Joint         Pipe Envelope Use
           Limitations Specifications Specification               Limitations
                       ASTM C76,      ASTM C361 and Class C, Type
RCP        All         Class III      C443          1             None
                       (minimum)
                       ASTM C506      Rubber rope   Class C, Type
ARCH RCP   All         Class A III    gasket        1             None
                       (minimum)
                       ASTM C507
ELLIP RCP  All         Class HE II or Rubber rope   Class C, Type None
                       VE II          gasket        1
                       (minimum)
                       AASHTO M36,                  Class B, Type Under
CM P       All         M190 or M245                 3             driveways as
                                                                  culverts
N-12 or    4 to 10                                  Class B, Type
approved   inches      AASHTO M252    AASHTO M252   3             None
equivalent
N-12 or    12 to 48                                 Class B, Type
approved   inches      AASHTO M294    AASHTO M252   3             None
equivalent
A-2000 or  4 to 36                    ASTM D3212    Class B, Type
approved   inches      AASHTO F949    F477          3             None
equivalent
 
   (B)   Sanitary sewer.
 
Type           Size           Pipe Material    Joint           Pipe Envelope
               Limitations    Specifications   Specification
Ductile Iron   None           Pressure Class   ANSI A21.11     Class C, Type 1
Pipe (DIP)                    350, ANSI A21.51
               4 to 6 inches  SDR 23.5         ASTM D3212 F477 Class B, Type 3
Polyvinyl                     ASTM D3034
Chloride (PVC) 8 to 15 inches SDR 26           ASTM D3212 F477 Class B, Type 3
                              ASTM D3034
Plastic Truss  8 to 15 inches ASTM D2680       ASTM D3212      Class B, Type 3
(ABS or PVC)
A-2000 (PVC)   None           ASTM F949        ASTM 3212 F477  Class B, Type 3
 
      (1)   The contractor may select particular pipe material for a project
from the below listed table, unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the
bid documents. These pipe specifications shall govern subject to anticipated
loading on the pipe.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer pipe trench depths exceeding 20 feet, pipe material
shall be ductile iron. Depth exceeding 20 feet pipe envelope shall be per
manufacturer’s recommendations and as approved by the engineer.
      (3)   Sump pump discharge pipe shall be PVC D1785, SDR 35 or approved
equivalent. Bedding shall be a minimum of Class B, Type 3. The minimum size for
a sump pump lateral from a single property to the sump pump main line shall be
four-inch diameter. The minimum size for a sump pump discharge main line shall
be eight-inch diameter and sized for the number of discharge connections.
Discharge pipe shall not be located in the front of the lot, if electric is
located in front of the lot. Lateral connections off the main line shall be
extended to the property line or easement line. The sump pump discharge pipe
header shall be provided with a cleanout structure, in accordance with standard
detail SD-13, every 300 feet minimum and at the end of the line. Sump pump
lines shall not be blind connected to a storm sewer pipe. Sump pump services
shall be marked with a four by four wooden post painted white and a three-
fourths inch diameter steel rebar three-foot long driven into the ground flush
with the surface next to the wooden post. New service taps on existing sump
pump lines shall be constructed in accordance with Standard Detail SD-10.
§ 2.04 MANHOLES.
   (A)   All manholes shall be precast concrete. All precast concrete manholes
shall conform to ASTM Specification C-478 with joints conforming to ASTM
Specification C-443. All manholes shall be a minimum of four feet in diameter.
   (B)   Sanitary manhole bottom sections shall have the bottom section precast
integral with the manhole base. Sanitary manhole fillets shall be poured
integral to the manhole base. The fillet shall be sloped to allow drainage from
the edge of the manhole invert. Sanitary manhole pipe openings in new manholes
shall be A-LOK or approved equivalent. New connections in existing sanitary
manholes shall be core drilled and a gasketed flexible watertight connection
shall be made using press-seal press-boot, link-seal system or approved
equivalent.
   (C)   Storm sewer manhole bases shall be either precast or cast-in-place
reinforced concrete. If using a precast base, it shall conform to ASTM
Specification C-478. If using a cast-in-place base, use a minimum 3,000 psi
compressive strength. The thickness of the cast-in-place base will be one inch
for every two feet of height of the manhole with a minimum thickness of eight
inches, with a minimum horizontal dimension of 12 inches greater than the
outside diameter of the manhole. Base and manhole weight shall be greater than
the uplift force caused by ground water displaced by the manhole. The cast-in-
place base reinforcing shall be one-half inch deformed bars so placed to form a
grill work of 12 inches squares and placed at the center height of the base.
Highchairs or cradles shall be used to hold reinforcing in proper location.
Storm manhole fillets may be poured integral to the manhole base or cast-in-
place. The fillet shall be sloped to allow drainage from the edge of the
manhole invert. Storm manhole pipe openings shall be closed with non-shrink
grout collar.
   (D)   The contractor shall provide pre-cast concrete or manufactured rubber
or HDPE adjusting on manholes to place lid at the required elevations. There
shall be a minimum of one three-inch adjusting ring per manhole with a maximum
height of manhole adjustment rings of 12 inches. External chimney seals shall
be installed on all sanitary and storm manholes.
   (E)   If the vertical separation between the crowns of two connecting pipes
in a sanitary manhole is greater than two feet, an interior drop manhole shall
be constructed in accordance with the standard drawings. When the difference in
elevation between the incoming sewer and the manhole invert is less than 24
inches, the invert should be filleted to prevent solids depositions.
   (F)   Manhole ring and cover shall be East Jordan Iron Works 1045Z frame
with 1040 AGS gasketed lid with E-Pic double concealed pickhole. Manhole
casting shall not extend beyond outer edge of manhole. Watertight cover
assembles shall be required. Bolt down cover assembles shall be required on
manholes subject to surcharging. Bolt down cover assemblies shall be East
Jordan Iron Works 1045ZPT frame with 1040 APT gasketed bolt down lid with E-Pic
double concealed pickhole.
   (G)   Contractor shall place a permanent saw cut in concrete curbs adjacent
to all manholes located beyond the back of curb. A four-inch by four-inch
square shall be sawcut into the curb to mark the manhole location, and the
sawcut area shall be spray painted green.
§ 2.05 CATCH BASINS.
   Catch basins are to be constructed of precast or poured in place six-inch
thick reinforced concrete walls and set on and pinned to a six-inch thick
concrete base as shown on the standard drawings. The frame shall be Neenah R-
3246-AL with Type L grate or approved equal. All catch basins must include a 24
inch sump below the lowest pipe invert.
§ 2.06 SUMP PUMP CLEANOUTS.
   A sump pump cleanout structure in accordance with SD-13 shall be provided at
300 max spacing, all dead ends and bends in sump pump drain lines.
§ 2.07 COMMENCING OF WORK.
   The contractor shall send to the engineer notice in writing at least two
days before the date on which he or she wishes to break ground for the
beginning of work.
§ 2.08 PIPE INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Bedding classes A, B or C, as described in SD-3, shall be used for all
pipe provided the proper strength pipe is used with the specified bedding to
support the anticipated load. Class of bedding shall be noted on the detailed
plans or listed in the specifications. Installation procedures, as described in
ASTM C12 (ANSI A106.2), shall be used for all rigid pipe provided the proper
strength of pipe is used.
   (B)   The contractor shall begin at the lowest point in the line and shall
lay the bell or groove ends pointing upstream. Each length of pipe shall be
checked for defects and hairline cracks prior to lowering into the trench, and
no defective pipe shall be used. Care shall be taken to protect the pipe and
the joints from injury while handling and storing the pipe. The bell and spigot
surfaces shall be clean of dirt and foreign matter before the joining of the
pipe. The pipe shall be joined in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations. The contractor shall provide bell holes at each pipe joint to
allow the barrel section of the pipe to support the full trench load.
   (C)   The engineer will provide grade at each structure and 50 foot upstream
of each structure, or at closer intervals where ground surface prevents sight,
on a one time only basis with the contractor paying for the replacement of any
hubs destroyed by him or her. A laser beam shall be used to check sewer
alignment and grade.
§ 2.09 WYE-BRANCHES.
   Single wye-branches shall be placed as shown by the grade sheet or other
similar plat furnished by the owner or at such places as directed by the
engineer. When laterals are not immediately connected to the wyes, they shall
be plugged with an approved plug to prevent foreign matter from entering the
sewer. Minimum spacing between wyes per pipe manufacturer’s recommendations.
Double Ys or double connections are not permitted.
§ 2.10 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The contractor shall install six-inch diameter service connections as
shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. When the sewer invert is 12
feet or more below the ground surface, the riser pipe shall be placed to the
ten foot level below ground. The riser pipe shall conform to the details on the
standard drawings SD-12.
   (B)   A watertight plug shall be provided at the end of the service
connection and shall match the pipe material used. The plug shall be secured to
prevent displacement under a minimum head of five feet of water pressure.
   (C)   The service lines shall be extended to the property line or easement
line (whichever is farther) on the side opposite the main and a bend and one
length of pipe shall be extended into the property on the side where the main
is installed and stopped at the easement line. The end of the service
connection shall be located with a six feet long steel T-Post driven down three
feet into the ground, painted green. Contractor shall place a permanent saw cut
in concrete curbs adjacent to all services and as directed by the city. A four
inch by four inch upside down “T” shall be sawcut into the curb to mark the
lateral location, and the sawcut area shall be spray painted green. Contractor
shall provide clear and precise as-built drawings for main line, service line
locations and sump pump line locations.
§ 2.11 DEAD END OF SEWERS.
   The ends of all sewers, laterals, Ys and connections which are not to be
immediately used and also where pipes are left open where construction stops
from one day to the next shall be closed or plugged only with an approved plug.
Any other method shall be subject to the written approval of the engineer.
§ 2.12 FINAL CLEANING AND TESTING.
   (A)   After the construction is completed and before final acceptance, all
lines, manholes, catch basins and the like shall be thoroughly cleaned and
tested. All sewers shall be lamped, mandrel tested, low pressure air tested
and/or televised prior to acceptance in an approved manner as set forth by the
engineer.
   (B)   After completing backfill of a section of wastewater line, the
contractor shall, at his or her expense, conduct a line acceptance test using
low pressure air. The test shall be performed according to stated procedures
and under the supervision of the engineer.
   (C)   The manhole shall be visually evaluated for infiltration during a
period of high groundwater table. Any visible infiltration shall be corrected
before acceptance. ASTM C828 shall apply for low pressure air testing
procedures. Time periods for testing shall be completed as described in the
following paragraph. ASTM F1417-92 (or most current addition) shall apply for
plastic pipe low pressure air testing of the sewer line.
   (D)   The section of sewer line to be tested shall have been trench
backfilled and cleaned. Testing shall be done after lateral sewers are
connected but before laterals are put in service. All Ys and laterals shall be
tightly plugged. Pneumatic plugs, having a sealing length equal to or greater
than the diameter of the pipe to be tested, shall be placed in both ends of the
test section and inflated to 25 psi. Air shall be slowly added to the test
section until the air pressure within the test section reaches a point 4.0 psi
greater than the average back pressure due to the ground water table. This
shall be accomplished by adding 0.43 psig to the initial pressures for each
foot the groundwater table is above the center line of the pipe. Do not exceed
ten psi total pressure in the line. All plugs shall be checked for leakage and
the air shall be allowed to stabilize at least two minutes before the actual
test begins. After the stabilization period, the pressure within the test
section shall be decreased to 3.50 psig above the average groundwater back-
pressure, and the time in seconds measured for the pressure to drop 1.0 psig to
2.5 psig above the average groundwater back-pressure.
   (E)   If the measured time is equal to or greater than the test time given
in Table I below, the line shall be deemed free from significant defects and
acceptable. If the measured time is less than the required ASTM duration, the
source or sources of leakage shall be located and corrected. If, after all
apparent sources of air leakage are corrected, and there is still difficulty in
meeting the minimum specification time, an infiltration or exfiltration test
shall be conducted to determine the acceptability of the line.
TABLE I
AIR TEST TABLE
Minimum Test Time for Various Pipe Sizes
Normal Pipe Size T(time), min/100 feet (30.5m)
TABLE I
AIR TEST TABLE
Minimum Test Time for Various Pipe Sizes
Normal Pipe Size  T(time), min/100 feet (30.5m)
3 inches (75mm)   0.2
4 inches (100mm)  0.3
6 inches (150mm)  0.7
8 inches (200mm)  1.2
10 inches (250mm) 1.5
12 inches (300mm) 1.8
15 inches (380mm) 2.1
18 inches (450mm) 2.4
21 inches (535mm) 3.0
24 inches (600mm) 3.6
27 inches (675mm) 4.2
30 inches (750mm) 4.8
33 inches (825mm) 5.4
36 inches (900mm) 6.0
 
§ 2.13 ABANDONED STRUCTURES.
   Whenever sewers, manholes, catch basins or like structures are abandoned,
they shall be collapsed and the void shall be backfilled with sand or other
approved backfilled material. Any material that may be salvaged, such as metal
grates, frames, covers and the like, shall be left to the discretion of the
city.
§ 2.14 UTILITY OBSTACLES AND SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Horizontal separation of gravity sewers from water mains.
      (1)   Gravity sewer mains shall be separated from water mains by a
horizontal distance of at least ten feet unless:
         (a)   The top of a sewer main is at least 18 inches below the bottom
of the water main; and
         (b)   The sewer is placed in a separate trench or in the same trench
on a bench of undisturbed earth at a minimum horizontal separation of three
feet from the water main.
      (2)   When it is impossible to obtain the required horizontal clearance
of three feet and a vertical clearance of 18 inches between sewers and water
mains, the sewers must be constructed of water main materials meeting both a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi and the requirements of §
3.02 of this chapter. However, a linear separation of at least two feet shall
be provided.
   (B)   Separation of sewer force mains from water mains. Sewer force mains
and water mains shall be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten
feet unless:
      (1)   The force main is constructed of ductile iron material meeting a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi and the requirements of §
3.02 of this chapter; and
      (2)   The sewer force main is laid at least four linear feet from the
water main.
   (C)   Separation of sewer and water main crossovers.
      (1)   Vertical separation of sanitary and storm sewers crossing under any
water main should be at least 18 inches measured from the top of the sewer to
the bottom of the water main. If physical conditions prohibit the separation,
the sewer may be placed not closer than six inches below the water main or 18
inches above the water main. The separation distance shall be the maximum
feasible in all cases.
      (2)   Where the water main crosses under a storm or sanitary sewer or
over said sewer with less than 18 inches of separation, both the sewer and
water pipe shall be situated such that the joints of both pipes are as far as
possible from each other. The water main shall have nitrile gaskets. In the
case of storm sewer, the pipe shall be reinforced concrete with flexible O-ring
gasket joints. In the case of sanitary sewer, the pipe shall be of water main
quality material for a minimum of 20 feet in accordance with SUDAS.
   (D)   Exceptions. Should physical conditions exist such that exceptions to
divisions (A), (B) and (C) above are necessary, the design engineer must detail
how the sewer and water main are to be engineered to provide protection equal
to that required by these sections.
   (E)   Connection of dissimilar pipe. Suitable couplings shall be used for
joining dissimilar materials. The leakage limitations on these joints shall be
in accordance with § 2.11 of these standards. Coupling shall be fernco or
approved equivalent.
   (F)   Sewer crossing under a waterway.
      (1)   The top of all sewers entering or crossing streams shall be at a
depth below the natural bottom of the stream bed sufficient to protect the
line. One foot of cover over the top of the line is required where the sewer is
located in rock or cased and three feet of cover is required in other material.
In major streams, more than the three feet of cover may be required.
      (2)   In paved channels, the top of the sewer line should be placed below
the bottom of the channel pavement. Sewer outfalls, headwalls, manholes, gate
boxes or other structures shall be so located that they do not interfere with
the free discharge of flood flows of the stream. Sewers located along streams
shall be located outside of the stream bed.
      (3)   Sewers entering or crossing streams shall be constructed of ductile
iron pipe with mechanical joints or equivalent approved by engineer. Sewer
systems shall be designed to minimize the number of stream crossings. The
stream crossings shall be designed to cross the stream as nearly perpendicular
to the stream flow as possible.
      (4)   Construction methods that will minimize siltation (silt fence)
shall be employed. Material used to backfill the trench shall be stone, course
aggregate, washed gravel or other materials, which will not cause siltation.
Upon completion of construction, the stream shall be returned as near as
possible to its original condition. The stream banks shall be seeded and
planted, or other methods employed to prevent erosion. The design engineer
shall include in the project specifications the method or methods to be
employed in the construction of sewers in or near streams to provide adequate
control of siltation.
   (G)   Aerial crossings.
      (1)   Support shall be provided at all joints in pipes utilized for
aerial crossings. The supports shall be designed to prevent overturning and
settlement.
      (2)   Precautions against freezing, such as insulation and increased
slope, shall be provided. Expansion jointing shall be provided between above-
ground and below-ground sewers.
      (3)   For aerial stream crossings, the impact of flood waters and debris
shall be considered. The bottom of the pipe should be placed no lower than the
elevation of the 50 year flood.
§ 2.15 PAYMENT.
   (A)   No separate payment will be made for work covered in this part of the
specifications except as set forth below. All other related items are
incidental to construction. Contract unit prices shall include all costs for
each item of work.
   (B)   Sewer pipe in place shall be paid per lineal foot. The unit price
shall include the furnishing of pipe, handling, laying, excavation of trench,
de-watering, diversion of sewage during construction, connections to sewers and
appurtenances, temporary sheeting and shoring, temporary supports of existing
utility services, backfill with ordinary backfill, tests and miscellaneous
associated work. The length will be measured from beginning point, as shown on
the plans, for each size of pipe and type of pipe material along the center
line of the pipe with no deductions for manholes or end sections. The length of
storm sewer pipe shall be measured between the center lines of connecting
manholes and catch basins.
   (C)   Manholes shall be paid per each. The unit price shall include the
furnishing, installing, excavating, temporary sheeting and shoring, concrete,
frame and cover, connections to sewers, manhole steps, backfill and
miscellaneous associated work for standard manholes as provided in standard
drawings.
   (D)   Catch basins shall be paid per each. The unit price shall include the
furnishing of all labor, material, excavation, backfill, castings, surface
restoration and miscellaneous associated work to construct each catch basin as
shown on the standard drawing.
   (E)   Y-branches shall be paid per each. The unit price shall include the
furnishing of all labor, material, additional excavation, backfill, stopper and
stopper restraint required for each Y-branch.
§ 3.00 WATER MAINS, FORCE MAINS AND APPURTENANCES.
§ 3.01 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The contractor shall furnish and install all pipes, fittings,
structures and accessories required for water main and force main construction
as shown on the plans and/or specified herein. All materials shall be new and
no salvaged or used materials shall be incorporated in this work unless
otherwise specified.
   (B)   Before installation of new facilities, the contractor shall verify
sizes, measurements, type and location of existing piping and appurtenances at
points of connection to existing systems. Contractor’s time and expenses to
field locate utilities shall not be paid for by the city. Water mains shall
have a minimum of five feet of cover.
   (C)   All work shall be in accordance with the best present day installation
and construction practices including the latest revision of AWWA C600
“Installation of Ductile Iron Water Mains and their Appurtenances” as modified
by these specifications.
   (D)   After award of the contract, the contractor shall submit the
manufacturer’s specification and/or catalog data for valves, valve boxes,
hydrants and other special items as requested by the engineer.
§ 3.02 PRESSURE PIPE AND FITTING MATERIALS.
   (A)   Ductile iron pipe shall be in accordance with AWWA C151 with
mechanical or push-on joints in accordance with AWWA C111. Fittings shall be in
accordance with AWWA C110. The minimum pipe thickness shall be Class 52. Pipe
and fittings used for water mains shall have a cement lining in accordance with
AWWA C104 while sewage force mains and fittings shall have a calcium aluminate,
polyethylene, ceramic epoxy or coal tar epoxy lining specifically designed for
sanitary sewer applications. The outside coating of all ductile iron pipe shall
have a bituminous coating in accordance with AWWA C111.
   (B)   The contractor shall not telescope small pipe inside larger pipe for
shipment or storage. Pipe with damage to cement mortar lining will be rejected
and field patching will not be permitted.
   (C)   Eight inch ductile iron pipe and accessories shall be the minimum size
that can be installed. A larger size may be required as specified by the
utility manager or utility engineer, or as recommended by AWWA.
§ 3.03 GATE VALVES AND VALVE BOXES.
   (A)   Valves shall conform to the latest revision of AWWA Standard C-509
covering resilient seated gate valves and be approved by ULFM. The valves shall
be non-rising stem, opening by turning stem left and provided with two inch
square operating nut with the word “open” and an arrow cast in the metal to
indicate direction to open. All bolts shall be stainless steel.
   (B)   The wedge shall be of cast iron completely encapsulated with rubber.
The sealing rubber shall be permanently bonded to the cast iron wedge to meet
ASTM tests for rubber metal bond ASTM D429. Stems for NRS assemblies shall be
cast bronze with integral collars in full compliance with AWWA. The NRS stem
stuffing box shall be the O-ring seal type with two rings located above thrust
collar. The two rings shall be replaceable with valve fully open and subjected
to full rated working pressure. There shall be two low torque thrust bearings
located above and below the stem collar. The stem nut shall be independent of
wedge and shall be made of solid bronze. There shall be a smooth, unobstructed
waterway free of all pockets, cavities and depressions in the seat area.
   (C)   The body and bonnet shall be coated with fusion bonded epoxy both
interior and exterior. The bonnet and stuffing box bolts shall be 304 stainless
steel.
   (D)   Each valve shall have maker’s name, pressure rating and year in which
manufactured cast on the body. Prior to shipment from the factory, each valve
shall be tested by hydrostatic pressure equal to requirement for both AWWA
(twice the specified working pressure) and 400 PSI ULFM requirements. Approved
gate valves are East Jordan Resilient Wedge Valve, Clow Resilient Wedge Valve
F-6100 and Mueller Resilient Wedge 2362-23.
   (E)   All valve boxes shall be cast iron, two piece - five and five-
sixteenths inches and shall conform to Sigma Corporation VB 267 for
applications outside of pavement and VB 467 for applications in pavement, or
engineer approved equivalent.
   (F)   Valve locations must be marked with an “X” saw cut on curb and the
sawcut area shall be spray painted blue.
§ 3.04 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA Standard C502,
be listed by Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc. and have Factory Mutual Research
approval. Fire hydrants shall be designed for 250 psi working pressure and
tested to 400 psi hydrostatic pressure. Fire hydrants shall be backed by
manufacturer’s ten-year limited warranty. Fire hydrants shall be dry-top center
stem construction having an O-ring sealed lubrication reservoir. Fire hydrants
shall be manufactured with operating nut and thrust made of bronze, with
bearings located both above and below the thrust collar and with operating nuts
protected by a cast iron weather shield. Fire hydrants shall be manufactured
with nozzles mechanically locked into the barrel and having O-ring pressure
seals. Fire hydrants shall be a “Traffic Model”, complete with safety flanges
and steel stem coupling. Nozzle section must rotate 360 degrees. Fire hydrant
shoe bolts and nuts shall be made of 304 stainless steel. Fire hydrants shall
be manufactured with a main valve seat ring of bronze threaded into a bronze
drain ring. A 360 degree drain channel shall have a minimum of two drain
outlets. Fire hydrants shall have an upper valve plate and two urethane rubber
facings that activate the drain ports. Fire hydrants shall be manufactured with
a lower valve plate that bottoms out in the shoe for maximum opening. Fire
hydrants shall have a one and one-half inch pentagon operating nut and open
left. Fire hydrants shall have three-way with two and one-half inch and four
and one-half inch NSHT nozzles. Fire hydrants shall be painted red. Fire
hydrants shall have six inch mechanical joint inlet. Fire hydrants shall be
manufactured with a minimum main valve opening of five and one-fourths inch.
Fire hydrants shall be five and one-half foot bury. Fire hydrants shall be of a
design and manufacture that meets the standards set forth in this section of
Eldridge code and ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-25, passed 11-3-2025)
§ 3.05 PIPE INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Before installation, the contractor shall visually inspect for cracks
or defects in all pipes and damaged or unsound pipes will be rejected. Pipe
material shall be handled by skids, hoists or other approved means and the use
of end hooks to install or move the pipe shall be prohibited. The contractor
shall uncover the existing mains a sufficient time ahead of the pipeline
operation to determine the special fitting required between the existing and
new water mains. The contractor shall clean all pipe interiors of foreign
matter before lowering them into the trench. When the pipe laying operation
stops for 30 minutes or more, the open ends of the pipe shall be closed with a
water-tight plug or other approved means to prevent the ingress of foreign
material. If water is in the trench, the seal shall remain in place until the
trench has been pumped dry. The contractor shall place the pipe in the trench
in sound, undamaged condition and care shall be taken not to injure the pipe
coating or lining. Cutting of the pipe shall be done by means of an approved
mechanical cutter in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the pipe.
The contractor shall close and block all pipe ends or fittings left for further
connections with a water-tight plug of the same material as the pipe. All pipe
and pipe joints shall be installed in accordance with the best construction
practices and manufacturer’s recommendations as well as the current revision of
AWWA C-600 Standard for “Installation of Ductile Iron Water Mains and their
Appurtenances”, as modified by these specifications. Bolt and nut package to be
core blue stainless bolts for valves and hydrants.
   (B)   All water mains shall have a blue warning tape four inch wide
installed 24 inches to 36 inches below the finish grade. The tape shall read,
“Buried Water Line Below”.
   (C)   Water main pipe envelope shall be minimum Class C, Type 2, unless
otherwise noted on plans.
§ 3.06 SETTING VALVES, VALVE BOXES, HYDRANTS AND FITTINGS.
   Valves, valve boxes and hydrants shall be installed where shown on the
drawings and directed by the engineer and shall be set plumb. Valves shall have
interior cleaned of all foreign matter before installation. Stuffing boxes
shall be tightened and the valves shall be inspected in open and closed
position to ensure that all parts are in working condition. Valve boxes shall
be provided for all valves, and shall be Sigma Corporation two-piece VB 266
Screw-type cast iron systems with drop style lid. Valve boxes shall be seated
on Adaptor Inc. Multi-Fit Adaptor sized for the specific valve, or approved
equivalent. Fire hydrants and valves shall be installed with concrete blocks
per detail SD-19 and SD-20 for the support of valves, bends and tees. Not less
than seven cubic feet of pea gravel or concrete stone shall be provided at the
base of the hydrant to dispose of water from self-draining hydrants. Hydrant
installation shall have a six-inch mechanical joint branch, holding spool, six-
inch mechanical joint gate valve, holding spool and hydrant with six-inch
mechanical joint inlet. Hydrants shall be so installed that the break-away ring
shall be set at an elevation that is six inches above the existing or proposed
top of curb at the hydrant location to an elevation established by the
engineer. Valve locations must be marked with a four inch by four inch “X” saw
cut on curb and the sawcut area shall be spray painted blue.
§ 3.07 STERILIZATION.
   (A)   Sterilization. Sterilization of new water mains shall be in accordance
with the current revision of AWWA C-651 “Standard for Disinfecting Water
Mains”, as modified by these specifications after an approved pressure test on
the main and appurtenances. The contractor shall ensure that the mains to be
sterilized are isolated to prevent the chlorine solution from entering into the
existing system. After the completion of the mains and approval of pressure
test and flushing, a solution of calcium hypochlorite and water shall be
injected into the system at a slow rate from the point where it connects with
the existing system so that there will be an even distribution of the solution
throughout the pipe. As the main is being filled, air shall be bleed off at
hydrants, blow offs or taps located at highest elevation until all air is
eliminated. Chlorine tablets affixed to the crown of the pipe may be used with
approval from the engineer. The form of chlorine, disinfecting equipment and
procedures shall be subject to the approval of the owner and the engineer.
After the main has been filled, all air eliminated and the minimum residual
chlorine content of 50 parts per million (ppm) has been attained, it shall be
allowed to stand for 24 hours with the chlorinated water. All valves and
hydrants in the new main shall be operated to assure full disinfection. At the
end of the 24-hour test period, the minimum free chlorine residual at the pipe
extremities shall be ten ppm. If this requirement is not met, the sterilization
procedure shall be repeated. The new mains shall be thoroughly flushed after
sterilization until extremities indicated the same chlorine residual as the
water supply. Before the newly laid water mains are put into use, the owner
shall collect two water samples 24 hours apart at 1,200 foot intervals and at
the end of the pipe for bacteriological examination. If the tests are returned
unsatisfactory or unsafe, the sterilization procedure shall be repeated until
the test samples are returned safe.
   (B)   Restrained joints, kickers and clamping. Bracing for fittings and
valves will be subject to the approval of the engineer prior to installation.
Restrained joints and precast concrete kickers bearing against undisturbed
earth shall be installed at all fittings providing bends in the pipeline and at
hydrants. No special payment will be made for restrained joints or kickers.
Cost of supplying and installing materials shall be incidental to the water
main construction. Wood blocking shall not be used for kicker adjustment. The
lengths of pipe requiring joint restraining locking lugs shall be in accordance
with manufacturer’s recommendations.
§ 3.08 TESTING.
   (A)   After the pipe is laid, including laterals and the joints completed,
hydrostatic tests shall be performed. The contractor shall backfill the trench
before performing the tests. Should any section fail to meet the requirements,
the contractor shall be responsible to locate the faulty section and make the
necessary repairs at his or her own expense. The hydrostatic tests shall be
conducted in accordance with AAWA C-600. The hydrostatic tests shall consist of
a pressure test. Prior to the pressure test, all air shall be expelled from the
pipe by means of taps located at points of highest elevation or as necessary.
Such taps shall afterward be tightly plugged. The test shall consist of
completely filling the section of main under observation with water applied by
means of a pump connected to the pipe in a satisfactory manner. The test
pressure shall be at 150% of the maximum operating pressure for a period of one
hour. The allowable pressure drop during the test period shall be 5% of the
test pressure.
   (B)   After the required pressure has been obtained, exposed pipe joints,
fittings and valves shall be carefully examined. Visible leaks shall be stopped
by tightening bolts if necessary or disassembling, cleaning and reassembling
joints. Cracked or defective pipe, fittings or valves disclosed under the
pressure test shall be replaced by the contractor with sound material and the
test shall be repeated until the test results are satisfactory.
   (C)   Bacteria testing shall be conducted by utility; contractor to pay for
cost of testing.
   (D)   The contractor shall provide all test pumps, test plugs, pipes and
gauges and shall make all required piping connections. The cost of all testing
shall be incidental to the lineal foot price of installed water main. See §
3.07 of this chapter.
§ 3.09 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   All service lines shall be direct tapped to the water main with
corporation stop, curb stop and service box located below frost line.
Contractor shall place a permanent saw cut “arrow mark” in the concrete curb
adjacent to all services and the sawcut area shall be spray painted blue.
   (B)   The corporation stop shall be AY McDonald 74701B or 74701BT “NL Ball
Style Corporation Stop”, Mueller catalog number B-25000 or B-25008 “300 Ball
Type Corporation Valve”, Ford FB600-X-NL or FB1000-XY-Q-NL or engineer approved
equal.
   (C)   The copper service piping shall be seamless, soft annealed copper,
type K, conforming with ASTM Specification B-88, with loop or bend, and have a
minimum cover of 48 inches.
   (D)   The curb stops shall be AY McDonald 76000Q or 76100 or 76101 “NL Ball
Style Curb Stop”, Mueller catalog number B-20283 or B-25204 or B-25209 “300
Ball Curb Valves” or Ford B11-XXX-NL or B22-XXX-NL or B44-XXX-Q-NL with the
curb box being AY McDonald 5601 and AY McDonald 5603 for one and one-fourths
inch through two inch service or engineer approved equal. The curb stop shall
sit on a concrete block. The curb stop and curb box shall be placed at the
property line or on the easement line (whichever is farthest from the main) and
shall be marked with a six feet steel T-Post driven down three feet deep,
painted blue. Curb stop locations shall be marked with a four-inch by four-inch
arrow mark () saw cut on curb and the sawcut area shall be spray painted blue.
   (E)   The contractor shall make service connections with a service saddle or
MJ tapping tee. Service saddle shall be Smith-Blaire No. 264 (for four-inch to
eight-inch diameter mains) or 265 (for ten-inch or 12-inch diameter mains), or
engineer approved equivalent. MJ tapping tee shall be manufactured by Clow,
Mueller or engineer approved equivalent in accordance with AWWA C153
requirements.
§ 3.10 TAPPING SLEEVES.
   When teeing off an existing main that cannot be isolated to the satisfaction
of the city, utilize a Smith-Blair 665 stainless steel tapping sleeve in
accordance.
§ 3.11 SEPARATION FROM EXISTING UTILITIES.
   (A)   Horizontal separation of water mains from gravity sewers.
      (1)   Water mains shall be separated from gravity sewer mains by a
horizontal distance of at least ten feet unless:
         (a)   The bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top
of the sewers; and
         (b)   The water main is placed in a separate trench or in the same
trench on a bench of undisturbed earth at a minimum horizontal separation of
three feet from the sewer.
      (2)   When it is impossible to obtain the required horizontal clearance
of three feet and vertical separation of 18 inches between water mains and
sewers, the sewer must be replaced with water main materials meeting both a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi and the requirements of §
3.02 of this chapter. However, a linear separation of at least two feet shall
be provided.
   (B)   Separation of water mains from sewer force mains. Water mains shall be
separated from sewer force mains by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet
unless:
      (1)   The force main is constructed of ductile iron material meeting a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi and the requirements of §
3.02 of this chapter; and
      (2)   The water main is laid at least four linear feet from the sewer
force main.
   (C)   Separation of water main and sewer crossovers.
      (1)   Vertical separation of water mains crossing over any sanitary or
storm sewer should be at least 18 inches when measured from the bottom of the
water main to the top of the sewer. If physical conditions prohibit this
separation, the water main shall not be placed closer than six inches above a
sewer or 18 inches below a sewer. The separation distance shall be the maximum
feasible in all cases.
      (2)   Where the water main crosses under a storm or sanitary sewer or
over said sewer with less than 18 inches of separation, both the sewer and
water pipe shall be situated such that the joints of both pipes are as far as
possible from each other. The water main shall have nitrile gaskets. In the
case of storm sewer, the pipe shall be reinforced concrete with flexible O-ring
gasket joints. In the case of sanitary sewer, the pipe shall be of water main
quality material for a minimum of 20 feet in accordance with SUDAS.
   (D)   Separation from sewer manholes. No water pipe shall pass through or
come in contact with any part of a sewer manhole. A minimum horizontal
separation of three feet shall be maintained.
   (E)   Exceptions. Should physical conditions exist such that exceptions to
divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above are necessary, the design engineer must
detail how the water main and sewer installation are to be engineered to
provide equal protection.
   (F)   Water crossings.
      (1)   Surface water crossings. The pipe for above water crossings shall
be adequately supported and anchored, protected from damage and freezing and
accessible for repair or replacement.
      (2)   Underwater crossings. Water mains entering or crossing streams
which drain areas greater than two square miles in urban areas and 100 square
miles in rural areas shall be of ductile iron pipe with flexible watertight
joints or shall be installed in a steel casing pipe and installed as follows.
         (a)   The top of the water main shall be below the natural bottom of
the stream bed at least one foot when located in rock, three feet when located
in other material or at a greater depth when crossing major streams. The trench
shall be backfilled with crushed rock or gravel.
         (b)   The water main shall be securely anchored to prevent movement of
the pipe and provided with easily accessible shutoff valves located outside of
the floodway at each end of the water crossing.
         (c)   1.   The stream bank shall be seeded, sodded or otherwise
protected from erosion upon completion of the project.
            2.   Water mains entering or crossing streams which drain areas
less than two square miles in urban areas and 100 square miles in rural areas
should be of ductile iron pipe with flexible watertight joints or installed in
a steel casing pipe. Drainageway crossings in areas where no evidence of
erosion exists are excluded from these requirements.
§ 3.12 PAVEMENT.
   (A)   No separate payment will be made for work covered in this part of the
specifications except as set forth below. All other related items are
incidental to construction. Contract unit prices shall include all costs for
each item of work.
   (B)   Pressure pipe in place shall be paid per lineal foot. The unit price
shall include the furnishing of pipe, all fittings and appurtenances except
valves and hydrants, installing the pipe in open cut, handling, laying, bedding
material where specified, excavation, backfill, sheeting and shoring, joint
restraint, tests, disinfection of water main and miscellaneous associated work.
This payment item does not include the pressure pipe to be jacked or augered as
required on the plans or in the specifications and on which special payment is
provided. The length will be measured along the center line of the pipe with no
deductions for valves or fittings except as noted on the plans. Contractor
shall submit to the city one set of record construction drawings indicating all
changes from the original bidding documents.
   (C)   Gate valves shall be paid per each. The unit price shall include
furnishing and installing the valves and appurtenances for the valves as shown
on the plans or in the specifications.
   (D)   Special valves shall be paid per each. The unit prices shall include
furnishing and installing the valves and appurtenances for the valves as shown
on the plans or in the specifications. These shall include butterfly valves,
tapping valves and sleeves, cutting-in valves and sleeves, air relief valves or
blow-off valves.
   (E)   Hydrants and hydrant valves shall be paid per each. The unit price
shall include furnishing and installation of the hydrant, hydrant valve,
hydrant valve box and cover, six-inch mechanical joint branch, the holding
spools, concrete pad, truss block, bedding, blocking, excavation and
backfilling and miscellaneous associated work.
   (F)   Corporation stops shall be paid per each. The unit price shall include
all labor and materials to furnish and install the corporation stop in the
water main and connect to the service line.
   (G)   The service line shall be paid per lineal foot. The unit price shall
include all labor and materials to furnish and install the service lines
including excavation, backfill, de-watering, temporary sheeting and shoring,
pushing or augering and miscellaneous associated work. The length will be
measured along the center line of the pipe from the center line of the water
main to the curb stop and service box.
   (H)   Curb stop and curb box shall be paid per each. The unit price shall
include all labor and materials to furnish and install a curb stop and service
box and to connect to the service line.
§ 4.00 EARTHWORK.
§ 4.01 DESCRIPTION OF EXCAVATION OR GRADING.
   (A)   Earthwork shall consist of preparing the subgrade, backfilling along
the curbs, shaping the soil in accordance with the engineer’s instruction and
approved construction plans, providing borrow and disposing of waste material.
   (B)   Excavation shall be true to the depths, slopes, grade and width as
called for on the plans or as otherwise staked and ordered by the engineer. The
work shall be so conducted that the excavation shall drain. No material that
would be classified as rock or stone which could not be passed through a three-
inch circular ring shall be left within 12 inches of the top of the finished
subgrade. Care shall be exercised that no material be loosened below the
required grade line. If soft, spongy materials which will not compact readily
and form an unyielding roadbed are encountered below the grade, the contractor
shall remove them, under the direction of the engineer, and replace them with
IDOT gradation 13 crushed stone, or other material acceptable to the engineer,
and compact as herein specified.
§ 4.02 FILLS.
   (A)   No fills shall be made without first removing the sod or other
material which will not readily compact. The on-site material, except for the
organic material, can be used as compacted fill unless specifically rejected by
the engineer.
   (B)   The selected fill materials shall be placed in uniform layers of nine
to 12 inches of loose material. Each layer must be approved by the engineer
prior to placement of the next layer.
   (C)   Moisture and density control will be exercised. All subgrade under
pavement will be compacted with equipment approved by the engineer to 95% of
maximum density according to ASTM Specification D-698 “Standard Proctor
Density” while all other material is to be compacted to 90% of the maximum
density. If the natural moisture of the fill material is in excess of the
specified moisture range, each layer will be disced and dried until the
moisture content falls within the specified moisture range. If the natural
moisture content of the fill material falls below the specified moisture range,
additional moisture must be added to bring it to the specified range.
§ 4.03 PREPARATION OF SUBGRADE.
   (A)   The surface of the subgrade when excavated, rolled and compacted shall
conform to the designed profile and cross sections so that it is not higher
than the designed elevations and at no point lower than 0.05 feet below design
elevations.
   (B)   The subgrade shall be so constructed as to have uniform stability for
a width at least equal to that of the proposed pavement, plus one foot on each
side, or full width between previously placed curb and gutter sections.
   (C)   Stones over four inches in size shall be removed from the loosened
portion of the subgrade and disposed of as directed by the engineer.
   (D)   Depressions that develop during rolling shall be filled with suitable
material, and rolling shall continue until the subgrade is uniformly firm,
properly shaped and substantially true to grade and cross-section.
   (E)   Material, other than sand, which will not compact readily under the
roller shall be removed and replaced with material which will compact readily,
and that portion of the subgrade shall be rolled again.
   (F)   Rolling of the subgrade shall extend for at least 12 inches outside
each edge of the proposed bottom of the pavement. Piles or ridges of earth or
material that seriously interferes with the operation of finishing the pavement
shall be removed from the shoulders.
   (G)   During the process of constructing the subgrade, the soil shall be
maintained in a condition, sufficiently moist as to facilitate compaction and
produce a firm, compact surface. Such sprinkling or wetting of the finished
subgrade will be required, as may be necessary to ensure a reasonable moisture
content.
   (H)   Perform proof rolling with a truck loaded to the maximum single legal
axle gross weight of 20,000 pounds or the maximum tandem axle gross weight of
34,000 pounds. Operate trucks at less than ten mph. Make multiple passes for
every lane. The subgrade will be considered to be unstable if, under the
operation of the loaded truck, the surface shows yielding (soil wave in front
of the loaded tires) or rutting of more than two inches, measured from the top
to the bottom of the rut at the outside edges. The expense of such load testing
shall be the contractor’s expense.
   (I)   (1)   Unstable subgrade conditions shall be noted by the engineer and
repaired to the extent required by the engineer.
      (2)   Such repairs shall be made as follows.
         (a)   The unsuitable earth materials shall be removed to the depth
needed.
         (b)   The bottom of the excavation shall be compacted. If the bottom
of this excavation consists of earthen material that will not compact to the
proper density, the earthen materials shall be stabilized via cement or fly ash
stabilization, replacement of unstabilized earth with IDOT gradation 13 or
other stabilizing method approved by the engineer.
         (c)   The engineer may decide, in lieu of the above, to specify
strengthening of the pavement structure in unstable areas; this work to be paid
for as an extra work item.
         (d)   When the bottom of the excavation is suitably stable to support
layers of compacted earth, the excavation will be filled with suitable backfill
materials and compacted in no more than six inch lifts to 95% optimum density
as shown by the Standard Proctor Test. Backfill materials may be either IDOT
gradation 30 crushed stone or suitable earth backfill approved by the engineer.
         (e)   The source of earth backfill shall be approved by the engineer
prior to the use of the material.
         (f)   After the subgrade has been repaired, it shall be shaped to
final cross-section and elevation. Visual checks shall then be made by the
engineer to determine any soft or spongy spots. Any such areas so detected
shall again be repaired, provided they are within the top six inches of the
subgrade.
         (g)   The subgrade shall be kept shaped and drained at all times to
prevent the development of soft or spongy areas. In no case shall any
improvement be placed on muddy subgrade or one that has not been checked and
approved. Delays resulting in the contractor’s failure to adequately protect
the subgrade shall be recorded. Subgrade repairs resulting from the
contractor’s negligence shall be the contractor’s expense.
         (h)   Accurate records on subgrade repairs, signed by the inspector,
shall be kept. The inspector’s signature upon such daily records shall be the
Inspector’s approval of daily effort expended, quantities of material compacted
and quality of workmanship. These records shall be used as a basis of payment.
         (i)   Any subgrade repair made more than once in the same spot shall
not be paid for if such a condition resulted through negligence or poor
workmanship by the contractor.
§ 4.04 WASTE MATERIAL.
   Excavated material such as spongy and vegetable surfaces, frozen material or
boulders, broken concrete or rock with dimensions greater than six inches,
trash and debris from construction operation shall be hauled to the dumping
area designated by the engineer. Portions of the topsoil stripped from lawn
areas and accepted by the engineer shall be stock piled for use within the
construction site to be used in replacing topsoil in embankments or shoulders.
The sale of topsoil stripped from the construction site shall not be allowed
unless specifically detailed in the construction documents. Any excess topsoil
shall be hauled and stock piled as directed by the engineer.
§ 4.05 BORROW MATERIAL.
   Borrow material for subgrade under paving will be engineer approved granular
material or soil free of top soil, vegetation or other deleterious material.
The contractor shall notify the engineer at least 72 hours prior to hauling
previously approved soil so testing arrangements can be made.
§ 4.06 SUBGRADE REPAIRS.
   (A)   Subgrade repairs are those needed to furnish an earth base to
adequately support traffic loads to be given. The contractor shall repair the
subgrade by whatever method needed to bring the area required to the supporting
strength of adjacent subgrade areas.
   (B)   Subgrade repairs shall be extra work and payment for this work will be
determined in accordance with unit adjustment prices submitted on the form of
proposal.
§ 4.07 EXISTING SURFACES.
   Where applicable, the existing oil and rock or gravel surfacing will be
scarified and salvaged within the project area. When fill is to be applied over
the existing grade, the top six inches will be scarified and recompacted as
herein specified.
§ 4.08 SUBGRADE IN CUT.
   When the section is in cut, the top six inches of the finished subgrade will
be scarified and recompacted as herein specified.
§ 4.09 FINAL GRADING.
   (A)   All areas within the city right-of-way, not receiving pavement or road
stone, which have been disturbed by the contractor’s operations, shall be
dressed to provide a suitable seed bed. The contractor is not required to seed
said area unless so specified, but shall be expected to leave the area neatly
dressed so others can sow grass seed.
   (B)   Final dressing can be done by dragging, brooming or raking as required
and this work shall be incidental to the contract and no extra compensation
will be allowed therefor.
§ 4.10 PAYMENT.
   (A)   No separate payment will be made for work covered in this part of the
specification except as set forth below. All other related items are incidental
to construction. Contract unit prices shall include all costs for each item of
work.
   (B)   Excavation shall be paid per cubic yard. The unit price shall include
all labor, material and equipment necessary to obtain the specified grade and
shall be measured in excavation only. No additional compensation shall be paid
to the contractor for the removal of waste material.
   (C)   Borrow material, if soil, shall be paid per cubic yard. The unit price
shall include all labor, materials, equipment and hauling costs incidental to
the project. Measurements of the borrow areas shall be made prior to and
following the grading operation and payment shall be in excavation only.
   (D)   Borrow material, if granular, shall be paid per ton. The unit cost
shall include all labor, material, equipment, hauling costs, spreading and
compacting of borrow material. The quantity of the granular material shall be
determined by the weight tickets collected by the inspector at the site.
§ 5.00 PAVEMENT.
§ 5.01 DRAINABLE GRANULAR SUBBASE.
   Granular material used for drainable subbase shall conform to IDOT
Specification 4121 and 4109 for gradation 12a. If access or construction
sequencing requires that concrete trucks must drive on the drainable subbase
course to place the fresh concrete, gradation 14 may be used with the approval
of the engineer. Recycled concrete may not be used.
 
Standard Sieve Size 1 1/2�1�3/4”1/2�3/8”4 8     30 50 100 200
Granular subbase    100                  40—80 5—25          0—6
Modified Subbase    100       70—90            10—40         3—10
 
§ 5.02 POROUS BACKFILL.
   Porous backfill for subdrain pipe shall conform to IDOT Specification 4131
and 4109 for gradation 29, as shown below.
 
Standard Sieve Size 1 1/2�1�3/4�1/2” 3/8” 4    8   30 50 100 200
Porous backfill               100  95—1050—100—50—8
 
§ 5.03 PIPE FOR LONGITUDINAL AND TRANSVERSE SUBDRAINS.
   (A)   Perforated corrugated polyethylene (PE) pipe and fittings shall
conform to IDOT Specification 4143.01B. The perforations shall be slots in
accordance with AASHTO M 252. Circular perforations will not be allowed.
   (B)   Subdrain outlets into open ditch sections shall be corrugated steel
culvert pipe in accordance with IDOT Specification 4141.01, including tapered
ends, when required.
   (C)   The outlet covering of all subdrain outlets shall be three-eighths-
inch mesh, galvanized hardware cloth screen.
   (D)   See IDOT Instructional Memorandum 443 and 443.01 for approved PE pipe
and rodent guard manufacturers and acceptance criteria.
§ 5.04 PORTLAND CEMENT.
   (A)   Normal portland cement shall conform to the latest Standard
Specification for portland cement Type I ASTM C-150.
   (B)   Air-entraining portland cement shall conform to the latest Standard
Specification for portland cement Type IA, ASTM C-150.
   (C)   High early strength portland cement shall conform to the latest
Standard Specification for portland cement Type III ASTM C-150.
§ 5.05 FLY ASH.
   (A)   Fly ash may be used as cementitious material in accordance with IDOT
Specifications 2301 and 4108. The maximum allowable fly ash substitution rate
is 20%.
   (B)   Between October 16 and March 15, substitution with fly ash will not be
allowed.
§ 5.06 AIR ENTRAINING ADMIXTURES.
   (A)   Except for air entrained portland cement, all portland cement shall be
treated with neutralized Vinsol Resin, Darex or other air entraining agents
approved by the engineer and shall conform to ASTM Specification C-260.
   (B)   All water-reducing, retarding and accelerating admixtures, if used,
shall conform to ASTM Specification C-494.
§ 5.07 WATER.
   (A)   Water used in mixing concrete shall be clean and free from deleterious
amounts of acid, alkali or organic materials.
   (B)   When a water supply is needed to perform the terms of the contract,
the contractor must provide same from private sources or in lieu thereof a
permit shall be obtained from the office of the Director of Public Works to
utilize the public fire hydrants. Contractors are forbidden to use hydrants
without said permit.
§ 5.08 REINFORCING STEEL FOR JOINTS.
   Reinforcing steel used shall conform to the latest ASTM Specification A-815
as shown in the standard details.
§ 5.09 REINFORCING MESH FOR SLABS.
   (A)   Steel for reinforcing mesh shall meet the standard requirements for
ASTM Specification A-82. The welded wire fabric mesh shall conform to ASTM
Specification A-185.
   (B)   The spacing of both the longitudinal and transverse wires shall be six
inches and both the longitudinal and transverse wire be six gauge. The mesh
shall weigh not less than 42 pounds per 100 square feet of area.
§ 5.10 FINE AGGREGATE.
   (A)   Fine aggregate shall be clean, hard, durable sand; shall range in size
from fine to coarse; shall be from an established source approved by the
engineer; and shall conform to ASTM Specification C-33 for “Concrete Aggregate”
and IDOT Specification § 4110. Sand shall not contain more than 2%, by weight,
of shale, coal and soft particles, nor more than 2.5%, by weight, of silt and
clay and shall be free from injurious amounts of deleterious substances. Fine
aggregate shall be IDOT Gradation 1.
   (B)   Samples of the fine aggregate shall be submitted to the engineer for
approval prior to use if requested.
§ 5.11 COARSE AGGREGATE.
   (A)   Coarse aggregate shall consist of gravel or crushed stone from an
established source approved by the engineer. Coarse aggregate shall not contain
more than 2%, by weight, of shale, coal and soft particles nor more than 2.5%,
by weight of silt and clay and shall be free from injurious amounts of
deleterious substances. All coarse aggregate shall comply with the following
requirements as to soundness, abrasion and size of particles and shall comply
with ASTM Specification C-33 for “Concrete Aggregate”.
   (B)   Coarse aggregate will be considered as unsound if any class of
particles in the representative sample has more than 12% weight loss when
subjected to five cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test in conformance
with ASTM Specification C-88 “Soundness of Aggregates by Use of Sodium Sulfate
or Magnesium Sulfate”.
   (C)   When the coarse aggregate is subjected to a test for resistance to
abrasion in compliance with ASTM Specification C-131, the maximum percentage of
wear shall be 50.
   (D)   Coarse aggregate shall be IDOT Gradation 3, Durability Class 3.
Samples of the coarse aggregate shall be submitted to the engineer prior to
use.
§ 5.12 STORAGE.
   All cement shall be kept clean, dry and free from weather damage. Each
gradation of aggregate shall be stockpiled separately on clean, non-
contaminated surfaces. The contractor shall stockpile each gradation so as to
avoid segregation.
§ 5.13 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE MIX DESIGN.
   (A)   The concrete mixture shall contain no more water than is necessary to
produce a concrete which is workable and plastic within the limits specified
for slump and in no case shall it be more than five and one-half gallons of
water per sack of cement including the free moisture contained in the
aggregate.
   (B)   The consistency of any concrete shall be such as to produce a mixture
with good workability, free from any segregation or honeycombing or produce a
homogeneous, sound and durable surface necessary for the quality of finish
specified. If the concrete fails to display any of the above characteristics,
the engineer shall be notified immediately.
   (C)   See IDOT Standard Specification § 2301 for other mix design
parameters. When in conflict with these specifications, use the standards
listed herein.
§ 5.14 TESTS FOR CONCRETE.
   (A)   The engineer will furnish the city with air content test results and
compressive strength test results. Said test results shall be forwarded to the
Street Superintendent.
   (B)   The maximum slump for concrete shall be three inches and the slump
test shall comply with ASTM Specification C-143. The entrained air content of
the mix shall be 5% to 7% and shall be measured in accordance with ASTM
Specification C-231 (Pressure Test). Not less than one slump and air test shall
be made for each 100 cubic yards of concrete placed at one operation.
   (C)   All concrete shall have a minimum ultimate 28-day compressive strength
of not less than 4,000 psi. Not less than one set of three test cylinders, six
inches in diameter and 12 inches in height shall be made for each 100 cubic
yards of concrete placed at one operation. The slump and air test shall be
performed at this time and the results recorded on the identification tags of
the test cylinders.
   (D)   The test cylinders shall be made by the engineer.
§ 5.15 CONCRETE MIXING.
   (A)   When a batch plant is to be used to mix the concrete, the contractor
shall obtain written approval from the engineer for the weighting equipment,
water measuring equipment, type of mixer and method of mixing.
   (B)   All concrete shall be ready mixed concrete and be mixed and delivered
to the site in accordance with ASTM Specification C-94, unless otherwise
approved by the engineer prior to the letting.
§ 5.16 PAVEMENT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   All pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these Standard
Specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, form and dimensions as
shown on the plans or specified in the detailed specifications.
§ 5.17 FORMS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by the detailed plans, steel side and curb
forms will be required to form the back of all slabs and curbs except where
street returns of small radii or other special sections make the use of
standard steel forms impractical.
   (B)   (1)   Side forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the
prescribed edge thickness of the pavement slab. They shall have a base width of
not less than eight inches for all forms eight inches or more in height. All
side forms less than eight inches in height shall have a base width of not less
than six inches. The minimum length of such section of form used shall be ten
feet.
      (2)   Each section of form used shall be straight, free from bends or
warps and shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled each time it is used before
concrete is placed against it. The method of connection between sections shall
be such that the joint formed shall be free from movement in any direction.
Forms shall be of such cross section and strength and so secured as to resist
the pressure of the concrete when placed and the impact and vibration of any
equipment which they support without springing or settlement.
   (C)   Wooden forms may be used for paving only when specifically provided
for on the plans or in special provisions with the exception that their use is
herein approved for all curves having a radii of less than 150 feet. Wooden
forms for use on tangents shall be dressed on one side three inches in
thickness, equal in depth to the edge thickness of the work prescribed and
shall have a minimum length of ten feet. Wooden forms for use on curves shall
be dressed on one side and equal in depth to the edge thickness of the
pavement. The forms shall be firmly nailed or secured to the side stakes and
securely braced at all points where necessary so that no movement will result
from pressure of the concrete or the impact of the tamper and finishing work.
   (D)   All other material and methods of constructing shall have the approval
of the engineer.
§ 5.18 SETTING AND REMOVING FORMS.
   (A)   Forms shall be set to line and grade on a prepared subgrade for at
least 300 feet ahead of the placing of the concrete. They shall be joined
neatly and tightly, shall be set with exactness to the required grade and
alignment and shall have a uniform bearing on the subgrade throughout their
entire length. The forms shall be tested for stability and any springing of
forms under any equipment operating thereon will not be permitted.
   (B)   Forms shall not be removed from the newly poured pavement for a period
of 48 hours, unless specifically authorized by the engineer.
§ 5.19 SUBGRADE TREATMENT.
   The subgrade or subbase must be thoroughly wetted just prior to the
placement of the concrete or polyethylene film or waterproof paper must be
placed on the subgrade. Polyethylene shall not be used between concrete and
drainable granular subbase.
§ 5.20 PLACING DRAINABLE GRANULAR SUBBASE.
   (A)   Granular subbase shall be placed in accordance with IDOT Specification
§ 2111.03 to meet the requirements set forth for secondary projects. Compact
subbase material to 95% of maximum consolidation (standard proctor density).
Maximum consolidation may be determined in the field on an initial trial
section using nuclear testing equipment, under the direction of the engineer.
   (B)   Subbase material placed on the prepared subgrade shall have a uniform
moisture content throughout the material to produce the required density,
together with stability.
   (C)   The subbase shall be constructed so that the finished subbase conforms
to the designed profile and cross section to the extent that it is not higher
than the designed elevation and at no point is lower than 0.05 foot below this
elevation.
§ 5.21 CONSTRUCTION OF LONGITUDINAL AND TRANSVERSE SUBDRAINS.
   Place three inches of porous backfill, gradation #29, in trench bottom,
install subdrain pipe, backfill up to 36 inches of trench depth per lift.
Compact each lift of backfill with vibratory compactor and approved trench
roller, narrower in width than the trench, to maximum consolidation.
§ 5.22 PLACING REINFORCING MESH.
   (A)   Reinforcing mesh if used shall be placed at the midpoint of the
thickness of the slab. It shall be parallel to the finished surface.
   (B)   Adjacent sheets shall lap at least the length of one spacing of the
fabric in either direction. Whenever a trench used for sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water main or any other utility is encountered, the contractor shall
overlap adjacent sheets at least four feet and centered on the utility. The
overlap at the utility trench may be waived at the discretion of the engineer.
   (C)   Reinforcing mesh shall extend to within two inches of any edge of
concrete and to within two inches of either side of construction or expansion
joint.
§ 5.23 PLACING OF CONCRETE.
   After mixing, concrete shall be deposited rapidly in successive batches upon
the prepared subgrade to the required depth and for the entire width of the
pavement strip being constructed without the use of intermediate forms.
Concrete shall be spread evenly over the subgrade to such a depth that will
leave it slightly above the surface desired allowing enough surplus for
compaction and a surplus in front of the screed tamper and strike-off template.
§ 5.24 EXPANSION JOINTS.
   (A)   Transverse expansion joints shall be constructed at the end of a
radius at all intersections, at the beginning and ending of all curves and at
all locations where new concrete abuts old concrete.
   (B)   Expansion joints shall be formed by inserting, in the proper place,
strips of approved, preformed joint fillers one inch thick and cut to the shape
of the crown of the pavement or of such length as will adjust to the shape of
the crown. The joint fillers shall be bituminous type or non-extruding and
resilient bituminous type and shall conform to ASTM Specification D-994 or ASTM
Specification D-1751, respectively. The joint filler shall be one-half inch
less than the thickness of the slab. The joint filler shall be set in place
ahead of the pouring of the concrete perpendicular to the surface of the
pavement and in a straight line at right angles to the center line of the
pavement and resting on the subgrade. These strips shall be so set that the top
of the strip is approximately one-half inch below the top of the finished
pavement at all points. They shall be inserted continuously from the back of
the integral curb or of the pavement on one side to the back of the integral
curb or the pavement on the other side. Said strips shall be held securely to
grade and alignment so that there is no appreciable movement of the same from
the original position after placing and finishing of the concrete. Tamping,
striking, floating and finishing shall be carried continuously across the
joint. At the proper time after finishing, the concrete above the top of the
joint filler shall be removed so as to expose the joint filler and the edges of
the concrete shall be finished with a tool of one-half inch radius. The space
between the top of the expansion joint and the top of the pavement shall be
filled with hot expansion joint filler has herein specified.
   (C)   Bars in accordance with detail SD-23 shall be inserted through the
pre-mold expansion joint on the center height of the concrete with eight inches
of the bar on one side of the expansion joint material and seven inches on the
other side. The dowels shall be coated with heavy grease and a metal expansion
tube which is at least six inches long shall be placed over the seven-inch
exposed part of the dowel.
§ 5.25 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS.
   (A)   Whenever the work of paving stops, for 30 minutes or more, a header,
the top of which is true to the shape and grade of the finished pavement shall
be set in a vertical position at right angles to the center line of the
pavement. The concrete shall be poured up the header and spaded and tamped into
place so as to leave no porous place in the concrete. A one-half inch radius
edging tool shall be used on the corners.
   (B)   Bars in accordance with detail SD-23 shall be installed in the
concrete. When work is resumed, the exposed portion of the dowel shall be
covered with heavy grease. The fresh concrete shall be placed directly against
the face of the previously poured concrete and well spaded around the rods. The
edge of the freshly poured concrete shall be finished with a one-half radius
edging tool.
§ 5.26 CONTRACTION JOINTS.
   Contraction joints shall be constructed as shown on the standard details and
the transverse joints shall be placed at a maximum of 15 feet center to center
along the pavement center line. These transverse contraction joints shall be
formed by sawing one fourth of the paving depth as herein specified.
§ 5.27 LONGITUDINAL JOINTS.
   (A)   Longitudinal joints in the street shall be constructed with bars in
accordance with detail SD-22. Longitudinal joints at the center line for half
width paving, bars shall be bent at 90 degrees in the center, and placed at the
mid-way point in the slab depth. One leg shall extend at right angles to the
center line into the first pour and separated from the first pour by means of a
continuous keyboard. Prior to pouring the second half of the pavement, the
dowels shall be straightened. Great care must be used in straightening the
dowels so as not to injure the concrete already in place. In no case are the
dowels to be straightened before 72 hours after the first pour.
   (B)   If the pavement is to be poured through a longitudinal joint, the
keyboard shall be eliminated. Bars in accordance with detail SD-22 shall be
placed at the mid-way point in the slab depth and centered on the longitudinal
joint. The joint shall be formed by sawing as herein specified.
§ 5.28 JOINT SEALING COMPOUND.
   (A)   Sealing material for filling all types of pavement joints shall be hot
poured, thermal plastic meeting the IDOT requirements of Article 4136.02.
   (B)   Sealer material shall be heated, handled and applied according to
manufacturer’s recommendations. The material shall not crack or break its bond
when exposed to temperatures of 0°F or below.
§ 5.29 HOT WEATHER PROTECTION.
   If concrete is placed when the weather is such that the temperature of the
concrete would exceed 90°F, as determined by the engineer, the contractor shall
employ effective means such as precooling of aggregate and mixing water as
necessary to maintain the temperature of the concrete as it is placed below
90°F. The contractor shall be entitled to no additional compensation on account
of the foregoing requirements.
§ 5.30 COLD WEATHER PROTECTION.
   If concrete is placed when the weather is such that the temperature of the
concrete would be less than 50°F, as determined by the engineer, the contractor
shall employ effective means such as heating of aggregate and mixing water as
necessary to maintain the temperature of the concrete as it is placed above
50°F. All surface with which concrete is to come in contact with must be free
from frost or ice. The temperature of the concrete must be maintained above
50°F for a period of five days.
§ 5.31 FINAL SURFACE FINISH.
   The final surface finish for the paving shall be a broom, artificial turf or
burlap drag finish to meet the approval of the engineer.
§ 5.32 CURING METHODS.
   Provisions shall be made for maintaining concrete in a continuously moist
condition for a period of at least seven days after placement of the concrete
by means of curing compound, polyethylene film, waterproof paper or wet burlap.
§ 5.33 SAWING, CLEANING AND FILLING JOINTS.
   (A)   Whenever sawed joints are to be provided they are to be sawed with a
machine made especially designed for sawing concrete. The saw cuts are to have
a depth of one-fourths of the thickness of the paving slab and a minimum width
of one-eighths inch. Such sawing shall be done as soon as possible but under no
circumstances shall the time of such sawing exceed 24 hours after the placing
of the concrete.
   (B)   Just prior to filling the sawed joints in hardened concrete, each
joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material to its full depth by
means of compressed air at sufficient pressure to accomplish the result
satisfactory to the engineer.
   (C)   Joints shall be filled in such a manner that the filler not be spilled
on the surface of the concrete. Sufficient filler shall be inserted into the
joints so that the filler is flush with the surface of the pavement when the
work is completed. When filling joints on slopes and intersections, the work
shall start at the lowest point and progress toward the highest point.
§ 5.34 BACKFILLING.
   After the forms have been removed, the contractor shall backfill and grade
the area from the back of the curb to the property line with a one-half inch
per foot incline from the level of the curb to the property line. The
contractor shall not be paid for this portion of the excavation. It shall be
included in the unit price for the pavement.
§ 5.35 FINAL CLEANING.
   After all construction is completed and prior to final acceptance, the
concrete pavement shall be free of all foreign material. When necessary, the
entire job or portions thereof shall be required to be broomed or cleaned to
the approval of the engineer.
§ 5.36 DEFICIENT THICKNESS.
   (A)   Pavement slab thickness will be determined by at least two cores taken
from each lane and at such other locations as the engineer may direct.
   (B)   (1)   Payment will not be made for slabs deficient in thickness by
more than one-half inch. If so ordered by the engineer, such slabs shall be
removed and replaced at the expense of the contractor with concrete of required
thickness which when accepted shall be included in the pay yardage.
      (2)   Deductions for deficiency in thickness are herewith tabulated:
 
Proportional Part of
Deficiency in Thickness Contract Price Allowed
0.00” - 0.25”       100%
0.26” - 0.50”       ratio (actual thickness) squared
                        (specified thickness) squared
greater than 0.5”     None
 
§ 5.37 SMOOTHNESS.
   The city will check PCC pavement surfaces with a ten foot straightedge
placed parallel to the center line. Areas showing high spots of more than one-
fourths of an inch in ten feet will be marked. Complete surface corrections
according to the procedures in IDOT § 2316 to an elevation where the area or
spot will not show surface deviations in excess of one-eighths inch when tested
with a ten foot straightedge. Surface corrections will be completed at the
direction of the city with no additional cost to the city.
§ 5.38 PAYMENT.
   (A)   Granular subbase. Granular subbase shall be paid for at the contract
unit price bid. The unit price shall include payment for all labor, materials
and equipment for loading, hauling, placing and compacting the material. The
unit price bid shall also include the removal and disposal of the soil
displaced by the subbase in cut areas. The weight of granular subbase for
payment shall be computed in tons by the engineer from delivery tickets
furnished to the engineer at the time of delivery.
   (B)   Pipe for subdrains. Pipe for subdrains shall be paid for per linear
feet. The price bid shall include payment for all labor, materials, equipment
and tools for excavating, disposal of waste material, placing of pipe, granular
backfill, fittings, connections, outlets, rodent guards and incidentals to
place the pipe. The length will be measured by the engineer in length of pipe
placed.
   (C)   Concrete pavement.
      (1)   Concrete payment shall be paid per square yard. The unit price
shall include the cost of the concrete; setting and removing the forms; the
reinforcing mesh, if required; joint construction; hot or cold weather
protection, if needed; backfilling; final clean-up; and all other labor and
materials incidental to pavement construction.
      (2)   The square yardage of concrete pavement will be computed as the
measured center line distance times the nominal width plus the intersection
areas placed.
§ 6.00 ASPHALTIC CONCRETE.
§ 6.01 PAVEMENT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   All pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these Standard
Specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, forms and dimensions
as shown on the plans or specified in the detailed specifications and standard
details. Asphalt concrete work shall conform to IDOT Specification §§ 2202 and
2303, except as herein amended.
§ 6.02 MATERIALS.
   (A)   Asphalt binder shall comply with IDOT Specification §§ 2303 and 4137
for PG 58-28.
   (B)   The minimum allowable asphalt mix design shall be an IDOT HMA 300K
mix, but calculations must be provided to document whether a stronger mix is
required. Minimum lift thickness shall be one and one-half inch and maximum
lift thickness shall be two and one-half inches.
   (C)   Asphalt tack coat, when required, shall comply with IDOT Specification
§ 2303. Bituminous tack coat material shall be SS-1, SS-1H, CSS-1 or CSS-1H.
Application rate shall be 0.02 to 0.05 gallons per square yard when applied
between courses to horizontal surfaces, and 0.10 to 0.15 gallons per square
yard when applied to vertical surfaces such as exposed joints or concrete curb
and gutter.
§ 6.03 SUBMITTALS.
   Submit job mix design and submit samples of material for laboratory analysis
if requested by the engineer. Provide certificates that materials comply with
specification requirements signed by the asphalt concrete producer and
contractor.
§ 6.04 TESTS FOR ASPHALT.
   The engineer shall be responsible for furnishing the city with depth
measurements, densities, extraction and gradation tests results from an
approved testing agency when required by the contract documents. Said test
results shall be forwarded to the Street Superintendent. The contractor shall
assist the engineer in obtaining samples as necessary.
§ 6.05 PAVEMENT.
   Payment for asphaltic concrete work will be based on the contractors unit
bid price for asphalt binder course and/or asphalt surface course. Bituminous
priming and tack coat shall be incidental to the asphalt paving course bid
items.
§ 7.00 CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION.
§ 7.01 GENERAL ITEMS.
   Whenever curb and gutter is specified it shall be of the shape as shown on
the standard details. The same specifications for the portland cement concrete,
excavation, preparing the subgrade, subgrade treatment, setting and removing
forms, backfilling, final finish and curing procedures for concrete shall meet
the requirements as set forth for the portland cement concrete pavement
construction as herein specified.
§ 7.02 EXPANSION JOINTS.
   The spacing, location and pre-molded fiber shall be the same for expansion
joints for curb and gutter as that specified for expansion joints for portland
cement concrete pavement. Two dowel bars shall be used to fasten abutting
sections of concrete curb and gutter. These dowels shall be of the same
material, size, covering and the like as provided in §
5.25 of this chapter except that they shall be placed on centers of not less
than 12 inches and not more than 18 inches.
§ 7.03 CONTRACTION JOINTS.
   Contraction joints shall be constructed and spaced at a maximum of 20 feet,
center to center, along the center line of the curb and gutter. These
transverse contraction joints shall be formed by sawing as herein specified.
§ 7.04 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS.
   The use of and the construction practices for construction joints for
concrete curb and gutter shall be the same as those for construction joints for
portland cement concrete pavement as outlined in §
5.21 of this chapter. Two dowel bars shall be used through the header to fasten
the abutting sections. These dowels shall be the same material, size and
covering and the like as provided in §
5.21 of this chapter except that they shall be place on centers of not less
than 12 inches and not more 18 inches.
§ 7.05 PAYMENT.
   Concrete curb and gutter shall be paid per lineal foot. The unit price shall
include the cost of the concrete, excavation, preparing the subgrade, subgrade
treatment, setting and removing forms, backfilling, final finish, curing of the
concrete and joint construction and all other labor and materials incidental to
concrete curb and gutter construction. The lineal footage of the concrete curb
and gutter shall be computed as the measurement along the back of the curb.
§ 8.00 PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   See standard drawing for detailed information on sidewalks.
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed a minimum of five feet in width,
except that sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in blocks with existing
sidewalks shall be of the same width and of the same distance from the property
line as the existing sidewalks, as determined by the Building Official.
   (C)   Subbase. For all sidewalks, shared use paths and driveways, place and
compact a minimum three-inch subbase material which complies with Iowa DOT
Gradation 11 unless otherwise specified in the contract documents or approved
by City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-09, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 8.01 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE.
   The portland cement concrete used for sidewalks shall conform to §
5.00, “Portland Cement Concrete for Pavement”, as herein specified.
§ 8.02 FORMS.
   (A)   Steel or wooden forms may be used for sidewalks. The forms shall be
smooth, straight and of sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape
and of depth to conform to the full thickness of the proposed walk.
   (B)   Forms shall be equal in depth to the edge thickness of the walk (four
inches), shall have a minimum length of ten feet and shall be well-staked and
thoroughly braced and set to the established lines. Their upper edges shall
conform to the grade of the finished walk, which shall have sufficient fall
from the lot line towards the curb line to provide drainage, which shall not
exceed one-fourths inch per foot. The setting and removing of the forms shall
conform to §
5.18 of this chapter.
§ 8.03 EXPANSION JOINTS.
   (A)   Approved expansion joint material as specified in §
5.24 of this chapter, one-half inch in thickness, shall be inserted wherever
the walk abuts against an intersecting walk, building or driveway wherever the
walk terminates at a street, alley or other pavement and shall be spaced at a
maximum of 100 feet, measured along the center line.
   (B)   The expansion joint material shall be as wide as the sidewalk is thick
and shall be set in the proper location prior to pouring the concrete. It shall
be set perpendicular to the surface of the walk and in a straight line at right
angles to the longitudinal edge of the walk with the upper edge of the
expansion joint material flush with the surface of the walk when finished.
§ 8.04 CONTRACTION OR DUMMY JOINTS.
   (A)   All walks four feet wide shall have contraction or dummy joints spaced
at no more than five feet center to center along the sidewalk center line.
Walks of other widths shall be cut into sections of such lengths as directed by
the engineer.
   (B)   The depth of all contraction or dummy joints shall be one-third the
thickness of the finished walk. The contraction joints and edges of the
separate slabs of walk shall be finished with an edging tool with a one-half-
inch radius.
§ 8.05 FINAL FINISH.
   The final surface of all walks shall be finished to uniform grade and
alignment throughout and float finish with a light broom final surface with the
broom striations to be at right angles to the direction of traffic.
§ 8.06 CURING METHODS.
   Provisions shall be made for maintaining concrete in a continuously moist
condition for a period of at least seven days after placement of the concrete
by means of curing compounds, polyethylene film, waterproof paper or wet
burlap.
§ 8.07 BACKFILLING.
   When a walk is completed, the contractor shall backfill any and all trenches
or holes which were used in setting the forms for the walk. Such fill shall be
made with a good grade of dirt which shall be reasonably free from rocks or
other undesirable objects. The upper six inches shall be topsoil.
§ 9.00 SURFACE RESTORATION.
   (A)   The contractor shall seed or sod disturbed areas as shown on the
plans.
   (B)   Prior to final soil preparations for all areas to be seeded,
fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of ten pounds per 1,000 square feet of
area. The fertilizer shall be commercial type either organic or inorganic
material and shall be normal 12-12-12 proportions containing nitrogen,
phosphorus and potash. Delivery to the site shall be in labeled bags with the
manufacturer’s guaranteed analysis. The fertilizer shall be applied uniformly
over the entire area by a distributor or spreader which is approved by the
engineer. After spreading the fertilizer, the contractor shall incorporate it
into the upper four inches of the soil by discing and then harrowing until all
ground clods and chunks have been broken up and the soil is ready for seeding.
The discing and harrowing may be omitted if the seed and fertilizer is applied
hydraulically.
   (C)   The seed mixture of 40% Kentucky Blue Grass, 30% Creeping Red Fescue
and 30% Perennial Rye shall be applied at the rate of four pounds per 1,000
square feet of area using an engineer approved method to guarantee an even
coverage. The seed mixture for roadway embankments shall be 50% tall Fescue,
10% White Dutch Clover, 20% Sweet Clover and 20% Perennial Rye Grass. Seed that
has become moldy, wet or otherwise damaged iron transportation or storage will
not be acceptable.
   (D)   Before seed has been sown, all debris shall be cleaned from the area.
After seeding, the entire area shall then be compacted with a cultipactor,
roller or other approved equipment. Final rolling shall be along contours and
across slopes to reduce water erosion.
   (E)   All seeded areas shall be hydraulically mulched at a rate in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Hydraulic mulch mixtures shall be
wood cellulose fiber, bonded fiber matrix or mechanically-bonded fiber matrix
meeting the requirements of IDOT § 4169.07(B).
   (F)   The contractor shall sod all areas as shown on the plans with three-
fourths inch thick nursery grown Blue Grass Sod of good quality. All sod shall
be placed with pieces tightly abutting each other and shall be staked with thin
wood stakes to prevent slipping. The contractor shall then roll sod with a
light roller to provide an even surface and to make tight contact between the
roots and the subgrade. After sodding, the contractor shall apply the above
specified fertilizer at the rate of ten pounds per 1,000 square feet of area.
   (G)   The contractor shall keep the area continually damp until the sod or
grass is well established.
   (H)   Areas rendered barren or sparse due to erosion or other weathering
actions shall be reseeded on a one time only basis at no charge to the owner.
Areas designated as such shall be reseeded using the original seed mixture
within ten days of notification or as soon as weather permits.
§ 9.01 EROSION CONTROL ALONG BACK OF CURB.
   If grading allows sediment to reach the street, perimeter controls must be
in place. Grading in right-of-way must be complete before private utilities
land owner sign-off.
§ 9.02 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT.
   No separate payment will be made for the work covered in this part of the
specifications.
CHAPTER 11: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 12: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 13: STREET IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Standard signs
   
3.00   Ornamental signs
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the purpose of the city to provide identification of street
locations in a readable, easy to locate fashion.
§ 2.00 STANDARD SIGNS.
   The standard street sign shall consist of two signs, one identifying each
intersecting street, mounted on a steel pole. Signs shall be placed at one
quadrant of each street intersection in the city. The standard street signs
shall be owned and maintained by the city. Variations to the use of the
standard sign requires the approval of the City Council.
§ 3.00 ORNAMENTAL SIGNS.
   (A)   A developer may wish to install ornamental signs in a new subdivision.
The design of ornamental street signs must be submitted to the City Council for
approval. Once approval of the design has been granted, the developer shall pay
all costs for the initial purchase and installation of the signs. Actual
installation will be done by the city and billed to the developer. After
initial installation, the signs will be maintained by the city. However, the
city reserves the right to install standard street signs in place of ornamental
signs.
   (B)   Ornamental street signs may be placed in previously developed areas in
response to petitions submitted by residents of the area. Approval, payment and
installation of these signs shall follow the same procedure used for new
subdivisions.
CHAPTER 14: STREET LIGHTING
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Standard lights
   
3.00   Installation in new subdivisions
   
4.00   Installation in new subdivisions
   
5.00   Installation of new lights in previously developed areas
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the general purpose of the city to provide an adequate and
consistent street lighting pattern which is able to produce quick, accurate and
comfortable light at night.
§ 2.00 STANDARD LIGHTS.
   The standard light will consist of a high pressure sodium luminaire
installed on a wood pole with a luminaire mounting height of between 25 and 30
feet above the roadway depending upon the lumen rating of the light. The light
shall be designed to produce efficient lighting at the lowest cost. Variations
to the use of the standard will require the approval of the City Council. The
standard light will be owned and maintained by the Eldridge Electric and Water
Utility, Iowa-Illinois Gas and Electric Company or Iowa Electric Light and
Power Company depending on the location of the lights.
§ 3.00 INSTALLATION IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The light pattern shall be designed so that the lowest FC (foot
candle) value at any point on the roadway surface will not be less than one-
sixth the average value. For residential roadways, the average value shall be
0.2 FC. The lowest average value in commercial and industrial subdivisions
shall be 0.2 FC; however, higher average values may be considered depending
upon the usage and traffic in the area. In a new subdivision, the appropriate
utility company will submit a lighting plan for review by the City Council.
   (B)   The plan will be submitted shortly after the adoption of the final
subdivision plat and will be developed using a minimum average lighting value
of 0.2 FC, inclusive of other ambient lighting, or a higher value if
established by the City Council and the following guides.
      (1)   All intersections will be lighted.
      (2)   All cul-de-sacs will be lighted.
      (3)   Mid-block lights will be installed at approximately 250-foot
intervals.
§ 4.00 INSTALLATION IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   In residential areas, the developer may wish to use ornamental lights
provided by the electric utility servicing that area. The developer shall pay
any initial installation costs that may be charged by the electric utility. The
lights shall be installed and maintained by the appropriate electric utility.
The rental rates shall be based upon wattage and shall be the same as for the
standard light. The procedure for installation of these lights will be similar
to the installation procedure of the standard light in new subdivisions, with
the exception that there will be no attempt to establish an average FC value.
§ 5.00 INSTALLATION OF NEW LIGHTS IN PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS.
   (A)   (1)   Street lights and alley lights in developed areas shall
generally be installed in response to petitions submitted by residents of an
area.
      (2)   The petition shall contain the following:
         (a)   The reason for requesting the light or lights;
         (b)   Specific location of the proposed light or lights;
         (c)   Designation of a contact person to whom correspondence can be
addressed; and
         (d)   Signatures, addresses and phone numbers of residents supporting
the installation of the light. All affected residents near the requested
installation shall be asked to sign the petition.
   (B)   All petitioned installations will be field checked by the Department
of Public Works to ensure suitability. The Public Works Department will
recommend to the City Council whether the light or lights should be installed.
CHAPTER 15: CITY BASE OR DATUM PLANE
Section
   
1.00   City base
   
2.00   Bench marks
   
3.00   Description of elevations
   
4.00   On file
§ 1.00 CITY BASE.
   The official city base or datum plane of reference is hereby fixed at a
point 784.96 feet above sea level, according the U.S.C. & G. Monument (H-70,
1943) located east of railroad by and north of LeClaire Road at First Street
and LeClaire Road, that the U.S.C. & G. elevation equals 793.21 which equals
784.96 in the city datum.
§ 2.00 BENCH MARKS.
   (A)   The primal bench marks in the city, and the elevation thereof in
reference to the city datum plane or base are as follows:
      (1)   Southeast bolt fire hydrant northwest corner of First and Sheridan:
786.45;
      (2)   “X” northwest corner pump island southwest corner First and
LeClaire: 788.20;
      (3)   Top south bolt on fire hydrant at northwest corner North Second and
West LeClaire: 790.19;
      (4)   East bolt fire hydrant on Fourth and LeClaire: 790.60;
      (5)   East bolt fire hydrant on Seventh and LeClaire: 777.67;
      (6)   East bolt fire hydrant northwest corner Fourth and Davenport:
792.49;
      (7)   South bolt fire hydrant Third and Franklin: 791.53;
      (8)   East bolt fire hydrant Fourth and Franklin at Franklin Park:
792.33;
      (9)   East bolt fire hydrant Fourth and Donahue: 791.37;
      (10)   East bolt fire hydrant Second and Franklin: 790.78;
      (11)   East bolt fire hydrant southeast corner Third and Davies: 788.60;
      (12)   South bolt fire hydrant Third and Donahue: 789.47;
      (13)   Southeast bolt fire hydrant south side Price 200 feet +/- west of
North First: 787.86;
      (14)   “X” cut on east headwall box culvert on east side North First
Street 500 +/- north of Sheridan Park (south one of two): 767.91;
      (15)   Southwest bole of first hydrant south side Price Street at alley
between North First Street and North Second Street: 787.67;
      (16)   “M” in Mueller on hydrant at southeast corner Price Street and
North Sixth Avenue: 777.23;
      (17)   “[]” cut in southeast side light pole base at south end of center
island of North Sixth Avenue, north side of LeClaire Road: 788.96;
      (18)   “[]” cut on northeast corner of concrete pad at electrical panel
on south side Sheridan Park outside “A” Frame building: 771.59;
      (19)   “[]” cut on southeast corner of concrete pad for “Casey’s” pylon
sign north side LeClaire Road 100’ +/- west of Ninth Avenue: 791.33; and
      (20)   Arrow on fire hydrant at southeast corner Price Street and North
Ninth Avenue: 775.44.
   (B)   Control points:
      (1)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line LeClaire Road and North
First Street: 788.28;
      (2)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line South Ninth Avenue and
East Iowa Street: 783.11;
      (3)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line South 16th Avenue extended
to north: 775.25;
      (4)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line LeClaire Road and South
14th Avenue: 781.07;
      (5)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line South First Street and
Spring Street: 785.31;
      (6)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line South First Street and
center line of drive to west at 850 South First Street: 776.54;
      (7)   Brass disk at center line-to-center line South First Street and
Lincoln Road: 770.52;
      (8)   Brass disk at center line South First Street opposite farm drive at
2201 South First Street: 763.5;
      (9)   Brass disk at center line Blackhawk Trail at 27 feet+/- east of
center line South First Street: 724.15;
      (10)   Brass disk at center line Trails Road and 36 feet+/- east of
center line of South First Street: 731.90;
      (11)   Brass disk at center line Trails Road 650 feet+/- east of twin
culverts at creek: 722.45;
      (12)   Brass disk at center line Blackhawk Trail and center line drive to
“Loftus” 501 Blackhawk Trail: 727.75;
      (13)   Brass disk in concrete shoulder at northwest corner bridge
Blackhawk Trail over Highway 61: 757.31; and
      (14)   Concrete nail near northwest corner bridge Lincoln Road over
Highway 61.
§ 3.00 DESCRIPTION OF ELEVATIONS.
   All official elevations hereafter established in the city shall be described
with reference to their elevation as compared to the official base or datum
plane in feet and decimal parts of a foot. No grade or official elevation shall
be established other than by chapter, and in the manner described in this
chapter.
§ 4.00 ON FILE.
   That the official elevations in existence as of the date of this chapter on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 16: STREET GRADES
Section
   
1.00   Center line paving grades
   
1.01   Donahue Street
   
2.00   Grades
   
3.00   Grades
   
4.00   Grades
   
5.00   Grades
   
6.00   Grades
   
7.00   Grades
   
8.00   Grades
   
9.00   Grades
   
10.00   Grades
   
11.00   Grades
   
12.00   Grades
§ 1.00 CENTER LINE PAVING GRADES.
   (A)   The center line paving grades for the street listed below are
established in accordance with the following elevations. Grade elevations are
to U.S.G.S. datum and are designated at the stations indicated at 100 foot
intervals.
   (B)   This section establishes official grades for permanent street
improvements on the following streets or portions thereof.
§ 1.01 DONAHUE STREET.
Donahue Street
Station Center Line Grade
Donahue Street
Station                            Center Line Grade
-1+00 (CENTER LINE DONAHUE STREET) 786.00
0+00                               785.50
1+00                               785.07
2+00                               785.60
3+00                               786.20
4+00                               786.80
5+00                               787.44
6+00                               788.60
7+00                               788.78
8+00                               788.51
9+00                               788.99
10+00                              789.09
11+00                              788.58
12+00                              788.05
13+00                              787.11
14+00                              786.58
14+12.83                           786.52
 
§ 2.00 GRADES.
   This section establishes grades for the following streets or portions
thereof:
§ 2.01.   Fourth Street from the north line of LeClaire Road to the south line
of Price Street;
§ 2.02.   Davenport Street from 140 feet west of the west line of North Fifth
Street to the west line of North Second Street;
§ 2.03.   South Eighth Street from the center of LeClaire Road approximately
250 feet south to meet existing concrete pavement;
§ 2.04.   Alley in Block 6, Original City, from the north line of Davenport
Street to the south line of Franklin Street;
§ 2.05.   Alley in Block 14, Original City, from the north line of Davenport
Street to the south line of Franklin Street; and
§ 2.06.   Wade Street from the center line of North First Street to a line 100
feet east of the east line of North Second Street.
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         West East
Station                                        Top of Curb Grade
                                               West   East
6+12 S   END OF PAVING AT                      788.11 788.11
6+00 S   LECLAIRE ROAD                         788.16 788.16
5+50 S                                         788.38 788.38
5+00 S                                         788.60 788.60
4+50 S                                         788.82 788.82
4+00 S                                         789.04 789.04
3+50 S                                         789.26 789.26
3+00 S                                         789.48 789.48
2+50 S                                         789.70 789.70
2+00 S                                         789.92 789.92
1+50 S                                         789.72 789.72
1+00 S                                         789.52 789.52
0+50 S                                         789.32 789.32
0+34 S   E.O.R. EAST                           789.26 789.26
0+30.5 S E.O.R. WEST                           789.25 789.25
0+00 S   E. LECLAIRE/E. DAVENPORT
0+34 N   BEGIN PAVING AT E.O.R.                790.10 790.10
0+50 N                                         790.18 790.18
1+00 N                                         790.43 790.43
1+50 N                                         790.68 790.68
1+75 N                                         790.81 790.81
2+00 N                                         790.85 790.85
2+25 N                                         790.76 790.76
2+50 N                                         790.59 790.59
3+00 N                                         790.25 790.25
3+50 N                                         789.91 789.91
4+00 N                                         789.57 789.57
4+50 N                                         789.23 789.23
4+75 N                                         789.06 789.06
5+00 N                                         788.96 788.96
5+25 N                                         788.99 788.99
5+50 N                                         789.09 789.09
5+75 N                                         789.19 789.19
6+00 N                                         789.14 789.14
6+25.5 N END PAVING E.O.R. AT DONAHUE STREET   788.82 788.82
6+93.5   START PAVING E.O.R. AT DONAHUE STREET 788.86 788.86
7+06                                           789.01 789.01
7+18.5 N                                       788.94 788.94
7+50 N                                         788.52 788.52
7+75 N                                         788.18 788.18
8+00 N                                         787.89 787.89
8+25 N                                         787.72 787.72
8+45 N                                         787.62 787.62
8+70 N                                         787.55 787.55
8+95 N                                         787.59 787.59
9+50 N                                         787.81 787.81
 
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         West East
Station                        Top of Curb Grade
                               West   East
9+83.5    E.O.R. DAVIES STREET 787.94 787.94
9+95 N                         787.99
10+20 N                        788.03
10+44.5 N                      787.98 787.98
10+45 N                        787.97 787.97
11+00 N                        787.69 787.69
11+50 N                        787.44 787.44
12+05 N                        787.17 787.17
12+30 N                        787.12 787.12
12+55 N                        787.24 787.24
13+00 N                        787.60 787.60
13+48.9   END JOB              787.99 787.99
 
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:  North South
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:                                       North  South
0+00                                                         788.40 788.40
0+50                                                         787.80 787.80
1+00                                                         786.60 786.60
2+06 E                 (E.O.R.) NORTH OF FIFTH STREET        785.51 785.51
2+50 E                                                       786.33 786.33
3+00 E                                                       787.26 787.26
3+15 E                                                       787.54 787.54
3+40 E                                                       788.00 788.00
3+65 E                                                       788.23 788.23
4+00 E                                                       788.44 788.44
4+50 E                                                       788.74 788.74
5+00 E                                                       789.04 789.04
5+17.10 E              (E.O.R.) NORTH FOURTH STREET          789.14 789.14
5+50 E                                                       789.34
5+8.10 E                                                     789.51 789.17
6+00 E                                                       789.64 789.30
6+50 E                                                       789.94 789.60
7+00 E                                                       790.24 789.90
7+35 E                                                       790.45
7+55 E                                                       790.23
7+60 E                                                       790.53
7+80 E                                                       790.31
7+85 E                                                       790.40
8+00 E                                                       790.28
8+05 E                                                       790.18
8+50 E                                                       789.88 789.81
8+63 E                 (E.O.R.) CENTRAL DRIVE                789.83 789.70
9+00 E                                                       789.68
9+14 E                 (E.O.R.) CENTRAL DRIVE                789.62 789.53
9+50 E                                                       789.48 789.13
9+65.3 E               END A.C. PAVEMENT AND CURB AND GUTTER 789.62
                       NORTH SIDE
10+00 E                                                      788.87
10+50 E                                                      788.61
11+00 E                                                      788.35
11+50 E                                                      788.09
12+00 E                                                      787.83
12+50 E                                                      787.57
13+00 E                                                      787.31
13+29.5 E              END OF 30 INCHES CURB AND GUTTER      787.16
                       CONSTRUCTION
 
SOUTH 8TH STREET
Station  Center Line
SOUTH 8TH STREET
Station                             Center Line
0+00 N   START PAVEMENT WEST HALF   771.42
0+50 N                              771.10
0+70.5 N START PAVEMENT BOTH HALVES 770.97
0+75 N                              770.94
1+00 N                              770.64
1+25 N                              769.88
1+50 N                              768.98
1+75 N                              768.08
1+90 N                              767.54
2+10 N                              767.05
2+15     END OF PAVEMENT            767.04
 
ALLEY BLOCK 6 FROM:
Station  Center Line West
ALLEY BLOCK 6 FROM:
Station                                         Center Line West
0+25    START SIX INCHES P.C.C. PAVEMENT        788.01
0+31.5  (E.O.R.) NORTH OR DAVENPORT EAST STREET             788.08
0+50 N                                          788.29
0+75 N                                          788.57
1+00 N                                          788.87
1+25 N                                          789.15
1+50 N                                          789.44
1+75 N                                          789.73
2+00 N                                          790.02
2+25 N                                          790.31
2+50 N                                          790.59
2+75 N                                          790.88
2+76.5  END OF PAVEMENT                         790.90
 
ALLEY BLOCK 14 FROM:
Station  Center Line
ALLEY BLOCK 14 FROM:
Station                                Center Line
0+30    START 6 INCHES P.C.C. PAVEMENT 785.26
0+50 N                                 785.15
0+70 N                                 785.26
0+75 N                                 785.32
1+00 N                                 785.59
1+25 N                                 785.87
1+50 N                                 786.14
2+00 N                                 786.42
2+25 N                                 786.07
2+50 N                                 787.08
2+71    END OF PAVEMENT                786.92
 
WADE STREET FROM:
Station  Center Line
WADE STREET FROM:
Station                                Center Line
1+30    START 8 INCHES P.C.C. PAVEMENT 785.25
1+50E                                  785.15
1+75E                                  785.03
2+00E                                  784.90
2+25E                                  784.78
2+50E                                  784.65
2+75E                                  784.53
3+00E                                  784.40
3+07E                                  784.38
3+20E                                  784.45
3+40E                                  784.80
3+47    END OF PAVEMENT                784.90
 
§ 3.00 GRADES.
§ 3.01.   North Second Street from the north line of Franklin Street to the
south line of Donahue Street;
§ 3.02.   Davenport Street from the west line of North Third Street to west
line of North Second Street;
§ 3.03.   Davenport Street from the east line of North Second Street to the
west line of North First Street;
§ 3.04.   Leclaire Road from the west line of North Second Place to 50 feet
east of the C.M.S.P.R.R. tracks adjacent to First Street; and
§ 3.05.   Wade Street from the east line of North Second Street 100 feet east
to meet existing concrete pavement.
NORTH 2ND STREET FROM:
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         West East
NORTH 2ND STREET FROM:
Station                                                    Top of Curb Grade
                                                           West   East
1+37.5  37.5 NORTH CL. FRANKLIN STREET                     789.98 789.98
1+50                                                       789.78 789.78
2+00                                                       789.00 789.00
2+50                                                       788.22 788.22
3+00                                                       787.44 787.44
3+50                                                       786.66 786.66
4+00                                                       785.88 785.88
4+31    E.O.R. AT DONAHUE STREET                           785.38 785.38
4+41    END PAVING AT GUTTER MATCH EXISTING GUTTER DONAHUE
        STREET ELEVATION
 
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         North South
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:
Station                      Top of Curb Grade
                             North    South
9+65.3  BEGIN P.C.C. PAVING  EXISTING EXISTING
P.C.C.                       CURB
        CURB AND
           GUTTER
10+00                        AND      788.87
10+50                                 788.61
11+00                        GUTTER   788.35
11+50                                 788.09
12+00                        788.00   787.83
12+50                        787.80   787.57
13+00                        787.60   787.31
13+30   END OF P.C.C. PAVING 787.48   787.05
 
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         North South
DAVENPORT STREET FROM:
Station                                              Top of Curb Grade
                                                     North  South
14+00   BEGIN P.C.C. PAVING, EAST LINE SECOND STREET 788.00 787.75
14+25   V.P.C.                                       787.75 787.50
14+50                                                787.44 787.19
14+75   V.P.T.                                       787.00 786.75
15+00                                                786.50 786.25
15+50                                                785.50 785.25
15+75   V.P.C.                                       785.00 784.75
16+00                                                784.77 784.56
16+25   V.P.T.                                       785.08 784.98
16+45   END P.C.C. PAVING, WEST LINE FIRST STREET    785.54 675.56
 
LECLAIRE ROAD FROM:
Station  Top of Curb Grade
         North South
LECLAIRE ROAD FROM:
Station                                      Top of Curb Grade
                                             North           South
0+90    BEGIN P.C.C. PAVING, WEST LINE NORTH 788.10          787.85
        SECOND PLACE
1+00    LOW POINT                            788.06          787.81
1+50                                         788.28          788.03
2+00                                         788.50          788.25
2+85    HIGH POINT                           788.22 (gutter) 788.47
3+00                                         788.37 (gutter) 788.62
3+50                                         788.30 (gutter) 788.55
4+00                                         788.55          788.30
4+50                                         788.30          788.05
5+00                                         788.05          787.80
5+50    LOW POINT                            787.55          787.30
6+00                                         787.88          787.69
6+50                                         787.71 (gutter) 787.58 (gutter)
7+00                                         788.04 (gutter) 787.97 (gutter)
7+41    STOP P.C.C. PAVING NORTH SIDE        788.81
7+45    STOP P.C.C. PAVING SOUTH SIDE        788.81
 
 
                                     Edge Slab Grade-No Curb
                                     North  South
7+51 RESUME P.C.C. PAVING NORTH SIDE 788.30
7+55 RESUME P.C.C. PAVING SOUTH SIDE        788.30
 
 
WADE STREET FROM:
Section                                        Center Line
0+22.5  22.5 FEET EAST CL. NORTH SECOND STREET 786.0
0+50                                           786.65
0+75                                           785.53
1+00                                           785.40
1+30    START EXISTING P.C.C. PAVEMENT         785.25
 
§ 4.00 GRADES.
§ 4.01.   North Third Street from the north line of Davenport Street to the
south line of Price Street;
§ 4.02.   North Second Street from the north line of LeClaire Road to the north
line of Davenport Street;
§ 4.03.   North Fifth Street from the north line of Donahue Street to the south
line of Price Street; and
§ 4.04.   Price Street from 105 feet west of the west line of Fifth Place to
the east line of North Fifth Street.
NORTH THIRD STREET FROM:
Station  Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
         East West
NORTH THIRD STREET FROM:
Station                                           Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
                                                  East     West
1-20.5  MATCH EXISTING PCC THRU GUTTER            EXISTING 789.47
                                                  CURB
1+50                                             AND      789.63
1+90    VPI (HIGH POINT)                          GUTTER   789.79
2+00                                                      789.75
2+50                                             789.67   789.55
3+00                                             789.47   789.35
3+50                                             789.27   789.15
4+00                                             789.07   788.95
4+15    VPC                                       789.01   788.89
4+25    LOW POINT                                 788.99   788.87
4+75    VPT–VPC                                 789.50   789.50
5+00                                             789.84   789.84
5+25    VPT AND VPC                               790.15   790.15
5+37.5  HIGH POINT                                790.22   790.22
5+50                                             790.18   790.18
5+75    VPT                                       789.82   789.82
6+00                                             789.34   789.34
6+50                                             788.38   788.38
7+00                                             787.42   787.42
7+27    END ACC PAVEMENT, MATCH EXISTING GUTTER   786.90   786.90
        ELEVATION
7+95.5  START ACC PAVEMENT, MATCH EXISTING GUTTER 785.86   785.86
        ELEVATION
8+30    VPC                                       784.78   784.62
8+60    VPI                                       784.06   783.90
8+83    LOW POINT                                 783.90   783.74
8+90    VPT                                       783.92   783.76
9+00                                             783.96   783.80
 
Station  Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
         North South
Station                  Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
                         North  South
9+50                     784.16 784.00
10+00                    784.36 784.20
10+25   VPC              784.46 784.30
10+50                    784.62 784.46
11+00                    785.33 785.17
11+25   VPT              785.87 785.71
11+50                    786.48 786.48
12+00                    787.69 787.69
12+50                    788.29 788.29
12+75                    789.44 789.44
13+00                    789.86 789.86
13+25                    790.15 790.15
13+50                    790.31 790.31
14+00                    790.41 790.41
14+45   END ACC PAVEMENT 790.59 790.59
 
NORTH SECOND STREET FROM:
Station  Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
         East West
NORTH SECOND STREET FROM:
Station                             Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
                                    East            West
1+50.5  MATCH EXISTING PCC PAVEMENT 788.40          788.74
2+00                                788.09          788.38
2+50                                787.78          788.02
3+00                                787.47          787.66
3+50                                787.16          787.41
4+00                                786.91          787.16
4+50                                786.66          786.91
5+00                                786.41          786.66
5+50                                786.16          786.41
5+80    LOW POINT
5+83    LOW POINT                   786.00          786.26
6+00                                786.17          786.42
6+50                                786.69          786.82
7+00                                787.21          787.22
7+33                                787.05 (gutter) 786.98 (gutter)
7+55                                787.29          787.16 (gutter)
7+85    MATCH EXISTING ACC PAVEMENT 787.59 (gutter) 787.40 (gutter)
 
NORTH FIFTH STREET FROM:
Station  Top of 4-Inch Curb Grade
         East West
NORTH FIFTH STREET FROM:
Station                                       Top of 4-Inch Curb Grade
                                              East   West
0+34.5  MATCH EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER        788.72  
0+75    VPI                                   788.85  
1+00                                         788.79  
1+50                                         788.68  
2+00                                         788.57  
2+50                                         788.46 EXISTING
3+00                                         788.35 CURB
3+50                                         788.24 AND
4+00                                         788.13 GUTTER
4+50                                         788.02  
5+00                                         787.91  
5+50                                         787.80  
6+00                                         787.69  
6+50                                         787.58  
6+85.7  MATCH P.C.C. PAVEMENT AT PRICE STREET 787.50  
 
PRICE STREET FROM:
Station  Top of 4-Inch Curb Grade
         North Center Line South
PRICE STREET FROM:
Station                                Top of 4-Inch Curb Grade
                                       North  Center Line South
10+60.3 MATCH EXISTING P.C.C. PAVEMENT                   
11+00                                                   
11+50                                 EXIST- EXIST-      EXIST-
12+00                                 ING    ING         ING
12+50                                 CURB   PAVE-       CURB
13+00                                 AND    MENT        AND
13+50                                 GUTTER            GUTTER
14+00                                                   
14+12.7 WEST E.O.R FOR NORTH                             
        FIFTH STREET
14+48.2                               787.18 787.30      786.85 (gutter)
14+83.7 END P.C.C. PAVEMENT            786.83 786.89      786.83 (gutter)
 
§ 4.05.   Blackhawk Trail from Station 1500+08.56 (center line of South First
Street) easterly to Station 1527+00 (west side of Highway #61 Interchange) in
Section 23 and 26, Township 79 North, Range 3 East of the Fifth Prime Meridian
in the city.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                                            Center Line Grade
1500+19.50  BEGIN P.C.C. PAVEMENT                  732.11
1501+00                                           731.85
1501+25 VPC                                       731.77
1501+50                                           731.71
1501+75                                           731.67
1502+00     VPI (LOW POINT)                        731.68
1502+25                                           731.69
1502+50                                           731.75
1502+75     VPI                                    731.84
1503+00                                           731.94
1504+00                                           732.34
1505+00                                           732.74
1506+00                                           733.14
1507+00                                           733.55
1508+00                                           733.95
1509+00                                           734.35
1510+00                                           734.76
1511+00                                           735.16
1512+00                                           735.56
1513+00                                           735.97
1514+00                                           736.37
1515+00                                           736.77
1516+00     VPC                                    737.18
1516+25                                           737.27
1516+50                                           737.36
1516+75                                           737.45
1517+00                                           737.56
1517+25                                           737.60
1517+50                                           737.67
1517+75                                           737.73
1518+00     VPI                                    737.78
1518+25                                           737.83
1518+50                                           737.87
1518+75                                           737.90
1519+00                                           737.93
1519+25                                           737.95
1519+50                                           737.97
1519+75                                           737.98
1520+00     VPI                                    737.98
1520+07+03  INTERSECTION WITH C.M.ST.P. AND P.R.R. 737.98
1520+50     VPC                                    737.98
1520+75                                           738.00
1521+00                                           738.07
1521+25                                           738.18
1521+50                                           738.33
1521+75                                           738.53
1522+00                                           738.77
1522+25                                           739.05
1522+50     VPI                                    739.38
1522+75                                           739.75
1523+00                                           740.17
1523+25                                           740.63
1523+50                                           741.13
1523+75                                           741.68
1524+00                                           742.27
1524+25                                           742.90
1524+50     VPT                                    743.58
1525+00                                           744.98
1526+00                                           747.78
1527+00                                           750.58
1528+00                                           753.38
1529+00                                           756.18
1530+00                                           758.98
1531+00                                           761.78
1531+25     VPC                                    762.48
1531+50                                           763.17
1531+75                                           763.83
1532+00                                           764.47
1532+25                                           765.08
1532+50                                           765.57
1532+75                                           766.23
1533+00                                           766.77
1533+25                                           767.28
1533+50                                           767.77
1533+75                                           768.23
1534+00                                           768.67
1534+25                                           769.08
1534+50     VPI                                    769.47
1534+75                                           769.83
1535+00                                           770.17
1535+25                                           770.48
1535+50                                           770.77
1535+75                                           771.03
1536+00                                           771.27
1536+25                                           771.48
1536+50                                           771.67
1536+75                                           771.83
1537+00                                           771.97
1537+25                                           772.08
1537+50                                           772.17
1537+75     VPT                                    772.23
1538+00                                           772.28
1539+00                                           772.48
 
§ 4.06.   Blackhawk Trail from Station 1540+00 (east side of Highway #61
Interchange) easterly to Station 1552+52.70 (center line of State Highway 956)
in Section 24 and 25, Township 79 North, Range 3 East of the Fifth Prime
Meridian in the city.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                     Center Line Grade
1540+00                    772.68
1541+00                    772.88
1542+00                    773.08
1543+00                    773.28
1544+00                    773.48
1545+00 VPC                 773.68
1545+25                    773.72
1545+50                    773.75
1545+75 HIGH POINT          773.77
1546+00                    773.76
1546+25                    773.75
1546+50                    773.72
1546+75                    773.68
1547+00 VPI                 773.62
1547+25                    773.55
1547+50                    773.46
1547+75                    773.36
1548+00                    773.24
1548+25                    773.11
1548+50                    772.97
1548+75                    772.81
1549+00 VPT                 772.63
1550+00                    771.91
1551+00                    771.18
1552+00 END P.C.C. PAVEMENT 770.46
 
§ 5.00 GRADES.
§ 5.01.   North Second Street from the north line of Donahue Street to the
south line of Price Street;
§ 5.02.   Davies Street from the east line of North Fourth Street to the west
line of North Third Street;
§ 5.03.   Davies Street from the east line of North Third Street to the west
line of North Second Street;
§ 5.04.   Davies Street from the east line of North Second Street to the west
line of North First Street; and
§ 5.05.   Donahue Street from a point 110 feet east of the east line of North
Second Street easterly 115 feet.
NORTH SECOND STREET FROM:
Station  Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
         West East
NORTH SECOND STREET FROM:
Station                                      Top of 6-Inch Curb Grade
                                             West   East
34      MATCHING EXISTING P.C.C. TOP OF CURB 785.25 785.27
0+50                                        785.22 785.22
0+85    LOW POINT                            785.04 785.04
1+00                                        785.12 785.12
1+50                                        785.38 785.38
1+95    V.P.C.                               785.60 785.60
2+00                                        785.62 785.62
2+20    V.P.I.                               785.72 785.72
2+45    V.P.T.                               786.22 786.22
2+50                                        786.32 786.32
3+00                                        787.32 787.32
3+35    V.P.C.                               788.02 788.02
3+50                                        788.27 788.27
3+60    V.P.I.                               788.52 788.52
3+85    V.P.T.                               788.87 788.87
4+00                                        789.09 789.09
4+50                                        789.81 789.81
4+75                                        790.17 790.17
5+00    MATCH EXISTING R.R. TRACKS
5+50                                        790.00 790.00
5+75    V.P.C.                               789.68 789.68
6+00    V.P.I.                               789.33 789.33
6+25    V.P.T.                               788.89 788.89
6+50                                        788.43 788.43
7+00                                        787.50 787.50
7+15    E.O.R.                               787.22 787.22
7+29.2  END OF PAVEMENT
 
DAVIES STREET FROM:
Station  Match Existing Curb and Gutter
         North South
DAVIES STREET FROM:
Station                                Match Existing Curb and Gutter
                                       North  South
0+37.5  MATCH EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER 787.30 787.14
0+50                                  786.94 786.94
1+00                                  786.30 786.30
1+50                                  785.66 785.66
1+80    V.P.C.                         785.28 785.28
2+05    V.P.I.                         785.04 785.04
2+30    V.P.T.                         785.08 785.08
2+50                                  785.19 785.19
3+00                                  785.46 785.46
3+17.4  MATCH EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER 785.59 785.56
 
DAVIES STREET FROM:
DAVIES STREET FROM:
3+94.5 MATCH EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER     785.74 785.71
4+50                                     786.73 786.73
5+00                                     787.65 787.65
5+25   V.P.C.                             788.11 788.11
5+50   V.P.I.                             788.53 788.53
5+75   V.P.T.                             788.85 788.85
6+00                                     789.07 789.07
6+18   END OR RETURN                      789.19 789.87
6+56.5 CENTER LINE OF NORTH SECOND STREET
 
DAVIES STREET FROM:
DAVIES STREET FROM:
7+17    789.57 789.57
7+50    789.22 789.22
8+00    788.87 788.87
8+50    788.52 788.52
9+00    788.18 788.18
9+50    787.94 787.94
9+64.5  787.84 787.84
 
 
DONAHUE STREET FROM:
Station                                Match Existing Curb and Gutter
                                       North  South
1+43    MATCH EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER 785.63 785.41
1+80    MATCH EXISTING RAILROAD TRACKS
2+10    MATCH EXISTING RAILROAD TRACKS
2+57    END OF PAVEMENT                787.06 786.84
 
§ 6.00 GRADES.
§ 6.01.   LeClaire Road from the west line of North Second Place to the west
line of North Fifth Street.
Station  Top of 3-Inch Curb
         North South
Station                                 Top of 3-Inch Curb
                                        North  South
1+50    WEST LINE OF NORTH FIFTH STREET 787.12 787.12
2+00                                   787.44 787.32
2+50                                   787.76 787.52
3+00                                   788.08 787.72
3+40                                   788.24 787.88
3+85                                   788.42 787.56
4+00                                   788.51 787.66
4+50                                   788.84 788.01
5+00                                   788.89 788.36
5+25                                   788.78 788.53
5+50                                   788.67 788.41
6+00                                   788.45 788.16
6+07                                   788.42 788.12
6+50                                   788.78 788.44
7+00                                   788.98 788.71
7+50                                   789.47 788.99
7+65                                   789.53 789.07
8+00                                   789.38 789.26
8+50                                   789.16 788.98
9+00                                   788.95 788.71
9+50                                   788.73 788.43
 
Station  Top of 3-Inch Curb
         North South
Station                                   Top of 3-Inch Curb
                                          North  South
10+00                                    788.28 787.98
10+50                                    788.48 788.18
10+68.8                                  788.56 788.26
11+00                                    788.43 788.38
11+50                                    788.23 788.03
11+85.7 (WEST LINE OF NORTH SECOND PLACE) 788.07 787.79
 
§ 7.00 GRADES.
§ 7.01.   LeClaire Road from the west line of North Ninth Street to the west
line of North Fifth Street.
Station  Top of Curb
         North South
Station                                   Top of Curb
                                          North  South
1+64    (WEST LINE OF NORTH NINTH STREET) 767.16 767.16
2+00                                     766.93 766.93
2+50                                     766.61 766.61
3+00                                     766.73 766.73
3+50                                     767.28 767.28
4+00                                     767.82 767.82
4+50                                     768.36 768.36
5+00                                     768.90 768.90
5+50                                     769.75 769.75
6+00                                     771.18 771.18
6+50                                     772.79 772.79
7+00                                     773.91 773.91
7+50                                     775.04 775.04
8+00                                     776.16 776.16
8+50                                     777.72 777.72
9+00                                     779.27 779.27
9+50                                     780.82 780.82
10+00                                    782.39 782.39
10+50                                    783.95 783.95
11+00                                    784.74 784.74
11+50                                    785.34 785.34
12+00                                    785.70 785.95
12+50                                    786.31 786.56
13+00                                    786.62 786.62
13+50                                    786.94 786.94
13+80.6 (WEST LINE OF NORTH FIFTH STREET) 787.12 787.12
 
§ 8.00 GRADES.
§ 8.01.   Iowa Street from the east line of South First Street to the east line
of South Third Avenue.
Station Edge of Pavement
Station Edge of Pavement
1+20    785.92 LT 785.76 RT
1+50    786.57
       Top of Curb
2+07    787.24
2+50    786.57
3+00    786.25
3+50    786.00
4+00    785.75
4+50    785.50
5+00    785.25
5+50    785.00
6+00    784.75
6+50    784.50
7+00    784.16
7+50    783.31
8+00    782.36
8+47    781.90
       Edge of Pavement
9+02.5  780.94
 
§ 8.02.   Central Drive from the south line of Davenport Street to the west
line of North Second Place.
Station Edge of Pavement
        Left Right
Station Edge of Pavement
        Left   Right
1+00    789.21 789.58
1+50    790.55 790.53
2+00    790.68 790.78
2+50    790.43 790.53
3+00    790.68 790.70
3+50    790.55 790.55
4+00    790.28 790.38
4+50    790.46 790.41
5+00    790.66 790.55
5+50    790.64 790.64
6+00    790.04 790.20
6+50    789.30 789.45
7+00    788.30 788.70
 
§ 9.00 GRADES.
§ 9.01.   North First Street from the north line of LeClaire Road to a point 25
feet north of the north line of Franklin Street.
Station Center Line Elevation
Station Center Line Elevation
1+53    787.51
2+00    787.04
2+50    786.54
3+00    786.04
3+50    785.70
4+00    785.36
4+50    785.01
5+00    784.67
5+50    784.70
6+00    785.09
6+50    785.49
7+00    785.88
7+50    785.63
8+00    785.38
8+50    785.41
9+00    785.73
9+50    785.05
10+00   786.36
10+50   786.68
11+00   787.00
 
§ 9.02.   Alley in Block 7 of Original Town from the west line on North Second
Street to the east line of North Third Street.
 
Station Center Line Elevation
0+50    789.20
1+00    788.83
1+50    788.40
2+00    788.30
2+50    788.10
3+00    787.90
 
§ 9.03.   Davenport Street from the west line of North First Street to a point
250 feet east of the east line of North Second Street.
 
Station Center Line Elevation
7+46.9= 0+00 on Davenport Street
0+00    785.65
0+15.5  785.25
0+40    785.39
0+58    784.85
 
§ 9.04.   Franklin Street from the west line of North First Street to a point
238 feet east of the east line of North Second Street.
 
Station                        Center Line Elevation
10+49.2 on North First Street= 30+00 on Franklin Street
30+00                          786.67
30+15.5                        786.27
30+50                          786.46
 
§ 10.00 GRADES.
§ 10.01. South Third Avenue from north line of Iowa Street to the south line of
LeClaire Road.
Station Top of Curb Grade Center Line Grade Top of Curb Grade
Station Top of Curb Grade Center Line Grade Top of Curb Grade
0+00    781.31            781.10            781.31
0+50    781.56            781.35            781.56
1+00    781.84            781.63            781.84
1+50    782.12            781.91            782.12
2+00    782.40            782.19            782.40
2+50    782.68            782.47            782.68
3+00    782.97            782.76            782.97
3+50    783.25            783.04            783.25
4+00    783.53            783.32            783.56
4+50    783.81            783.60            783.81
5+00    783.63            783.42            783.63
5+50    783.45            783.24            783.45
6+00    783.27            783.06            783.27
6+50    783.09            782.88            783.09
7+00    783.87            783.66            783.87
7+12.1  784.05            783.84            784.05
 
§ 11.00 GRADES.
§ 11.01. North Ninth Avenue from the north line of LeClaire Road to the south
line of Price Street.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                                               Center Line Grade
10+00   Begin P.C.C. paving, north line LeClaire Road 790.46
10+25                                                790.05
10+50                                                789.58
10+75                                                789.04
11+00   PVC                                           788.48
11+25                                                787.94
11+50                                                787.46
11+75                                                787.02
12+00   PVC                                           786.62
12+25                                                786.27
12+50                                                785.97
12+75                                                785.71
13+00   PVT                                           785.50
14+00                                                784.75
15+00                                                784.00
16+00                                                783.25
17+00                                                782.50
18+00                                                781.75
19+00                                                781.00
20+00                                                780.25
21+00                                                779.50
22+00                                                778.75
23+00                                                778.00
24+00                                                777.28
25+00                                                776.50
26+00                                                775.75
27+00                                                775.00
28+00   PVI                                           774.25
29+00                                                773.44
29+40   PVI                                           773.10
29+82   Match PCC Pavement at Price Street            772.48
 
§ 11.02. Price Street from 296 feet west of the center line of North Ninth
Avenue to 298 feet east of the center line of North Ninth Avenue.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                                Center Line Grade
69+95   Match existing P.C.C. Pavement
70+00                                 771.30
71+00                                 771.81
72+00                                 772.32
72+91   VPI                            772.78
73+00                                 772.85
74+00                                 773.58
74+80   VPI                            774.16
75+00                                 774.37
75+89   Match existing P.C.C. Pavement
 
§ 11.03. Franklin Street from the east line of North Ninth Avenue to the west
line of North Twelfth Avenue.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                                                      Center Line Grade
50+15   Match P.C.C. paving, east edge of North Ninth Avenue 779.68
50+35                                                       779.92
51+00                                                       778.99
51+70   PVC                                                  778.00
52+00                                                       777.63
52+25                                                       777.42
52+40   PVI                                                  777.33
52+50                                                       777.28
52+75                                                       777.23
53+00                                                       777.26
53+10   PVT                                                  777.29
54+00                                                       777.66
55+00                                                       778.07
56+00                                                       778.17
57+00                                                       778.88
58+00                                                       779.29
58+28                                                       779.40
 
§ 12.00 GRADES.
§ 12.01. Leclaire Road from the east line of North First Street to the west
line of North Ninth Avenue.
Station  Center Line Grade
Station                                                Center Line Grade
102+75.35 BEGIN P.C.C. PAVING, MATCH EXISTING PAVEMENT 788.23
103+00                                                788.30
103+34.40 VPI                                          788.40
103+50    VPC                                          788.48
104+00    VPI                                          788.73
104+50    VPI                                          788.40
105+00                                                788.08
106+00                                                787.75
106+50                                                787.10
107+00                                                786.78
107+50                                                786.45
108+00                                                786.13
108+50                                                785.80
109+00                                                785.45
109+50                                                785.15
110+00                                                784.83
110+50                                                784.50
111+00                                                784.18
111+50                                                783.85
112+00                                                783.53
112+41.98 VPC                                          783.25
112+50                                                783.21
112+91.98 VPI (LOW POINT)                              782.93
113+00                                                783.07
113+41.98 VPT                                          783.18
113+50                                                783.22
114+00                                                783.47
114+50                                                783.72
115+00                                                783.97
115+50                                                784.22
116+00                                                784.47
116+50                                                784.72
117+00                                                784.97
117+50                                                785.22
118+00                                                785.47
118+50                                                785.72
119+00                                                785.97
119+50                                                786.22
120+00                                                786.47
120+50                                                786.72
121+00                                                786.97
121+50                                                787.22
122+00                                                787.47
122+50                                                787.72
123+00                                                787.97
123+50                                                788.22
124+00                                                788.47
124+50                                                788.72
125+00                                                788.97
125+50                                                789.22
126+00                                                789.47
126+50                                                789.72
127+00                                                789.97
127+50                                                790.22
128+00                                                790.47
128+50                                                790.72
129+00                                                790.97
129+50                                                791.22
130+00                                                791.47
130+50                                                791.72
130+69.87 VPC                                          791.81
131+00                                                791.90
131+07.37 VPI (HIGH POINT)                             792.00
131+44.87 VPT                                          791.81
131+50                                                791.79
132+00                                                791.54
132+45.5  END P.C.C. PAVING, MATCH EXISTING PAVEMENT   791.31
 
CHAPTER 17: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
1.00   Responsibility
   
2.00   Notice and action
§ 1.00 RESPONSIBILITY.
   Sidewalks are the responsibility of the abutting property owner. This
responsibility includes that for construction, reconstruction, repair or
replacement.
§ 2.00 NOTICE AND ACTION.
   The Council may serve notice on the abutting property owner by certified
mail, requiring him or her to construct, reconstruct, repair of replace
sidewalks or portions thereof. If the owner does not perform an action required
in that notice within a reasonable time, the Council may require the City
Engineer to perform the required action and assess the costs of such work in
accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 384.
CHAPTER 18: CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
   
1   Findings
   
1.1   MS4 permit
   
1.2   Application
   
1.3   Objectives of permit
   
1.4   Funding
   
1.5   Terms
   
2   Application procedure for obtaining and maintaining a city construction
site erosion and sediment control (COSESCO) permit
   
2.1   Permit required
   
2.2   Permit application forms
   
2.3   Payment of fees
   
2.4   Materials required for permit
   
2.5   Requirement for SWPP
   
2.6   Issuance condition
   
2.7   Permit information for construction sites
   
2.8   Transfers
   
2.9   Review of applications
   
2.10   Application for termination
   
3   Inspection procedures for city COSESCO permits
   
3.1   Enforcement officer
   
3.2   Reports; corrective measures
   
3.3   Construction during non-compliance prohibited
   
3.4   Construction violation
   
3.5   Responsibility for non-compliant conditions
   
4   Monitoring procedures for city COSESCO permits
   
4.1   Duty to report
   
4.2   Third-party reports
   
4.3   Inspection after report
   
4.4   Unannounced inspection
   
4.5   Responsibility for non-compliant conditions
   
5   Enforcement
   
5.1   Violation
   
5.2   Municipal infraction
   
5.3   Advice and consent of the City Attorney
   
6   Performance bond or cash security
   
6.1   Security
   
6.2   Acceptable forms
   
6.3   Signature and commitment
   
7   Appeal
   
7.1   Rules for appeal
   
7.2   Decisions
§ 1 FINDINGS.
§ 1.1 MS4 PERMIT.
   The United States EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) permit program (“program”), administered by the State Department of
Natural Resources (“IDNR”), requires that cities meeting certain demographic
and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (“MS4”)
(“MS4 permit”). The City of Eldridge (“city”) is subject to the program and is
required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit; the city’s MS4 permit is
on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection
during regular office hours.
§ 1.2 APPLICATION.
   The program requires certain individuals engaged in construction activities
(applicant or applicants) to submit an application to the IDNR for a state
NPDES general permit #2. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every
applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with a state
NPDES general permit #2 and a city construction site erosion and sediment
control (“COSESCO”) permit and any other requirement of state or federal law or
administrative rule.
§ 1.3 OBJECTIVES OF PERMIT.
   As a condition of the city’s MS4 permit, the city is obliged to undertake
primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the program by
adopting a COSESCO ordinance designed to achieve the following objectives:
   § 1.3.1. Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
state agency or political subdivision (“applicant”) required by law or
administrative rule to apply to the IDNR for a state NPDES general permit #2
shall also be required to obtain from the city a construction site erosion and
sediment control permit (“city COSESCO permit”) in addition to and not in lieu
of the state NPDES general permit #2; and
   § 1.3.2. The city shall have primary responsibility for inspection,
monitoring and enforcement procedures to promote applicants’ compliance with
state NPDES general permits #2 and city COSESCO permits.
§ 1.4 FUNDING.
   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city in
administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city shall fund its
application, inspection, monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely
by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to the
program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding
established by a separate ordinance.
§ 1.5 TERMS.
   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the program.
§ 2 APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING AND MAINTAINING A CITY CONSTRUCTION
SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (COSESCO) PERMIT.
§ 2.1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   All persons required by law or administrative rule to obtain a state NPDES
general permit #2 from the IDNR are required to obtain a city COSESCO permit.
§ 2.2 PERMIT APPLICATION FORMS.
   Applications for city COSESCO permits shall be made on forms approved by the
city which may be obtained from the office of the Community Development
Department (Assistant City Administrator).
§ 2.3 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   An applicant for a city COSESCO permit shall pay fees as follows:
   § 2.3.1. An application fee at the time of application in the amount of $50;
   § 2.3.2. For each inspection required by this chapter, the applicant shall
pay an inspection fee in the amount of $50; and
   § 2.3.3. Failure of the applicant to pay an inspection fee within 30 days of
billing shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 2.4 MATERIALS REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.
   An applicant in possession of a state NPDES general permit #2 issued by the
IDNR shall immediately submit to the city full copies of the materials
described below as a basis for the city to determine whether to issue a city
COSESCO permit:
   § 2.4.1. Applicant’s plans, specifications and supporting materials
previously submitted to the IDNR in support of applicant’s application for the
state NPDES general permit #2;
   § 2.4.2. Applicant’s authorizations issued pursuant to applicant’s state
NPDES general permit #2;
   § 2.4.3. A storm water pollution prevention plan (“SWPPP”) prepared in
accordance with this chapter;
   § 2.4.4. Evidence or plan showing topsoil preservation during development
activities. Individuals engaged in land disturbing activities shall minimize
soil compaction and preserve topsoil that exists on site. During mass grading
operations, topsoil shall be stripped, stockpiled and remain within the area
covered by the applicable General Permit No. 2 authorization. Excess topsoil
may be removed from the site only upon written approval of the City Engineer
where the individual can show that the additional topsoil is not needed to meet
the city's storm water requirements; and
   § 2.4.5. Evidence or plan to provide compost in an amount equivalent to that
needed to cover all areas to be seeded, sodded or otherwise have vegetation
established to a depth of one and one-half inches and shall be bladed, disced,
tilled or otherwise mixed with soil to a depth of four inches, or shall provide
another mechanism for ground treatment that is approved by the Building
Official and City Engineer. For use in this section, sod may account for a
maximum of one inch of ground treatment.
(Ord. 2025-12, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 2.5 REQUIREMENT FOR SWPP.
   Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for a city
COSESCO permit:
   § 2.5.1. Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for
SWPPPs promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of a state NPDES
general permit #2;
   § 2.5.2. Shall, if the applicant is required by law to file a joint
application form, “Protecting Iowa Waters, Iowa Department of Natural Resources
and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers”, comply with all mandatory minimum
requirements pertaining to such applications;
   § 2.5.3. Shall comply with all other applicable state or federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application;
   § 2.5.4. Shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or landscape
architect or a professional in erosion and sediment control or a representative
of the local Soil and Water Conservation District, credentialed in a manner
acceptable to the city;
   § 2.5.5. Shall provide evidence or plan showing topsoil preservation during
development activities. Individuals engaged in land disturbing activities shall
minimize soil compaction and preserve topsoil that exists on site. During mass
grading operations, topsoil shall be stripped, stockpiled and remain within the
area covered by the applicable General Permit No. 2 authorization. Excess
topsoil may be removed from the site only upon written approval of the City
Engineer where the individual can show that the additional topsoil is not
needed to meet the city's storm water requirements;
   § 2.5.6. Shall provide evidence or plan to provide compost in an amount
equivalent to that needed to cover all areas to be seeded, sodded or otherwise
have vegetation established to a depth of one and one-half inches and shall be
bladed, disced, tilled or otherwise mixed with soil to a depth of four inches,
or shall provide another mechanism for ground treatment that is approved by the
Building Official and City Engineer. For use in this section, sod may account
for a maximum of one inch of ground treatment; and
   § 2.5.7. Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by
the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-12, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 2.6 ISSUANCE CONDITION.
   Issuance by the city of a city COSESCO permit shall be a condition precedent
for the issuance of a city building permit or site plan approval.
§ 2.7 PERMIT INFORMATION FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   For so long as a construction site is subject to a state NPDES general
permit #2 or a city COSESCO permit, the applicant shall provide the city with
current information as follows:
   § 2.7.1. The name, address and telephone number of the person on site
designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the state NPDES general
permit #2 and the city COSESCO permit;
   § 2.7.2. The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contractor
(s) and/or subcontractors(s) that will implement each erosion and sediment
control measure identified in the SWPPP; and
   § 2.7.3. Applicant’s failure to provide current information shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
§ 2.8 TRANSFERS.
   Developers can transfer state NPDES general permit #2 and the city COSESCO
permit responsibility to homebuilders, new lot owners, contractors and
subcontractors. Transferees must agree to the transfer in writing and must
agree to fulfill all obligations of the SWPPP, the state NPDES general permit
#2 and the city COSESCO permit. Absent such written confirmation of transfer of
obligations, the developer remains responsible for compliance on any lot that
has been sold. A developer shall notify the city of any application to the DNR
for release of any property from a general permit #2 pursuant to 567 I.A.C. §
64.6(b) or any similar successor provision.
§ 2.9 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
   Upon receipt of an application for a city COSESCO permit, the city shall
either find that the application complies with this chapter and issue a city
COSESCO permit in accordance with this chapter, or that the application fails
to comply with this chapter, in which case the city shall provide a bill of
particulars identifying non-compliant elements of the application.
§ 2.10 APPLICATION FOR TERMINATION.
   Application for termination of a city COSESCO permit shall be made in the
following manner:
   § 2.10.1. Within 30 days after final stabilization at the construction site,
as defined by the IDNR in its general permit #2, the permittee shall submit a
notice of termination to the enforcement official. The notice shall contain the
following information:
   § 2.10.2.   1.   The name and address of the permittee to whom the permit
was issued;
   § 2.10.3.   2.   The permit authorization number;
   § 2.10.4.   3.   The date the construction site reached final stabilization;
and
   § 2.10.5.   4.   A certification that the disturbed soils have been finally
stabilized and temporary sediment control devices will be removed at an
appropriate time. The permittee will acknowledge that he or she is no longer
authorized to discharge storm water associated with construction at this site.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 8-2-2021)
§ 3 INSPECTION PROCEDURES FOR CITY COSESCO PERMITS.
§ 3.1 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   All inspections required under this chapter shall be conducted by the City
Engineer, Public Works Director, Building Official or other certified employee
hereinafter referred to as the “Enforcement Officer”.
§ 3.2 REPORTS; CORRECTIVE MEASURES.
   Applicant shall notify the city when all measures required by applicant’s
SWPPP have been accomplished on-site, whereupon the city shall conduct an
inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter, and
shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, report to the applicant either that
compliance appears to have been achieved, or that compliance has not been
achieved, in which case the city shall provide a bill of particulars
identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall immediately
commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24
hours of receiving the city’s bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the
city may extend the deadline for taking corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 3.3 CONSTRUCTION DURING NON-COMPLIANCE PROHIBITED.
   Construction shall not occur on the site at any time when the city has
identified conditions of non-compliance.
§ 3.4 CONSTRUCTION VIOLATION.
   Construction activities undertaken by an applicant prior to resolution of
all discrepancies specified in the bill of particulars shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 3.5 RESPONSIBILITY FOR NON-COMPLIANT CONDITIONS.
   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to
the applicant or to third-parties for non-compliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
§ 4 MONITORING PROCEDURES FOR CITY COSESCO PERMITS.
§ 4.1 DUTY TO REPORT.
   Upon issuance of a city COSESCO permit, an applicant has an absolute duty to
monitor site conditions and to report to the Enforcement Officer any change of
circumstances or site conditions which the applicant knows or should know pose
a risk of storm water discharge in a manner inconsistent with applicant’s
SWPPP, state NPDES general permit #2 and/or city COSESCO permit.
   § 4.1.1. Such report shall be made by the applicant to the Enforcement
Officer immediately but in any event within 24 hours of the change of
circumstances or site conditions.
   § 4.1.2. Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
§ 4.2 THIRD-PARTY REPORTS.
   Any third-party may also report to the city site conditions which the third-
party reasonably believes pose a risk of storm water discharge in a manner
inconsistent with applicant’s SWPPP, state NPDES general permit #2 and/or city
COSESCO permit.
§ 4.3 INSPECTION AFTER REPORT.
   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, the
Enforcement Officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as
reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide the applicant with a bill of
particulars identifying the conditions of non-compliance. The applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective
action within 24 hours of receiving the city’s bill of particulars. For good
cause shown, the city may extend the deadline for completing corrective action.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, whereupon the Enforcement Officer shall immediately
commence enforcement actions specified in §
5 of this chapter.
§ 4.4 UNANNOUNCED INSPECTION.
   Unless a report is made to the Enforcement Officer pursuant to the previous
subsections, the Enforcement Officer shall conduct at least one unannounced
inspection during the course of construction to monitor compliance with the
state NPDES general permit #2 and the city COSESCO permit. If the inspection
discloses any significant non-compliance, the Enforcement Officer shall provide
the applicant with a bill of particulars identifying the conditions of non-
compliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and
shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of receiving the city’s
bill of particulars. For good cause shown, the city may extend the deadline for
completing corrective action. Failure to take corrective action in a timely
manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter, whereupon the Enforcement
Officer shall immediately commence enforcement actions specified in §
5 of this chapter.
§ 4.5 RESPONSIBILITY FOR NON-COMPLIANT CONDITIONS.
   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to
the applicant or to third-parties for non-compliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
§ 5 ENFORCEMENT.
§ 5.1 VIOLATION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action,
administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
§ 5.2 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Iowa Code § 364.22, pursuant to the
city’s municipal infraction ordinance.
§ 5.3 ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the Enforcement
Officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
§ 6 PERFORMANCE BOND OR CASH SECURITY.
§ 6.1 SECURITY.
   Along with the application for a city COSESCO permit, the applicant shall
post security for compliance with all requirements imposed by the state NPDES
general permit #2 and the city COSESCO permit as well as necessary remedial
work resulting from violation of any provision of this chapter. The amount of
the security shall be equal to the amount shown on a cost opinion provided by a
licensed engineer or landscape architect. This amount shall apply to the
maximum acreage of soil that will be simultaneously exposed during the
project’s construction.
§ 6.2 ACCEPTABLE FORMS.
   Acceptable forms of performance security include the following:
   § 6.2.1. Performance bonds;
   § 6.2.2. Surety bonds;
   § 6.2.3. Money orders; and
   § 6.2.4. Certificates of deposit.
§ 6.3 SIGNATURE AND COMMITMENT.
   The application form signed by the applicant for a city COSESCO permit shall
include the following commitment by the applicant: “In addition to the
performance security posted with this application, the undersigned applicant
hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all
claims, damages or suits arising directly or indirectly out of any act of
commission or omission by the applicant, or any employee, agent, assign or
contractor or subcontractor of the applicant, in connection with applicant’s
state NPDES general permit #2 and/or city COSESCO permit”.
§ 7 APPEAL.
§ 7.1 RULES FOR APPEAL.
   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the
Enforcement Officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council
pursuant to the following rules.
   § 7.1.1. The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within five
business days of the decision or enforcement action.
   § 7.1.2. The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed
from, the errors allegedly made by the Enforcement Officer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing and the relief requested.
   § 7.1.3. The Enforcement Officer shall specify in writing the reasons for
the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the Enforcement Officer intends to call and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   § 7.1.4. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the Enforcement
Officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Iowa
Code Chapter 21 of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting
of the City Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than 20 days after
the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard
of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 17A.
The applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant’s expense. The
Enforcement Officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney
designated by the City Council at city expense.
§ 7.2 DECISIONS.
   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may be
appealed to the State District Court.
CHAPTER 19: RESERVED
   [Reserved]
CHAPTER 20: RIGHT OF WAY/UTILITY EASEMENT MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Permit required
   
4.00   Contents of permit application
   
5.00   Permit fee; exemptions
   
6.00   Bond requirements
   
7.00   Safety devices
   
8.00   Specifications of restoration
   
9.00   Relocation of facilities or equipment
   
10.00   Noncompliance
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to regulate and manage the city right of way
and utility easements.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. Any disturbance with a right of way/utility easement on or below
the surface.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 3.00 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavation within the right of
way of any street or alley or utility easement for any purpose without first
obtaining a permit from the Assistant City Administrator, or their designee,
except:
   (A)   If an emergency exists, work may proceed immediately to protect public
safety and the person, firm, or corporation responsible for such work shall
secure from the building inspector on the next working day a permit for such
work.
   (B)   Employees of the city on official business shall be exempt from this
section.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 4.00 CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit required by this chapter shall state the
applicant, place and purpose of the excavation and all contact information for
which the permit is sought.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 5.00 PERMIT FEE; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Fee amount; franchise holders exempt.
      (1)   The fee for each excavation permit, which permit shall be for a
single project involving continuous work requiring excavation in the right of
way of any street or alley, shall be pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Holders of valid utility franchises which specifically exempt that
utility from a permit fee are exempt from this section.
   (B)   Exception for other permit; bond. No fee shall be charged for an
excavation permit if the applicant secures, at the same time and for the same
purpose of excavation another required permit; provided, however, the applicant
has on file with the Clerk, a properly executed bond for the work to be
performed.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 6.00 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Bond required. The applicant for a permit required by this chapter
shall file with the City Clerk a properly executed bond, with sureties to be
approved by the City Clerk in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the
faithful performance and observation of all provisions of this code and other
ordinances of the city relative to excavation and further conditioned that the
obligors on the bond will save harmless the city from all damages sustained or
caused by reason of the negligence of the applicant or his or her agent or
employee.
   (B)   Business of making excavations. Any person whose business requires the
making of excavations in the public streets for sewer, drain, water or other
connections may file a properly executed bond to the City Clerk which shall be
sufficient to fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 7.00 SAFETY DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in any street, alley, or other
public place or within six feet of any sidewalk, street, alley or other public
place unless the excavation is secured by a substantially built enclosure with
warning lights placed and operational at night.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 8.00 SPECIFICATIONS OF RESTORATION.
   (A)   Restoration. The excavation construction and restoration of any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public property shall be made so as to restore
the property to as good a condition as existed prior to the excavation, but
shall not be less than the standard specifications and requirements of the
Public Works Department adopted pursuant to
Title C, Chapter 10 Standard Construction Specifications,
Title C, Chapter 18 Construction and Site Erosion and only policies of the city
impacting disturbed areas.
   (B)   Maintenance. All excavations shall be maintained in good and suitable
repair to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department for three years after
completion of the excavation work.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 9.00 RELOCATION OF FACILITIES OR EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If the city shall elect to alter or change the grade or location of
any street, or shall engage in any construction or other public works in, on,
next to, or under the streets, permit holder, upon at least 45 days written
notice by the city, shall relocate its their facilities or equipment, whatever
they may be, at its own expense, and in each instance shall comply with all
applicable local, state, and federal laws, ordinances, codes, and regulations.
   (B)   If a commercial or private developer requests the permit holder to
relocate its existing facilities or equipment to directly facilitate the
project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the
city shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the permit
holder for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its
existing facilities or equipment. The permit holder shall not be required to
relocate to facilitate such private projects at its expense.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 10.00 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Noncompliance with any part of this chapter is a municipal infraction and
subject to the penalties detailed in Title A, Chapter 2, §
3.02.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 4-1-2024)
TITLE D: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
   Chapter
      
1.   SUBDIVISION
      
2.   ZONING
      
3.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
4.   CAMPGROUNDS
      
5.   MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILER COURTS
      
6.   AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
      
7.   LECLAIRE ROAD URBAN RENEWAL AREA
      
8.   BLACKHAWK TRAIL URBAN RENEWAL AREA
      
9.   [RESERVED]
      
10.   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
      
11.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
      
12.   LINCOLN-LECLAIRE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
      13.   CITY DETAILS
CHAPTER 1: SUBDIVISION
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Title, purpose, authority, approvals and exceptions
   
2.01   Short title
   
2.02   Purpose
   
2.03   Authority
   
2.04   Approvals and exceptions
   
3.00   Definitions
   
4.00   Procedure for review of subdivisions
   
5.00   Sketch plan discussion
   
5.01   Location map
   
5.02   Sketch plan
   
6.00   Preliminary plat - preparation and filing
   
6.01   Location map
   
6.02   Preliminary plat
   
6.03   Site plan
   
6.04   Drainage title
   
6.05   Preliminary plat subdivision fee
   
7.00   Preliminary plat - review and approval
   
7.01   Review by Engineer, Administrative Officer, Director of Public Works and
County Zoning Administrator
   
7.02   Review by Board
   
7.03   Require a neighborhood plan
   
7.04   Approval or rejection by Council
   
7.05   Action on preliminary plat to be filed with Clerk
   
7.06   Platting procedure for minor plats
   
8.00   Preliminary plat approval not to constitute subdivision approval
   
8.01   Time limitation of preliminary approval
   
9.00   Construction plans
   
9.01   Current preliminary plat
   
9.02   Draft final plan
   
9.03   Specific plans related to the site plan
   
9.04   Sanitary plans
   
9.05   Water service plans
   
9.06   Paving and drainage plans
   
9.07   Certification of registered engineer
   
10.00   Grade sheets and change orders
   
11.00   Final plat - preparation and filing
   
11.01   Final plat
   
11.02   Other required documents
   
11.03   Guarantee of improvements
   
12.00   Bond to secure liens
   
13.00   Final plat - review and approval
   
13.01   Review by the Board
   
13.02   Approval or rejection by Council
   
13.03   Action on final plat to be filed in the office of the Clerk
   
14.00   Time limitation for recording of plat
   
15.00   Release, expiration or extension of bond
   
16.00   Implementation of changed standards/requirements
   
17.00   Acquisition of plats
   
17.01   Utilization of instruments of record and field measurements
   
17.02   Plat identification information
   
17.03   Scale of original drawing
   
17.04   Required references
   
17.05   Monuments
   
17.06   Parcel designation
   
17.07   Measuring of parcels
   
17.08   Governmental agency requirements
   
18.00   Auditor’s plats
   
19.00   General design requirements for streets
   
19.01   Streets to be continued
   
19.02   Discourage through traffic on minor streets
   
19.03   Streets to intersect at right angles
   
19.04   Not more than two streets to intersect
   
19.05   Minimum centerline offsets
   
19.06   Connecting street lines to be joined by curves
   
19.07   Reverse curves to be connected by tangent
   
19.08   Half streets
   
19.09   “Buffer treatment” may be required between proposed subdivision and
adjacent use
   
19.10   Access to highways under jurisdiction of the state
   
19.11   Street names
   
19.12   Sidewalks
   
19.13   Street rights-of-way
   
20.00   General design requirements for alleys
   
20.01   Alleys in commercial and industrial districts
   
20.02   Alignment of alleys
   
20.03   Dead-end alleys to be avoided
   
20.04   Alleys to be prohibited in residential districts
   
21.00   General design requirements for blocks
   
21.01   Lengths of blocks
   
21.02   Pedestrian crosswalks
   
21.03   Width of blocks
   
21.04   Shape of blocks
   
21.05   Blocks in commercial and industrial areas
   
22.00   General design requirements for lots
   
22.01   Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation
   
22.02   Building setback lines to be established
   
22.03   Lot lines to be at right angles to street lines
   
22.04   Corner lots to be extra width
   
22.05   Every lot to have frontage on a public street
   
22.06   Reverse frontage not normally allowed
   
22.07   Land remnants
   
22.08   Reserve strips not allowed
   
22.09   Acre subdivision
   
23.00   General design requirements for easements
   
23.01   Necessary utility easements to be provided
   
23.02   Service easements
   
23.03   Maintenance easements to be provided for natural watercourses
   
23.04   Free access of authorities to easements
   
24.00   Street classification and control of access to adjoining property
   
25.00   Minimum improvements required - general information
   
25.01   Construction plans to be prepared by a registered engineer
   
25.02   Completion of improvements
   
25.03   Privately owned improvement facilities
   
25.04   Construction to city specifications
   
25.05   Cost of engineering and inspection
   
26.00   Minimum street and alley improvements required
   
26.01   All streets constructed to standards
   
26.02   Curbs or gutters
   
26.03   Curb corners
   
26.04   Pavements on major and collector streets
   
26.05   Street surfaces
   
26.06   Storm water inlets
   
26.07   Sidewalks
   
26.08   Street name signs
   
26.09   Street pavement widths
   
27.00   Minimum improvements required for sewage disposal
   
27.01   Connection to public sanitary sewer system
   
27.02   Sewage disposal outside of the corporate limits
   
27.03   Sewer installed to comply with specifications
   
28.00   Minimum improvements required for water supply
   
28.01   Connection to a public water supply system
   
28.02   Water supply outside of the corporate limits
   
28.03   Water systems to comply with specifications
   
28.04   Lots not served by public sewer and water
   
29.00   Minimum improvements required for storm drainage
   
29.01   Land subject to flooding or containing poor drainage facilities
   
29.02   Installation of storm drainage improvements
   
29.03   Required watercourse improvement
   
29.04   Additional width of lots abutting a watercourse
   
29.05   Sump pump discharge
   
30.00   Minimum improvements required for public utilities
   
31.00   Minimum improvements required for monuments
   
32.00   Administration and legal data
   
32.01   Establish and appointment of Administrative Officer
   
32.02   Variation and exception
   
32.03   Amendments
   
32.04   Building permit
   
32.05   Penalties
   
32.06   Conflict with private deeds and covenants
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   This chapter authorizes, establishes and provides for the orderly
subdivision and development of lands and properties within the city and within
the environs as set forth and described herein; and provides for the routine
review of proposed land subdivisions situated within the city limits of the
said city and within the contiguous and adjacent lands and properties situated
within the area described in §
4.00 of this chapter outside said city for the orderly subdivision and
development of the same, and for the routine review of proposed land
subdivisions and developments relating thereon and thereto; and provides for
the control, enforcement and the penalties in connection therewith.
§ 2.00 TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, APPROVALS AND EXCEPTIONS.
§ 2.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as
“Subdivision Chapter for the City of Eldridge, Iowa and Contiguous Area”. It
embraces all the lands and properties lying within said city, and within the
contiguous and adjacent lands and properties situated within the area described
in §
4.00 of this chapter outside said city.
§ 2.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the adequacy and efficiency of the
street and road system so as to avoid congestion and promote safety; to secure
the proper distribution of population and the necessary open spaces for light
and air; to improve the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens; to
establish minimum standards for the design and development of all new
subdivisions so that existing developments will be protected and so that new
subdivisions will conform to the city’s comprehensive plan; facilitate the
adequate provisions of the water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; and improve the health, safety and general welfare of the
population; to ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth; and to safeguard the interest of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the city; to provide permanent assets to the locality and to the
city; to prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs; to assure the development of land for the
highest possible use with all the necessary protection against deterioration
and obsolescent; and to provide common grounds of understanding and a sound
working relationship between the city and the developer.
§ 2.03 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted in pursuance of the authority granted by Iowa Code
Chapter 354.
§ 2.04 APPROVALS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No land shall, after the adoption of these regulations, be subdivided
or filed for record, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to the
land, until the plat or plans of the subdivisions or street improvements shall
have been referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation and approved by action of the City Council. This approval must
be in writing and placed on the original tracing of the final plats according
to the procedure outlined herein.
   (B)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or
given until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the Planning
Commission and officially approved by the City Council.
   (C)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sewer facilities, gas service, electric service or lighting, or
grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made within any
such subdivision by any owner or owners or his, her or their agent, or by any
public service corporation at the request of such owner or owners or his, her
or their agent until preliminary plats for the subdivision and also the plans
for improvements thereto have been formally approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council.
§ 3.00 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter and in order to carry out the
provisions contained herein, certain words, terms and phrases are to be
interpreted as defined herein.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel”. The word “shall”
is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive. The phrase “used for” shall
include the phrases arranged “for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained
for” and “occupied for”.
   (C)   The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows
and shall be interpreted as such throughout these regulations. Terms not herein
defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The person appointed to occupy the office created
herein, in which office is vested the chief administrative and enforcement
duties as outlined in the attached standards.
      ALLEY. A trafficway, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways and/or
other physical barriers.
      BOARD. The Planning and Zoning Commission Board of the City of Eldridge,
Iowa. Defined as BOARD for this chapter only.
      BUILDING. Any structure designed, built or intended for the shelter,
enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of
any kind.
      CITY. The City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      CROSSWALK. A trafficway, dedicated to public use, which is reversed
across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street terminated at one end with a permanent turn-
around, the open end being the only means of access to another street.
      DESIGN STANDARDS. The Eldridge Design Standards of Public Improvements.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works for the City of Eldridge, Iowa, or
a person designated to act in that capacity.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by
the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
      ENGINEER. The City Engineer of Eldridge, Iowa, or person designated to
act in that capacity in the review of engineering data as outlined herein where
the service of engineer is specifically mentioned.
      HALF STREET. A street having width less than required by these and other
appropriate regulations.
      HIGHWAY. A right-of-way for vehicular traffic which traverses a non-urban
area, usually a state or federal numbered route.
      INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY. A sewage disposal system
designed to function on an individual lot basis. A septic tank is a type of
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY.
      LAND REMNANT. Any portion of a tract of land which cannot be developed
after the tract has been subdivided. Also known as an OUTLOT.
      LOT. A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings or related use, together with such yards or open spaces
within the lot lines as may be required by these regulations.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for
their full length on a street; provided the interior angle at the intersection
of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A CORNER LOT shall be designated to
have two front lot lines and two side lot lines. The two front lot lines shall
be the two sides of the lot that abut the street.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets as distinguished from a corner lot. The sides of the lot abutting
streets shall be considered front yards.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
street.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, it is the line
separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double
frontage lot, both lines separating said lot from streets shall be considered
FRONT LOT LINES.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot boundary opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary
line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line not less than ten feet
long and wholly within the lot.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line that is not a front or rear lot
line.
      LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A double frontage lot which has vehicular access
point limited to the back of the lot, rather than having access on its front.
      METES AND BOUNDS. The method used to describe a tract of urban land that
uses distances and angles, distances and bearings or describes the parcel by
reference to physical features of the land and is intended to be used for
dwelling or other purposes, so that it can be recorded in the County Recorder’s
office, as contrasted with the description of a part of a properly approved and
recorded subdivisions plat by the lot and block number.
      PLAT, FINAL. The plan of record of a subdivision, together with
accompanying material as required in §
10.00 of this chapter.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The plan of layout of a proposed subdivision, together
with the accompanying material as required in §
6.00 of this chapter.
      RESERVE STRIP. A narrow parcel of land between a street adjacent to the
property line and the adjacent property, the strip being retained in private
ownership to prevent access of neighboring property to an improved and
dedicated street.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
road, walkway, crosswalk, railroad or other such use. Every RIGHT-OF-WAY
established under this chapter and shown on a final plat is separate and
distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included
within the dimension or areas of such lots or parcels.
      ROADWAY. The portion of the street which has/is to be improved and is/
will be available for vehicular traffic.
      SETBACK LINE. The line denoting the distance required to obtain the
minimum front, side and rear yards as required by the appropriate zoning
regulations.
      SEWERAGE SYSTEM, CENTRAL. A type approved by the State Department of
Public Health as properly designed to serve one or more subdivisions. A septic
tank is not a CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of the street, walkway or crosswalk which is paved
and intended for pedestrian use only.
      SITE PLAN. The grading and erosion control plan for a subdivision.
      STREET. A general term used to describe a public right-of-way which
provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and may provide for
vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may
also provide space for the location of utilities (both above and below ground).
      STREET, COLLECTOR. A trafficway which carries traffic between sections of
the community or which serves as a connector between rural areas and the
community.
      STREET, EXPRESSWAY. A limited access trafficway connecting two or more
communities.
      STREET, LOCAL. A trafficway which serves primarily for access to abutting
properties.
      STREET, MAJOR. A trafficway connecting communities or connecting to
limited access trafficways which, in turn, connect to other communities.
      STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A local street which is parallel to and adjacent
to primary streets and highways, and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast through-moving traffic on
the primary streets.
      STREET PAVEMENT WIDTH. The horizontal distance of the roadway measured
from back of curb to back of curb.
      SUBDIVIDER. An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
or agent thereof which undertakes the activities covered by these regulations.
Inasmuch as the subdivision plan drawings are merely a necessary means to the
end of assuring satisfactory development. The term SUBDIVIDER includes
“developer”, “owner” or “builder”, even though the persons and their precise
interests may vary at different project stages.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots, sites or
parcels; or the establishment or dedication of a road, highway, street or alley
through a tract of land regardless of area; or the resubdivision, sale or
exchange of land previously divided or platted in lots, sites or parcels, where
land remnants, additional lots of record or additional zoning lots are created.
The sale or exchange of small parcels of land where such sale or exchange does
not create land remnants, additional lots of record or additional zoning lots
shall not be considered a subdivision or resubdivision of land.
§ 4.00 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Iowa Code § 354.9, the city desires to review
subdivisions outside its corporate limits as set forth within this chapter. It
is hereby required that no subdivision of land within the city or land located
within the following described area: beginning at the southeast corner of 140th
Avenue and Slopertown Road, then west to 130th Avenue, then north to the south
line of 255th Street, then east to the west line of 190th Avenue, then south to
the south line of 220th Street, then west to the west line of 180th Avenue the
south to the south city limits, then west along the south city limits to the
point of beginning, which is not within another municipality shall be entitled
to be recorded in the county or have any validity until it has been approved by
the Council. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within such described
area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be to a line equal distance between the
limits of the overlapping municipalities concerned. Each person, firm or
corporation seeking Council’s approval of a map, plat or subdivision shall
follow the procedure outlined in this chapter.
§ 5.00 SKETCH PLAN DISCUSSION.
   Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, it is recommended that the
subdivider submit to the Administrative Officer material relating to the
proposed subdivision in order to avail himself or herself of the advice and
assistance of the Board. This may include information relative to the site and
conditions of the site, existing community facilities and utilities on and
adjacent to this site, number and size of lots proposed and the like. It is
suggested that, for the maximum benefit, the material should include §§
5.01 and
5.02 of this chapter.
§ 5.01 LOCATION MAP.
   Location map should show relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
streets and other community facilities serving it.
§ 5.02 SKETCH PLAN.
   Sketch plan should show, in simple sketch form, proposed layout of streets,
lots and other features in relation to existing conditions, as well as existing
topographic data. The sketch plan discussion does not require formal
application, fee or filing of the plan. The Administrative Officer shall submit
the sketch plan material to the Board which shall, within one month, make known
its comments regarding the proposed subdivision to the subdivider and the
Administrative Officer.
§ 6.00 PRELIMINARY PLAT - PREPARATION AND FILING.
   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and shall file
eight copies at required scale, a copy of the plat reduced to fit 11- by 17-
inch paper and other required material with the Administrative Officer in
application of or preliminary approval. The application of for preliminary
approval shall include §§
6.01 through
6.05 of this chapter.
§ 6.01 LOCATION MAP.
   Sketch map showing relationship of the proposed subdivision to the streets
and other community facilities serving it. Such map shall include the
subdivision name; outline of the area to be subdivided; existing streets and
city utilities on adjoining property; and the north point, scale and date.
§ 6.02 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   Preliminary plat of the subdivision drawn to the scale of one inch to 100
feet or larger and including:
   (A)   Name of the proposed subdivision with the approximate length and
bearing of the exterior boundaries, which are to be indicated by a solid heavy
line. It is recommended that the subdivider consult with the County Auditor to
ensure that the subdivision is uniquely named;
   (B)   Name and address of owner;
   (C)   Names of person(s) who prepared the plat and owner’s attorney,
representatives or agent;
   (D)   North point, graphic scale and date;
   (E)   Location of the proposed subdivision by township, section town and
range or by other legal description;
   (F)   Contours at two feet intervals where ground slope is regular, contours
at five feet intervals when ground slope is irregular as determined by the
Board;
   (G)   Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or
other public ways, lot lines, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks or
other public open space, permanent buildings and structures, houses or
permanent easements and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the
tract and/or other relevant information required by the Board;
   (H)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities
within the tract or adjacent to the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades,
manholes and approximate location. Any transmission pipeline over six inches in
diameter, located outside the boundary of the plat but within 1,000 feet of the
plat, shall be shown on the location map and a note included in the general
notes as to its size, type of materials transported and maximum allowed
operating pressure;
   (I)   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided land,
showing ownership where possible;
   (J)   Layout of proposed blocks (if used) and lots, including the dimensions
of each, and the lot and block number in numerical order;
   (K)   All front setback lines and side setback lines on intersecting street
sides of corner lots;
   (L)   Location, width, other dimensions and names of existing and proposed
streets, alleys and roads with approximate radii of all curves and length of
tangents, utility easements, parks and other open spaces or reserved areas;
   (M)   Zoning classification on and adjacent to the subdivision;
   (N)   Approximate grades of proposed streets and alleys;
   (O)   Width of proposed streets;
   (P)   The layout of proposed water mains and sanitary sewers;
   (Q)   The proposed drainage system of the subdivision, including storm
sewers, ditches, culverts, bridges and other structures;
   (R)   Boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the
subdivision and the source of information;
   (S)   If the proposed subdivision borders on a lake or stream, the distances
and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the
mean high water mark of the lake or stream;
   (T)   A statement, near the owner’s name, to read: “PRELIMINARY PLAT, NOT TO
BE RECORDED”;
   (U)   A table of the following information: total acreage of subdivision,
total number of lots and acreage of public lands to be dedicated other than
streets; and
   (V)   A complete listing of all existing convenants which apply to the land
to be subdivided and a complete listing of all covenants that are proposed by
the developer to apply to the subdivided land.
§ 6.03 SITE PLAN.
   Site plan of the subdivision based on the preliminary plat and including:
   (A)   Existing and proposed contours;
   (B)   Areas having a slope greater than 10%;
   (C)   Individual trees having a diameter of four inches or more;
   (D)   Wooded areas;
   (E)   Streams, ponds and drainage courses;
   (F)   Floodplain limits existing and proposed;
   (G)   Analysis of site run-off characteristics;
   (H)   Provisions for the control of erosion during construction, including,
but not limited to, sedimentation basins, temporary diversions, contour furrows
and such other provisions as may be required to reduce erosion and excessive
water drainage to downstream adjacent properties; and
   (I)   A written plan which provides for preservation of four to six inches
of topsoil, prompt seeding following grading, seasonal restrictions on the plan
and preservation of drainage in field tiles.
§ 6.04 DRAINAGE TITLE.
   It shall be the developer’s responsibility to determine if any field tile
runs through the proposed subdivision. In the event that it is determined that
an adjacent landowner has drainage tile which drains through the property
subject to the subdivider’s proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall include
on the subdivision plan for improvements the location of the known drainage
tile and the plans for tying it into the subdivision drainage system. The City
Engineer shall approve all proposed plans. If, during the construction of the
subdivision improvements, an unknown drainage tile is disturbed, it shall be
the developer responsibility to determine the area served by the tile. If it
serves more than the developer’s land, then a plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the City Engineer to allow for the continued proper functioning of
the drainage tile. The plan shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to its
implementation. Any tile not included on the original subdivision plan of
improvements shall be shown on the final “as-built” plans.
§ 6.05 PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBDIVISION FEE.
   At the time of filing an application for approval of the preliminary plat,
the application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order
payable to the city in the amount established from time to time by resolution
of the City Council.
§ 7.00 PRELIMINARY PLAT - REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
§ 7.01 REVIEW BY ENGINEER, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND
COUNTY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Immediately upon the filing of eight copies of the preliminary plat,
the Administrative Officer shall retain four copies for his or her file (on one
copy is to be indicated the Board and/or Council action on the plat) and shall
distribute the remaining copies of the plat as follows: one copy to the
Engineer, one copy to the Director, one copy to the Board and, where a proposed
plat is outside the city limits but within the area of subdivision
jurisdiction, one copy to the County Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Review by the Soil Conservation Service may be sought where erosion or
sedimentation control considerations are evident. The Engineer, Administrative
Officer, Director and, where concerned, the County Zoning Administrator, shall
have the opportunity to review the plat and application materials to assure the
proposed subdivision complies with applicable regulations and requirements and
report upon such to the Board. The Administrative Officer shall determine if
the proposed subdivision complies with
Title D, Chapter 2. The Administrative Officer shall also report upon
conditions of the site or adjacent properties which, while not evident in the
application materials, may affect development upon the site.
§ 7.02 REVIEW BY BOARD.
   The Board shall review the preliminary plat and application materials to
assure compliance with the comprehensive plan. Particular note shall be made
that any planned public facilities of the community falling in the area of the
subdivision being reviewed are accommodated in the proposed plat; they also
shall review the reports of the Administrative Officer, Engineer and Director
with regard to the proposed subdivision. Within 30 days of the subdivider’s
filing for preliminary approval, the Board shall make known to the Council and
Clerk that the preliminary plat has been approved; approved subject to
modification; or disapproved; if disapproved, the Board shall submit to the
subdivider, with a copy to the Clerk, a statement setting forth reasons for
disapproval, indicating particularly the aspects in which the proposed plat
fails to conform to chapter requirements. Failure of the Board to act within 30
days of filing the plat with the Administrative Officer shall be deemed
approval of the plat, unless, however, an extension of time is mutually agreed
upon by the subdivider and Board. The Board shall maintain one copy of the
preliminary plat in its files with its action noted upon it.
§ 7.03 REQUIRE A NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN.
   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical
subdivision unit in relation to the city as a whole, the Board may, before
approval, require the developer to prepare a plat for the entire area or
neighborhood, such plan to be used by the Board as an aid in judging the
proposed plat. The Engineer may be commissioned to aid in the preparation of
this plan and furnish such surveys and data as may be necessary.
§ 7.04 APPROVAL OR REJECTION BY COUNCIL.
   Following review and recommendation of the preliminary plat by the Board,
the Council shall approve or reject the plat within 30 days after the first
regular Council meeting following the action of the Board.
§ 7.05 ACTION ON PRELIMINARY PLAT TO BE FILED WITH CLERK.
   A certified copy of the order or resolution approving the preliminary plat
or disapproving the preliminary plat and stating the reasons shall be attached
to a copy of the preliminary plat by the Clerk and filed in the office of the
Clerk.
§ 7.06 PLATTING PROCEDURE FOR MINOR PLATS.
   The Board may waive any or all of the requirements relating to the
preliminary plat for subdivisions containing three or fewer lots; provided that
all the lots within the proposed subdivision front on an existing street, no
public improvements construction is required, no variation of the requirements
of this chapter is requested and no site for a public facility is covered by
any part of the plat.
§ 8.00 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL NOT TO CONSTITUTE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Council does not constitute approval
of the subdivision but is merely an authorization to the subdivider to proceed
with the preparation of the final plat. Specifications and engineering
construction drawings, including profiles, cross sections and details
applicable, of all public improvements, including streets and alleys, water
systems, sanitary sewerage systems and storm drainage, shall be in accordance
with preliminary plat and shall be submitted to the Engineer not less than
seven days prior to the commencement of any construction. A maintenance bond
guaranteeing all improvements for a period of four years from the time of city
acceptance, against defective materials in workmanship, shall be provided
before construction is undertaken.
§ 8.01 TIME LIMITATION OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for 12 months; except,
however, the Board, upon written request of the subdivider and advice of the
Administrative Officer, may grant an extension of time. If the final plat is
not filed with the Administrative Officer within 12 months or authorized
extension thereof, of the Council approval of the preliminary plat, all
previous approvals of the preliminary plat shall become null and void.
Submission of a current preliminary plat with construction drawings shall
constitute an updating of the preliminary plat upon approval of the
construction drawings.
§ 9.00 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   Prior to any construction on the site, the subdivider shall cause to be
prepared complete construction plans for the work contemplated as a phase of
the project. Four sets of such plans shall be provided. The submission shall be
in accordance with the design standards and shall include §§
9.01 through
9.07 of this chapter.
§ 9.01 CURRENT PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   A copy of the latest preliminary plat and site plan for the area showing the
exact area(s) covered by the construction plans and any proposed revisions to
the preliminary plat which are to be considered as a part of the construction
plan approval.
§ 9.02 DRAFT FINAL PLAN.
   A tentative final plat for the entire area upon which improvements are to be
proposed for acceptance. Where improvements are to be made or where utility
extensions will be required outside of final plat limits, easements covering
those areas shall be provided.
§ 9.03 SPECIFIC PLANS RELATED TO THE SITE PLAN.
   Such plans are to ensure that desirable features are retained, topsoil and
tile drainage are preserved and erosion is limited.
§ 9.04 SANITARY PLANS.
   Detailed plans for sanitary sewer facilities must be submitted in accordance
with current design standards. Where public sewers are not a part of the plan,
a certification by the County Board of Health that the area can be adequately
served by other means shall be required.
§ 9.05 WATER SERVICE PLANS.
   Detailed plans for water service shall be provided, including the location
of hydrants, valves, thrust blocks, plugs and service lines.
§ 9.06 PAVING AND DRAINAGE PLANS.
   Detailed plans for streets, storm sewers, culverts and other drainage and/or
erosion control facilities must be submitted as required.
§ 9.07 CERTIFICATION OF REGISTERED ENGINEER.
   Plans must include a certification by a state registered engineer indicating
he or she has prepared the plans.
§ 10.00 GRADE SHEETS AND CHANGE ORDERS.
   (A)   All changes to the approved plans shall be submitted to the city in
the form of change orders after said changes have been prepared by the
developer’s engineer and have been approved by the developer and the
developer’s contractor. The Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to
approve change orders on behalf of the city; provided the change orders do not
represent a material change from the contract approved by the Council and that
the engineer and general manager have been consulted.
   (B)   Grade sheets shall be supplied by the developer’s engineer prior to
any work being done. Grade sheets shall be reviewed by the City Inspector and
their issuance shall be the contractors authority to proceed.
§ 11.00 FINAL PLAT - PREPARATION AND FILING.
   Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall cause to be
prepared a final plat and other material required in filing for final approval.
Application for final approval shall consist of filing with the Administrative
Officer the reproducible final plat and ten copies at full scale, one copy
reduced to fit 11 by 17 inch paper and such additional information outlined in
§§
11.01 through
11.03 of this chapter and a check, certified check or money order made payable
to the city in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
§ 11.01 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat may include all or only part of the preliminary plat and
should include or indicate the following:
   (A)   Final plat shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to 100 feet or
larger. The size of the plat sheet shall not be less than eight and one-half
inches by 11 inches, nor shall it exceed 30 inches by 36 inches in size. The
scale of the drawing shall be clearly stated and graphically illustrated by a
bar scale on every plat sheet;
   (B)   If there are multiple sheets used, each shall display both the number
of the sheet and the total number of sheets in the plat with clearly labeled
match lines indicating where the other sheets adjoin. An index shall be
provided to show the relationship between the sheets;
   (C)   Accurate tract boundary lines with dimensions and angles which provide
a survey tract, closing with an error of not more than one foot in 5,000 feet;
   (D)   All monuments, erected corners and other points established in the
field in their proper places; the material of which the monuments, corners or
other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof, by legend;
   (E)   All proposed streets named and listed;
   (F)   All curves supplied with complete and accurate curve notes;
   (G)   The exact length and bearing of the boundary lines of all blocks,
public grounds, streets, alleys and all lot lines, except that when the lines
in any tier of lots are parallel, it shall be sufficient to mark the bearings
of the outer lines on one tier thereof; easements shall be shown by center line
and width when lines are parallel to a boundary; otherwise, boundary bearings
and distances shall be shown;
   (H)   The exact width of all easements, streets and alleys. The purpose of
all easements shall be clearly stated;
   (I)   All blocks consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order;
the blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be
numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions;
   (J)   All lots in each block numbered progressively. Progressive block
numbers or letters may be assigned to groups of lots separated from other lots
by streets or other physical features of the land. The surveyor shall not
assign numbers or letters to a lot shown within a subdivision plat;
   (K)   All lake or stream shore meander lines established by the surveyor in
accordance with the preliminary plat requirements, the distances and bearings
thereof and the distance between the point of intersection of such meander
lines with lot lines and the ordinary high water mark;
   (L)   All front setback lines and side setback lines on intersecting street
sides of corner lots;
   (M)   Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use and any area to be
reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners in the
subdivision shall be assigned a progressive letter and shall have the proposed
use clearly designated;
   (N)   Where provisions are made for access from any subdivision to any lake
or stream, the plat shall show the area over which access is provided to the
lake or stream;
   (O)   The names of adjoining streets, state highways and subdivisions shown
in their proper location;
   (P)   Abutting street and state highway lines of adjoining plats shown in
their proper location by dotted lines. The width of these streets and highways
shall be given also;
   (Q)   A subdivision name or title, approved by the County Auditor, that is
unique to the county;
   (R)   Name of owner(s) of the property;
   (S)   North point and date;
   (T)   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider, unless the
land is sufficient size and shape to be of practical use or service as
determined by the Board;
   (U)   Certification by a registered state land surveyor indicating that he
or she has surveyed the subdivision and that the plat conforms to said survey;
   (V)   Notarized certification by the owner of the dedication of streets and
other public areas;
   (W)   Final approval by Council and the Board with signature and date spaces
for Mayor, Clerk and the Board Chairperson; and
   (X)   If a transmission pipeline, exceeding six inches in diameter, is
located within the plat or within 1,000 feet of the plat boundary, then a note
shall be included under the general notes describing the location of the
pipeline, its size, type of materials transported and the maximum allowed
operating pressure.
§ 11.02 OTHER REQUIRED DOCUMENTS.
   Other required documents include the following:
   (A)   Restrictive covenants, if any, in form for recording;
   (B)   Consent to platting by a mortgage holder or lienholders, signed and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds.
An affidavit and bond as provided for in §
12.00 of this chapter may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or
lien holder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a
release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the
governing body or dedicated to the public;
   (C)   A certificate from the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with §
12.00 of this chapter;
   (D)   Specifications and engineering construction drawings, including
profiles, cross sections and details as applicable, of all public improvements,
including streets and alleys, water systems, sanitary sewerage system and storm
drainage or as-built plans when acceptance is a part of this approval;
   (E)   An opinion of an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of
title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the
proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land
being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing
the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances
for the purpose of this subsection;
   (F)   A certified resolution by each governing body, with rights to review,
either approving the subdivision or waiving the right to review;
   (G)   A statement of the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the
plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire,
signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment
of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the
public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys,
parks, open areas, school property or other public use, if the dedication is
approved by the governing body; and
   (H)   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the Board in the enforcement of these regulations.
§ 11.03 GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The final plat submitted to the Board for approval shall be accompanied by a
notice from the Clerk, stating that there has been filed and approved by the
Attorney and Council, one of the following:
   (A)   A certificate by the Engineer that all improvements and installations
to the subdivision required for its approval have been made and installed in
accordance with the city specifications; and a maintenance bond guaranteeing
the improvement for a period of four years against defective materials and
workmanship;
   (B)   A bond, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit has been
posted, which is available to the city and in sufficient amount to assure
completing of the improvement, and to guarantee the improvement for a period of
four years against defective materials and workmanship of all required
improvements; or
   (C)   In circumstances where a plat is located in an area where public
infrastructure does not presently exist, or is in an area where improvements to
public infrastructure may be expanded or improved, the city may require that an
assessment waiver be filed with the plat.
§ 12.00 BOND TO SECURE LIENS.
   A bond in double the amount of the lien shall be secured and recorded if a
lien exists on the land included in a subdivision plat and the required consent
of the lienholder is not attached for one of the following reasons: the
lienholder cannot be found, in which case an affidavit by the proprietor
stating that the lienholder could not be found shall be recorded with the bond;
or the lienholder will not accept payment or cannot, because of the nature of
the lien accept payment in full of the lien, in which case an affidavit by the
lien holder stating that payment of the lien was offered but refused shall be
recorded with the bond. The bond shall run to the county and be for the benefit
of purchasers of lots within the plat and shall be conditioned for the payment
and cancellation of the debt as soon as practicable and to hold harmless
purchasers or their assigns and the governing body from lien.
§ 13.00 FINAL PLAT - REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   Immediately upon filing of the reproducible final plat and 12 copies, the
Administrative Officer, maintaining one copy for his or her own files (on which
is to be indicated Council action on the plat), shall distribute the copies of
the final plats to the Engineer, Director and Clerk; the reproducible plat; and
one copy to the Board.
§ 13.01 REVIEW BY THE BOARD.
   The Board shall review the comments of the Administrative Officer, Director
and Engineer and make its own study to assure compliance with these regulations
and substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat or conditionally
approved plat subject to modifications requested. Pursuant to Iowa Code §
354.8, the Board shall not issue final approval of a subdivision plat unless it
conforms to Iowa Code §§ 354.6 and 354.11. The Board shall approve or
disapprove the final plat within 30 days after submission of final plat
materials by the subdivider to the Administrative Officer; failure of the Board
to act within 30 days shall be deemed to be approval, unless, however, the
subdivider and the Board have mutually agreed to an extension of time. The
Board shall make known immediately to the Clerk and the Council its action upon
the final plat.
§ 13.02 APPROVAL OR REJECTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall, after being notified of the Board’s action on the plat,
approve or reject the final plat within 30 days. If the Board does not approve
the final plan of the subdivision, the Council may approve said plan and accept
the public areas and easements, thereon by a three-fourths vote of the entire
membership of the Council. The Mayor and Clerk shall be authorized to sign the
original tracing.
§ 13.03 ACTION ON FINAL PLAT TO BE FILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE CLERK.
   A certified copy of the order or resolution of the corporate authorities
approving the final plat or disapproving the final plat and stating the reasons
therefor shall be attached to a copy of the plat by the Clerk and filed in the
office of the Clerk.
§ 14.00 TIME LIMITATION FOR RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder within four
months of date of approval by Council, and if not filed within such time, shall
have no validity and shall not be recorded without recertification by the Clerk
and reapproval by the Council.
   (B)   Before it is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, the
provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 354, and amendments thereto, shall be complied
with. Immediately after recording, the duly certified copy shall be filed with
the Clerk.
§ 15.00 RELEASE, EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF BOND.
   Prior to the release or expiration of bond, the Council will request the
Administrative Officer to certify that he or she was notified by the subdivider
to witness the installation of required improvements at key times so as to be
able to certify that all required improvements were properly installed and that
neither the subdivision as built nor improvements installed deviate from the
approved final plat. Should the required improvements not be completed within
the duration of the bond, the subdivider may request the Council for an
extension of time for the installation of the balance of improvements. Should
such request be granted, the subdivider shall deposit with the city a surety
bond for the length of extension granted. Bond shall be approved as to form and
type by the City Attorney, and as to adequacy of amount by Engineer.
§ 16.00 IMPLEMENTATION OF CHANGED STANDARDS/REQUIREMENTS.
   Changes in design standards or specifications shall be incorporated into
actual construction at the earliest possible time, at any time prior to the
approval by the Council or the three-party contract and bond.
§ 17.00 ACQUISITION OF PLATS.
   When land or rights in land are divided for right-of-way purposes by an
agency of the government or other persons having the power of eminent domain
and the description of the land or rights acquired is a metes and bounds
description, then an acquisition plat shall be made and attached to the
description when the acquisition instrument is recorded. Acquisition plats
shall be clearly marked as an acquisition plat and shall conform to the
following.
§ 17.01 UTILIZATION OF INSTRUMENTS OF RECORD AND FIELD MEASUREMENTS.
   The information shown on the plat shall be developed from instruments of
record together with information developed by field measurements. The
unadjusted error of field measures shall not be greater than one in 5,000.
§ 17.02 PLAT IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   The plat shall be signed and dated by a surveyor, bear the surveyor’s state
registration number and legible seal and shall show an arrow and bar scale.
§ 17.03 SCALE OF ORIGINAL DRAWING.
   The original drawing shall remain the property of the surveyor or the
surveyor’s agency and shall not be less than eight and one-half by eleven
inches in size.
§ 17.04 REQUIRED REFERENCES.
   If the right-of-way on an acquisition plat is a portion of lots within an
official plat, reference shall be made to both the lots and plat name. If the
right-of-way acquisition plat is not within an official plat, reference shall
be made to the government lot or quarter section and to the section, township,
range and county.
§ 17.05 MONUMENTS.
   The plat shall indicate whether the monuments shown are existing monuments
or monuments to be established. Monuments shall be established as necessary to
construct or maintain the right-of-way project.
§ 17.06 PARCEL DESIGNATION.
   The acquisition plat shall identify the project for which the right-of-way
was acquired and a parcel designation shall be assigned to each right-of-way
parcel.
§ 17.07 MEASURING OF PARCELS.
   The acreage shown for each parcel included in a plat of survey or
acquisition plat shall be to the nearest one-hundredth acre. If a parcel
described as part of the United States public land survey system and not
entirely within an official plat, lies within more than one 40-acre aliquot
part of a section, the acreage shall be shown only for assessment and taxation
purposes for each portion of the parcel that lies within each 40-acre aliquot
part. The surveyor shall not be required to establish the location of the 40-
acre aliquot line by survey but is required to use reasonable assumptions in
determining its approximate location for assessment and taxation purposes.
§ 17.08 GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   Governmental agencies shall not be required to survey a remaining parcel
when land is divided for right-of-way purposes and shall not be required to
contact the auditor for approval of parcel designations shown on an acquisition
plat.
§ 18.00 AUDITOR’S PLATS.
   (A)   If a tract is divided or subdivided in violation of Iowa Code §§ 354.4
or 354.6, or the descriptions of one or more parcels within a tract are not
sufficiently certain and accurate for the purpose of assessment and taxation
under the guidelines of Iowa Code § 354.3, the auditor shall notify the
proprietors of the parcels within the tract for which no plat has been recorded
as required by this chapter, and demand that a plat of survey or a subdivision
plat be recorded as required by this chapter. Notice shall be served by mail
and a certified copy of the notice shall be recorded. The auditor shall mail a
copy of the notice to the applicable governing bodies.
   (B)   If the proprietors fail, within 30 days of the notice, to comply with
the notice or file with the auditor a statement of intent to comply, the
auditor shall contact with a surveyor to have a survey made of the property and
have a plat of survey or an auditor’s plat recorded as necessary to comply with
this chapter.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a statement of intent to comply, the auditor may
extend the time period for compliance.
§ 19.00 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS.
§ 19.01 STREETS TO BE CONTINUED.
   Streets in new subdivisions shall be designed to provide for the
continuation of existing and planned streets. In addition the Board or the
Council may require the provision of right-of-way for the connection of
proposed subdivision to any adjoining unsubdivided land.
§ 19.02 DISCOURAGE THROUGH TRAFFIC ON MINOR STREETS.
   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
§ 19.03 STREETS TO INTERSECT AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   Intersections of streets shall be nearly right angles as possible. No street
shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees.
§ 19.04 NOT MORE THAN TWO STREETS TO INTERSECT.
   Intersection of more than two streets at a point will be prohibited.
§ 19.05 MINIMUM CENTERLINE OFFSETS.
   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
§ 19.06 CONNECTING STREET LINES TO BE JOINED BY CURVES.
   Connecting street lines deflecting from each other at any one point by more
than ten degrees shall be joined by curves, the inner radius of which shall be
not less than 350 feet for a major street, 250 feet for a collector street and
100 feet for a local street.
§ 19.07 REVERSE CURVES TO BE CONNECTED BY TANGENT.
   A tangent or portion of street in straight alignment and of not less than
100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and
collector streets.
§ 19.08 HALF STREETS.
   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of
these regulations; and where the Board or the Council finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Whenever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
§ 19.09 “BUFFER TREATMENT” MAY BE REQUIRED BETWEEN PROPOSED SUBDIVISION AND
ADJACENT USE.
   Where a proposed subdivision contains an existing or proposed major street
or abuts such a land use which may have an adverse effect on the residential
subdivision, the Board may require some buffer treatment, such as frontage
street, reverse frontage with screen planting along rear lot lines, deep lots
or any other such treatment which may protect the proposed residential
subdivision from these outside influences.
§ 19.10 ACCESS TO HIGHWAYS UNDER JURISDICTION OF THE STATE.
   If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part thereof lies
adjacent to a highway over which the State Division of Highways has
jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an entrance or
entrances are desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadways or alleys in
such proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the Board a written
permit from the said Division of Highways, granting him or her permission to
obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances.
§ 19.11 STREET NAMES.
   Streets and avenues shall be numbered in accordance with the present
numbering system, as provided in this code. Streets that are obviously in
alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of the
existing street. Otherwise, names shall not duplicate existing street names,
and names similar to existing street names shall not be permitted.
§ 19.12 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets in all residential
subdivisions. Sidewalks are required in any public and municipal or commercial
or industrial subdivision where pedestrian traffic is not otherwise served.
When any subdivision is adjacent to an existing street and may contain lots
with multiple street frontages, the Council may require the developer to grade
for and/or install sidewalk on the adjacent street concurrently with the
construction of other required subdivision improvements, or at such other time
as the Council may determine appropriate. In existing industrial parks, in
industrial districts, where no sidewalks currently exist the developer may
submit a sidewalk assessment waiver to the City Council for its consideration.
All new industrial park developments will require sidewalks as set forth in
this section. Any approved sidewalk assessment waivers are required to be filed
with the County Recorder by the applicant.
(Ord. 2023-15, passed 8-7-2023)
§ 19.13 STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   The minimum requirement for local, collector and major shall be 60 feet. The
width for expressway streets shall conform to the widths recommended by the
City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
§ 20.00 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR ALLEYS.
§ 20.01 ALLEYS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that
the Board may waive this requirement where other definite and assured
provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading
and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
§ 20.02 ALIGNMENT OF ALLEYS.
   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but
where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular
movement.
§ 20.03 DEAD-END ALLEYS TO BE AVOIDED.
   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall
be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined
by the Board.
§ 20.04 ALLEYS TO BE PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential districts.
§ 21.00 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS.
§ 21.01 LENGTHS OF BLOCKS.
   Block length shall not exceed 1,200 feet. Where a subdivision adjoins a
major street, the greater dimension of the block shall front or back upon such
major street to avoid unnecessary access or egress.
§ 21.02 PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   The Board may require the construction of pedestrian crosswalks in
blocks which exceed 800 feet in length. Crosswalk easements not less than ten
feet in width shall be provided where deemed necessary by the Board at the
approximate centers of the blocks.
   (B)   The use of additional crosswalkways in any instance to provide safe
and convenient access to schools, parks or other similar destinations may be
required by the Board.
§ 21.03 WIDTH OF BLOCKS.
   The width of blocks, except for special reasons, shall not be less than 220
feet and not more than 350 feet.
§ 21.04 SHAPE OF BLOCKS.
   No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit
easily into the overall plan of the subdivision and their design shall show
consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and public areas.
§ 21.05 BLOCKS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS.
   Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use shall be designated as
such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas to provide for parking,
loading docks and such other facilities that may be required to accommodate
motor vehicles.
§ 22.00 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR LOTS.
§ 22.01 LOT SIZE, WIDTH, DEPTH, SHAPE AND ORIENTATION.
   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for
the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated; provided, however, no lot size, width or depth shall be less than
the applicable requirements of the appropriate zoning chapter (
Title D, Chapter 2).
§ 22.02 BUILDING SETBACK LINES TO BE ESTABLISHED.
   Building setback lines, appropriate for the location of the subdivision and
the type of development contemplated shall be established on all lots;
provided, however, that such setback lines are not less than the applicable
requirements of the appropriate zoning chapter (
Title D, Chapter 2).
§ 22.03 LOT LINES TO BE AT RIGHT ANGLES TO STREET LINES.
   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the
center line of the street or center of a cul-de-sac turn-around.
§ 22.04 CORNER LOTS TO BE EXTRA WIDTH.
   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets.
§ 22.05 EVERY LOT TO HAVE FRONTAGE ON A PUBLIC STREET.
   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with a
frontage on a public street. No lot shall have a frontage width of less than 40
feet.
§ 22.06 REVERSE FRONTAGE NOT NORMALLY ALLOWED.
   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
The Board may require a planting screen easement of at least ten feet across
which there shall be no access.
§ 22.07 LAND REMNANTS.
   If remnants of land exist after subdividing with no apparent future use,
they shall be incorporated into the lots of the proposed lotting scheme.
§ 22.08 RESERVE STRIPS NOT ALLOWED.
   “Reserve strips” created by the platting of property line streets several
feet inside the property line with the objective of the receiving of
renumeration for access to any improved street will not be allowed.
§ 22.09 ACRE SUBDIVISION.
   Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one to three acres,
inclusive, and there are indications that such lots will eventually be re-
subdivided into small building lots, consideration shall be given to the street
and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor
streets can be opened which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
Easements provided for the future opening and extension of such streets may, at
the discretion of the Council, be made a requirement of the plat.
§ 23.00 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR EASEMENTS.
§ 23.01 NECESSARY UTILITY EASEMENTS TO BE PROVIDED.
   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities and shall be at least ten feet wide on each side of all
rear lot lines, side lot lines and front lot lines where necessary. The
location of the proposed easements shall be concurred to by the utility
companies for which they are intended in writing. A copy of the concurrence
shall be provided to the Community Development Director prior to approval of
the plat by the City Council. It shall be the developer’s responsibility to
obtain the necessary concurrence.
§ 23.02 SERVICE EASEMENTS.
   A blanket easement shall be provided to allow individual utility service
lines to be extended from utility trunk lines; provided that the individual
service line traverses only that parcel on which the structure to be served is
located.
§ 23.03 MAINTENANCE EASEMENTS TO BE PROVIDED FOR NATURAL WATERCOURSES.
   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-
way, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
additional width or construction as deemed necessary by the Board.
§ 23.04 FREE ACCESS OF AUTHORITIES TO EASEMENTS.
   No tree, shrub or structure shall be placed or erected in any easement for
utility or drainage purposes preventing the proper authorities free access to
and use of such easements at any time.
§ 24.00 STREET CLASSIFICATION AND CONTROL OF ACCESS TO ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   (A)   Access control shall be granted to the city for all frontages on
streets classified as major arterials or minor arterials as shown in the future
street plan of the comprehensive plan. Right-of-way widths shall be provided as
specified in the future street plan.
   (B)   Direct access to major and minor arterial streets may be allowed only
when it is clearly demonstrated that such access will not have a significant
negative impact on the present and forecast traffic flow of the arterial
street. For large developments or for uses which will generate a heavy traffic
volume, a traffic engineering study may be required to be submitted by the
developer in order to determine the full impact of the proposed access point
prior to approval of such access point. The use of frontage roads, joint-access
driveways, deceleration lanes or other traffic control devices or designs may
be required to assure minimum impact on traffic flows.
§ 25.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED - GENERAL INFORMATION.
§ 25.01 CONSTRUCTION PLANS TO BE PREPARED BY A REGISTERED ENGINEER.
   Construction plans for all public improvements to be installed shall be
prepared by a registered state professional engineer as qualified by experience
or education.
§ 25.02 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   None of the following public improvements shall be considered as completed
until officially approved by the Administrative Officer and accepted by the
appropriate government agency.
§ 25.03 PRIVATELY OWNED IMPROVEMENT FACILITIES.
   Where a subdivision within the city limits is to contain sewers, sewage
treatment plants, water supply system, park areas or other physical facilities
which will not be maintained by existing public agencies, provision should be
made by trust agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is
acceptable to the proper public agencies, for jurisdiction over the continuous
maintenance, supervision, operation and reconstruction of such facilities by
the lot owners in the subdivision.
§ 25.04 CONSTRUCTION TO CITY SPECIFICATIONS.
   All improvements herein provided shall be constructed in accordance with all
appropriate city specifications.
§ 25.05 COST OF ENGINEERING AND INSPECTION.
   The cost of engineering and inspection of improvements determined on the
period of time devoted to the project shall be charged to the subdivider.
§ 26.00 MINIMUM STREET AND ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
§ 26.01 ALL STREETS CONSTRUCTED TO STANDARDS.
   The construction of all streets and alleys shall be in accordance with the
design standards set forth in §§
19.00 and
20.00 of this chapter.
§ 26.02 CURBS OR GUTTERS.
   Curbs and gutters on local streets shall be of the integral type unit, not
less than 18 inches in overall width, and not less than six inches thick where
they abut the street pavement.
§ 26.03 CURB CORNERS.
   Curb corners of local streets shall have radii of not less than 25 feet.
§ 26.04 PAVEMENTS ON MAJOR AND COLLECTOR STREETS.
   The subdivider shall be responsible for providing pavement 31 feet in width
for major and collector streets.
§ 26.05 STREET SURFACES.
   Local and collector streets shall be portland cement concrete not less than
seven inches thick. Major streets shall be portland cement concrete not less
than nine inches thick. Streets constructed in commercial and/or industrial
subdivisions shall be portland cement concrete not less than nine inches thick.
§ 26.06 STORM WATER INLETS.
   Storm water inlets shall be provided within the street improvements at
points specified by the engineer.
§ 26.07 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be paved and constructed in accordance with
the standards set forth in §
19.12 of this chapter.
§ 26.08 STREET NAME SIGNS.
   Provisions shall be made by the subdivider to furnish street signs for all
intersections within the subdivision or as approved by the Director.
§ 26.09 STREET PAVEMENT WIDTHS.
   The minimum pavement width for streets shall be 31 feet measured from back
of curb to back of curb.
§ 27.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
§ 27.01 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   Connection to the public sanitary sewer system is required for every lot in
a proposed subdivision located within the corporate limits. Whenever a
subdivider can provide conclusive evidence to the Board that public sanitary
sewers are not reasonably available, the subdivider may design the subdivision
to be served by individual subsurface treatment facilities; provided that all
lots not served by a public sanitary sewer shall have a minimum width of 100
feet, measured at the building line and a minimum area of 30,000 square feet.
§ 27.02 SEWAGE DISPOSAL OUTSIDE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Lots outside of the corporate limits, but within the area of subdivision
jurisdiction which cannot reasonably be served by a central sewerage system,
shall have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured at the building line, and a
minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
§ 27.03 SEWER INSTALLED TO COMPLY WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   Sanitary sewer shall be installed to comply with specifications established
by the City and the State Department of Health.
§ 28.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR WATER SUPPLY.
§ 28.01 CONNECTION TO A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   Connection to a public water supply system is required for every lot in a
proposed subdivision located within the corporate limits. Whenever a subdivider
can provide conclusive evidence to the Board that a public water supply system
is not reasonably available, the subdivider may design the subdivision to be
served by individual water supply systems; provided that all lots not served by
a public water supply system shall have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured
at the building line, and a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
§ 28.02 WATER SUPPLY OUTSIDE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Lots outside of the corporate limits, but within the area of subdivision
jurisdiction, shall be served by a public or private well.
§ 28.03 WATER SYSTEMS TO COMPLY WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   Water supply systems shall be installed to comply with specifications
established by the City and the State Department of Public Health.
§ 28.04 LOTS NOT SERVED BY PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER.
   In a proposed subdivision located within the corporate limits, all lots
served by both individual subsurface sewage treatment facilities and individual
water supply systems shall have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured at the
building line, and a minimum area of 30,000 square feet.
§ 29.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR STORM DRAINAGE.
§ 29.01 LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING OR CONTAINING POOR DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   No plat will be approved of a subdivision which is subject to periodic
flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage facilities or where
conditions are such that adequate drainage of the streets and the entire
subdivision is impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make
improvements which will, in the opinion of the Board, make the area completely
safe for residential occupancy and provide adequate street drainage, the
preliminary and final plats of the subdivision may be approved.
§ 29.02 INSTALLATION OF STORM DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   When required, storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire
subdivision which shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer
system and which shall provide an adequate outlet to other facilities. When
storm sewers are not installed, adequate facilities for the removal of surface
water shall be provided throughout the entire subdivision.
§ 29.03 REQUIRED WATERCOURSE IMPROVEMENT.
   Whenever any subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel
or stream, the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate
provision for straightening or widening the channel so that it will properly
carry the surface water, and shall also provide and dedicate to the city an
easement along each side of the stream, which easement shall be for the purpose
of widening, improving or protecting the stream. The width of such easement
shall not be less than 20 feet, and the total width of the easement shall be
adequate to provide for any necessary channel relocations and straightenings.
§ 29.04 ADDITIONAL WIDTH OF LOTS ABUTTING A WATERCOURSE.
   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have
additional minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building
site and afford the minimum usable area required for front, rear and side yards
and not restrict the watercourse.
§ 29.05 SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In all new residential subdivisions, the developer will be required to
provide a sump pump discharge system consisting of a main sump pump discharge
line and lateral connections for each lot. The main line shall be a minimum
six-inch diameter pipe and the lateral connection shall be a minimum four-inch
diameter wye or T connection with the lateral extended to the property or
easement line.
   (B)   The sump pump discharge line shall be designed to carry the flow for
the maximum developed density allowed for the zoning of the development.
Calculations for the anticipated design flow shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval prior to construction.
   (C)   The main sump pump discharge line shall connect to a public storm
sewer, inlet, manhole or drainage way of adequate size to carry the sump pump
discharge and surface water runoff of the minimum design storm.
   (D)   Sump pump discharge lines shall be located in the public right-of-way
or public utility easements. The minimum width of easement shall be ten feet.
Additional easement width may be required if more than one utility will be
installed in the easement.
   (E)   Cleanouts shall be installed on all sump pump laterals and main
discharge lines at all grade or alignment changes and at intervals of not less
than 150 feet.
   (F)   All lots in the subdivision must be connected to the sump pump
discharge system at the time a structure is constructed on the lot.
§ 30.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   All utilities within the city shall be installed underground. New service
lines from existing overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the event
that it can be demonstrated that the installation of any underground utilities
is not feasible, the City Council may approve the installation of above ground
facilities. If overhead lines are permitted, they shall be located along rear
lot lines. Transmission lines carrying 69,000 volts or more may be installed
above ground and in any location approved by the City Council.
§ 31.00 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR MONUMENTS.
   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the external
boundaries of a subdivision, but no further than one-fourth mile apart. Unless
otherwise specified by the Engineer, the monuments shall be iron rods or pipes
at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. Solid round or square iron
bars of equal or greater length may be used in lieu of pipes wherever pipes are
specified in this section. These monuments shall be placed not more than one-
fourth mile apart in any straight line and at all lot corners, at each end of
all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius and at all angle
points in any line where such corners or points are 100 feet or more apart.
§ 32.00 ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DATA.
§ 32.01 ESTABLISH AND APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   (A)   Establishment of the office of Administrative Officer. The office of
Administrative Officer is hereby established in which is vested the duty of the
administration of these regulations as specified herein, and such other related
regulations as are assigned to that office by the Council.
   (B)   Appointment of the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer
is to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. He
or she shall be a person who is qualified by professional or practical training
and experience to conduct the affairs of that office.
§ 32.02 VARIATION AND EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Standards are minimum. These land subdivision regulations are adopted
and enforced only as minimum standards, and all developers may develop their
subdivisions at higher standards. The subdivider is encouraged at any time to
surpass these regulations.
   (B)   Variance, general. The Council hereby reserves authority to vary the
strict application of the provisions herein contained, but such variances shall
be exercised only upon written recommendation of the Board and only after a
written findings of fact is made by the Board that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations was adhered to;
      (2)   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
for financial gain;
      (3)   The conditions creating the need of a variance are unique and are
not applicable generally to other property and have not been created by any
person having an interest in the property; and
      (4)   The granting of the variations will not be detrimental to public
safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in
the area in which the property is located.
   (C)   Variances, large scale development. The standards and requirements of
these regulations may be modified by the Council in case of a plan or program
for a complete community or neighborhood unit. Such modification shall not be
made until after written recommendation of the Board, which recommendation may
be given when, in the judgment of the Board, the specific plan or program
presented provides adequate public space and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as
will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
§ 32.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this subdivision chapter shall be made by the Council as
provided by statute; provided, however, that no amendment shall be adopted
without first referring the proposed amendment to the Board and receiving a
report therefrom. However, if no report is received within 90 days, it shall be
deemed to be approved by the Board.
§ 32.04 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or
replanting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready
to service the property, and roadways providing access to the subject lot or
lots have been reconstructed or are in the process of constructions.
§ 32.05 PENALTIES.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person, firm or
corporation shall be considered a municipal infraction, as provided in Title A,
Chapter 2, §§
3.01 and
3.02. Each day a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 32.06 CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE DEEDS AND COVENANTS.
   In case of any conflict between this chapter or part thereof, and the whole
or part of any existing or future private covenants or deeds, the most
restrictive shall apply. However, it shall not be the responsibility of the
city to enforce private deeds or covenants.
CHAPTER 2: ZONING
Section
   
1.00   Title
   
2.00   Purpose
   
3.00   Nature
   
4.00   Authority
   
5.00   Definitions
   
6.00   Establishment of districts
   
6.01   Residential Districts
   
6.02   Commercial Districts
   
6.03   Industrial Districts
   
6.04   “PUD” Planned Unit Development District
   
7.00   Zoning map
   
8.00   Rules for interpretation of zoning district boundaries
   
9.00   Annexed territory
   
10.00   Organization
   
11.00   Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer
   
11.01   Powers and duties of the Building Official
   
11.02   Zoning Officer
   
12.00   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
12.01   Creation and membership
   
12.02   Jurisdiction
   
12.03   Meetings and rules
   
12A.00   Board of Adjustments
   
12A.01   Creation and membership
   
12A.02   Jurisdiction
   
12A.03   Meetings and rules
   
12A.04   Finality of decisions of the Board of Adjustment
   
13.00   Mayor and Council
   
13.01   Jurisdiction
   
14.00   Zoning certificates and occupancy permits
   
14.01   Zoning certificates
   
14.02   Occupancy permits
   
15.00   Variances
   
15.01   Authority
   
15.02   Application for variances
   
15.03   Initiation of variance
   
15.04   Hearing on application
   
15.05   Notice of hearing
   
15.06   Standards for variances
   
15.07   Authorized variances
   
15.08   Finding of fact
   
15.09   Granting a variance
   
15.10   Effect of denial of variance
   
16.00   Appeals
   
16.01   Authority
   
16.02   Initiation of appeal
   
16.03   Application for appeal
   
16.04   Imminent peril to life and property
   
16.05   Hearing on applications
   
16.06   Notice of hearing
   
16.07   Findings on appeals
   
17.00   Uses on review and other powers of the Board
   
17.01   Uses on review
   
17.02   Other powers of the Board
   
18.00   Amendments
   
18.01   Authority
   
18.02   Initiation of amendment
   
18.03   Application for amendment
   
18.04   Public notification of district reclassification
   
18.05   Meeting on application
   
18.06   Findings of fact and recommendation of the Commission
   
18.07   Action by the City Council
   
18.08   Effect of denial of amendment
   
19.00   SA Suburban Agriculture Districts
   
19.01   Principal permitted uses
   
19.02   Permitted uses on review
   
19.03   Height regulations
   
19.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
20.00   R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts
   
20.01   Principal permitted uses
   
20.02   Permitted uses on review
   
20.03   Height regulations
   
20.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
21.00   R-2 Two-Family Residential Districts
   
21.01   Principal permitted uses
   
21.02   Permitted uses on review
   
21.03   Height regulations
   
21.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
22.00   R-3 Multiple-Family Residential Districts
   
22.01   Principal permitted uses
   
22.02   Permitted uses on review
   
22.03   Height regulations
   
22.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
22A.00   R-MH Mobile Home Park Residence District
   
22A.01   Principal permitted uses
   
22A.02   Permitted uses on review
   
22A.03   Height regulations
   
22A.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
22A.05   Development plan requirements
   
23.00   Planned Residential Overlay Districts
   
23.01   Procedure
   
23.02   Permitted uses
   
23.03   Permitted uses on review
   
23.04   Minimum lot area
   
23.05   Minimum lot width
   
23.06   Height requirements
   
23.07   Front yard
   
23.08   Side yard
   
23.09   Rear yard
   
23.10   Maximum density
   
23.11   Special provisions
   
23.12   Development plan
   
23.13   Time limit
   
23.14   Schedule
   
23.15   Alternatives
   
23.16   Completed project
   
23A.00   O-T Office/Transitional District
   
23A.01   Principal permitted uses
   
23A.02   Permitted uses on review
   
23A.03   Accessory uses permitted
   
23A.04   Height regulations
   
23A.05   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
24.00   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts
   
24.01   Principal permitted uses
   
24.02   Permitted uses on review
   
24.03   Height regulations
   
24.04   Lot width and yard requirements
   
25.00   C-2 Central Business District
   
25.01   Principal permitted uses
   
25.02   Permitted uses on review
   
25.03   Height regulations
   
25.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
26.00   C-3 General Commercial District
   
26.01   Principal permitted uses
   
26.02   Permitted uses on review
   
26.03   Height regulations
   
26.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
27.00   C-4 Highway-Oriented Commercial Districts
   
27.01   Principal permitted uses
   
27.02   Permitted uses on review
   
27.03   Height regulations
   
27.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
27A.00   C/I - Commercial Industrial Transition District
   
27A.01   Principal permitted uses
   
27A.02   Permitted uses on review
   
27A.03   Height regulations
   
27A.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
27A.05   Special requirements
   
28.00   I-1 Light Industrial District
   
28.01   Principal permitted uses
   
28.02   Permitted uses on review
   
28.03   Prohibited uses
   
28.04   Height regulations
   
28.05   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
28.06   Enclosure of use
   
29.00   I-2 General Industrial District
   
29.01   Principal permitted uses
   
29.02   Permitted uses on review
   
29.03   Prohibited uses
   
29.04   Height regulations
   
29.05   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
29A.00   P/M Public and Municipal District
   
29A.01   Principal permitted uses
   
29A.02   Permitted uses on review
   
29A.03   Height regulations
   
29A.04   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements
   
29A.05   Other requirements
   
30.00   “PUD” Planned Unit Development District
   
30.01   Purpose
   
30.02   Procedure
   
30.03   Specific content
   
30.04   Standards
   
30.05   Conditions and guarantees
   
30.06   Detailed site plan
   
31.00   General provisions
   
31.01   Zoning affects every structure and use
   
31.02   Minimum street frontage, lot of record, number of buildings on lot and
lots unserved by sewer or water
   
31.03   Required yard cannot be reduced or used by another building
   
31.04   Conversion of dwelling
   
31.05   Traffic visibility across corner lots
   
31.06   Essential services
   
31.07   Special setback requirements
   
31.08   Validity of existing building permits
   
31.09   Location on lot of satellite receivers
   
31.10   Adjoining lots
   
31.11   Site plan review
   
31.12   Residential development adjacent to a transmission pipeline easement
   
32.00   Exceptions and modifications
   
32.01   General
   
32.02   Height limits
   
32.03   Front yard exceptions and modifications
   
32.04   Side yard exceptions and modifications
   
32.05   Rear yard exceptions and modifications
   
32.06   Electric and barbed wire fence
   
33.00   Accessory buildings
   
33.01   Time of construction
   
33.02   Percentage of required yard occupied
   
33.03   Height of accessory buildings
   
33.04   Location on lot
   
33.05   Mobile homes
   
33.06   Adjoining lots
   
34.00   Temporary permit uses permitted
   
35.00   Off-street parking areas and loading spaces
   
35.01   Off-street loading spaces
   
35.02   Scope
   
35.03   Location
   
35.04   Procedure
   
35.05   Number of parking spaces required
   
35.06   Definition and interpretation
   
35.07   Development standards
   
35.08   Exceptions
   
36.00   Trailers, mobile homes and trucks
   
37.00   Signs
   
37.01   Intent and purpose
   
37.02   Permits required
   
37.03   General requirements
   
37.04   Removal and conformance requirements
   
37.05   Permitted sign within zoning districts
   
37.06   Specific sign regulations
   
37.07   Table of sign types, definitions and restrictions
   
38.00   Fences/screening/walls
   
39.00   Street numbers
   
40.00   Nonconforming buildings and structures
   
40.01   General
   
40.02   Alteration or enlargement of building and structures
   
40.03   Destruction of nonconforming building or structure
   
40.04   Building vacancy
   
40.05   Change in use
   
40.06   Standards for regulation of nonconforming uses
   
41.00   Nonconforming uses of land
   
42.00   Greenbelts
   
42.01   Size
   
42.02   Use
   
42.03   Restrictions
   
42.04   Waiver and vacating
   
43.00   Fees and penalties
   
43.01   Fees
   
43.02   Penalties
   
43A.00   Adult entertainment land uses
   
43A.01   Purpose
   
43A.02   Definitions
   
43A.03   Entertainer
   
43A.04   Facilities
   
43A.05   Locations
   
44
.0
0   Solar energy systems
   
44.01   Purpose
   
44.02   Definitions
   
44.03   Permitted accessory use
   
44.04   Principal uses
§ 1.00 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as the
“Zoning Chapter of the City of Eldridge, Iowa”.
§ 2.00 PURPOSE.
   The various use districts which are created by this chapter and the various
articles and sections of this chapter are adopted for the purpose among others
of:
§ 2.01.   Carrying out the comprehensive plan for the city;
§ 2.02.   Promoting public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare;
§ 2.03.   Helping to achieve greater efficiency and economy of land development
by promoting the grouping of those activities which have similar needs and are
compatible;
§ 2.04.   Encouraging such distribution of population, classification of land
use and distribution of land development that will tend to facilitate adequate
and economic provision of transportation, communication, water supply,
drainage, sanitation, education, recreation and other public requirements;
§ 2.05.   Lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways;
§ 2.06.   Protecting against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards
in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
§ 2.07.   Helping to ensure that all residential commercial and manufacturing
structures as well as other types of structures will be accessible to
firefighting and other emergency equipment;
§ 2.08.   Prohibiting the formation or expansion of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which adversely affect the character and value of
desirable development in each district;
§ 2.09.   Promoting the development of residential neighborhoods which are free
of noise, dust, fumes and heavy traffic volumes in which each dwelling unit is
assured of light, air and open spaces;
§ 2.10.   Helping to prevent land development activities which lead to roadside
blight and to minimize the effects of nuisance producing activities;
§ 2.11.   Promoting and guiding the continued growth and expansion of the city
while protecting the natural, economic and scenic resources of the city;
§ 2.12.   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
city; and
§ 2.13.   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and bodies as provided herein.
§ 3.00 NATURE.
   This chapter classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city, as hereinafter set forth.
The regulations contained herein are necessary to promote the health, safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zoning
districts and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and size of
buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land by
buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings and the
density of population.
§ 4.00 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted in pursuance of the authority granted by Iowa Code
Chapter 414.
§ 5.00 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter and in order to carry out the
provisions contained herein, certain words, terms and phrases are to be
interpreted as defined herein.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel”. The word “shall”
is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive.
   (C)   The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows
and shall be interpreted as such through these regulations. Terms not herein
defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned them.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A building or use on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal building or
use.
      ALLEY. A trafficway, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street.
      AUTO LAUNDRY. A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for
washing more than two automobiles; using production line methods with a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices; or partial
hand-washing of such automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. One or more buildings on premises where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail, and incidental repair and maintenance may be
obtained. Uses permissible at an AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION do not include
major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normal found in service stations. An AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION is not a repair
garage or a body shop. (See GARAGE, PUBLIC.) All activities incidental to the
sale of gasoline or oil shall be conducted within a business and there shall be
no storage or accumulation of equipment or motor vehicles dissolved or
otherwise, outside of the principal structure.
      BASEMENT. A story having part but not more than 50% of its height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a “cellar”). A
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story for purpose of height measurement.
      BILLBOARD. A type of sign having more than 100 square feet of display
surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or supported by a
building or structure.
      BOARD. The Board of Adjustments of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel where for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and
meals are provided for three or more, but not exceeding 12 persons on a weekly
or monthly basis.
      BUILDING. Any structure designed, built or intended for the shelter,
enclosure or protection of people, animals or moveable property of any kind.
Any structures with interior areas not normally accessible for human use shall
not be considered as BUILDINGS.
      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
      CELLAR. A story having 50% or more of its height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground. A CELLAR shall be counted as a story, for purposes of
height measurement, only if used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor
or caretaker employed on the premises.
      CHILD CARE CENTER. A building or structure which receives three or more
children under the age of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for care,
protection and supervision apart from their natural parents, legal guardian or
custodians, for regular periods of time for compensation.
      CITY. The City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      CLINIC. A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of
human patients by licensed physicians or practitioners that does not include
overnight care facilities.
      COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Eldridge,
Iowa.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail establishment offering for sale food
products, household items and other goods commonly associated with the same and
having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet with no automobile
repair on the premises.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eldridge, Iowa.
      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any place or premises principally used for the sale,
dispensing or serving of food or beverages in automobiles, including those
establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the
food or beverages on or off the premises.
      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof that provides living facilities
for residential purposes.
      DWELLING, ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). An additional residential
dwelling unit located on the same lot as a single-family residence that is
either attached to or detached from the single-family residence up to 1,000 sq.
ft. or 50% of the single-family residence, whichever is greater.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building or portion thereof used
for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other and
containing three or more dwelling units.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED (SFD). A detached residential dwelling
unit, other than a mobile home, designed for occupancy by one family only, and
is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. A floor area of at least
640 square feet, have a minimum width of 20 feet for at least 75% of its
narrowest dimension, and be placed on permanent foundation, and be taxed as
real property.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached residential building containing two
separate dwelling units, which are arranged so as to create an independent
housekeeping establishment for occupancy by two families with separate toilets
and facilities for cooking and sleeping.
      DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling which consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for
occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and
sleeping.
      ELDER FAMILY HOME. The occupation of a private household by up to five
ambulatory elderly persons pursuant to the Iowa Code. More than five persons
are allowed if they are related to the resident provider.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, alteration or maintenance, by public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or
for the public health or safety or general welfare.
      FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth, adoption or
marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than five persons, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel or
group.
      FARM. An area of 35 or more acres which is used for the growing of the
usual farm products, such as vegetable, fruit, trees and grain, and their
storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine. The term
FARMING includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above
uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and
storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and
provided further that FARMING does not include the extraction of minerals or
the operation of commercial feedlots for livestock. The term FARM includes farm
dwellings occupied by the farm owner, operator or seasonal or year-round hired
farm workers.
      FEEDLOT. Any tract of land or structure, pen or corral, wherein cattle,
horses, sheep, goats and swine are maintained in close quarters for the purpose
of fattening such livestock for final shipment to market.
      FENCE. A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially
constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land. Decorative corner treatments which do not
exceed six feet in length and three feet in height are not considered FENCES.
      FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets or highways (crossing or terminating) measured along the
line of a street or highway, or if the street is dead ended, abutting on one
side between an intersecting street or highway and the dead end of the street
or highway. FRONTAGE shall not include property more than 400 feet distant on
either side of a lot.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage
of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to
which it is accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial
vehicle exceeding two-ton capacity.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling or storing motor-driven vehicles.
      GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building or premises used for housing only of motor-
driven vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles, pursuant to
previous arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and
oils are not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired
or sold.
      GROUP HOME FOR THE DISABLED.
         (a)   A dwelling shared by four or more disabled persons, including
resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-
term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education
and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary
goal of enabling the resident to live as independently as possible in order to
reach their maximum potential.
         (b)   1.   As used herein, the term DISABLED shall mean having:
               a.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of such person’s major life activities so that such person is
incapable of living independently;
               b.   A record of having such an impairment; or
               c.   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
            2.   However, DISABLED shall not include current illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose
residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety
of other individuals.
         (c)   The term GROUP HOME FOR THE DISABLED shall not include
alcoholism or drug treatment center, work release facilities for convicts or
ex-convicts or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to
incarceration.
      HOME OCCUPATION.
         (a)   Any occupation or activity incidental to residential use, when
carried on in the main building by one member of the immediate family residing
on the premises, in connection with which there is no sign used other than a
nonilluminated name plate not more than two square feet in area or no display
used that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for
any purpose other than that for a dwelling. There is no commodity sold on the
premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family
residing on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used except of the
type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or
household purposes.
         (b)   HOME OCCUPATIONS shall include, but are not limited to, the use
of premises by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyman, barber,
beautician or other professional.
      HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily
rate to the general public and may provide additional services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
      INSTITUTIONS. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a
nonprofit establishment for public use.
      JUNKYARD. A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for
the collection, storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded materials or for the collection, storage, dismantling and salvaging
of machinery or vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts
thereof. The term JUNKYARD shall include auto wrecking yards.
      KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, or small animals,
more than six months of age, are kept for compensation or sale.
      LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing hometype washing, drying or iron
machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
      LOT. A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings or related use, together with such yards or open spaces
within the lot lines as may be required by these regulations.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for
their full length on a street; provided the interior angle at the intersection
of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A CORNER LOT shall be designated to
have two front lot lines and two side lot lines. The two front lot lines shall
be the two sides of the lot that abut the street.
      LOT DEPTH. The depth of a lot which shall be considered to be the
distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting foremost points of
the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in
the rear.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets as distinguished from a corner lot. The sides of the lot abutting
streets shall be considered front yards.
      LOT, FRONTAGE. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
street.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot. It is the line
separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double
frontage lot, both lines separating said lot from streets shall be considered
FRONT LOT LINES.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot boundary opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary
line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line not less than ten feet
long and wholly within the lot.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line that is not a front or rear lot
line.
      LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder; or a parcel of land, the
deed of which was recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
      LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A double frontage lot which has a vehicular access
point limited to the back of the lot, rather than having access on the front.
      LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot which shall be considered to be the
distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each
side of the lot. Where side lot lines are not continuously parallel or at right
angles to the abutting street, the average of the rear and front widths shall
be used.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family detached dwelling that is factory
built, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. §
5403 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not
constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to
be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which
does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
For the purpose of this definition, a MANUFACTURED HOME shall be converted to
real property in conformance with Iowa Code § 135D.26 and shall not be allowed
to be reconverted from the real property, thus created, to a mobile home. All
MANUFACTURED HOMES installed on single-family lots shall have recorded in their
abstracts of title, prior to the occupancy of the dwelling, an affidavit that
states that any alteration to the structure shall be certified, by the
manufacturer or a licensed architect or engineer, as complying with 42 U.S.C. §
5403 and that any alteration not certified is illegal.
      MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its being
used, as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways, and duly licensable
as such, and so designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of an
enclosed addition or room, in such manner as will permit the occupancy thereof
as a dwelling or sleeping place of one or more persons on a permanent basis and
supported by wheels, jacks or similar supports. A travel trailer is not to be
considered a MOBILE HOME. (See definition of TRAVEL TRAILER.)
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one
or more mobile homes.
      MOTEL. A building or group of buildings used primarily for the temporary
residence of motorists or travelers on a daily rate and may provide additional
services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
      NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS. An area primarily for recreation dedicated or to be
dedicated to the city and developed integrally with a subdivision and in
accordance with subdivision chapter.
      NONCONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of this chapter, or amendment thereto, which does not conform after
passage of this chapter, or amendment thereto, with the use regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
      PARK. Any public or private land available for recreational, educational,
cultural or aesthetic use.
      PARKING SPACE. A durably surfaced area, enclosed in the main building, in
an accessory building or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one standard
automobile, and if the space is unenclosed comprising an area of not less than
140 square feet, exclusive of a durably surfaced driveway connecting the
PARKING SPACE with a street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and
egress for an automobile.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A development of land that is under
unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development
operation or programmed series of development stages. The development may
include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces and other
site features and improvements.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For the purposes of this chapter, MAJOR
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES are defined as including boats and boat trailers, pick-up
campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized
dwellings, tent trailers and similar vehicles. Trailers used for hauling which
are required to be licensed by the state are also included under provisions of
this chapter.
      ROW DWELLING. One of two or more residential buildings having a common or
party wall separating dwelling units.
      SATELLITE RECEIVERS. A concave dish or an antenna anchored to a
foundation or portable and which is a device designed and intended to transmit
or receive or intercept microwave, television, radio and other such signals or
transmissions.
      SCREENING. The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent
site is shielded, concealed or hidden. SCREENING techniques include fences,
walls, hedges, berms or other features.
      SEPTIC TANK. A sewerage system with a seepage field designed to function
on an individual lot basis.
      SETBACK LINE. The line denoting the distance required to obtain the
minimum front, side and rear yards as required by the appropriate zoning
regulations.
      SEWERAGE SYSTEM, CENTRAL. A type which is approved by the State
Department of Health and the County Health Department as properly designed to
serve one or more subdivisions. A septic tank is not a CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
      SIGN. A structure or device designed or intended to convey information to
the public in written or pictorial form.
      SIGN, OFF-SITE. A sign other than an on-site sign.
      SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on
which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities on
the premises. ON-SITE SIGNS do not include billboards.
      STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory building in which horses are kept for
private use and not for renumeration, hire or sale.
      STABLE, PUBLIC. An accessory building in which horses are kept for
commercial use, including boarding, hire and sale.
      STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and upper surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling or roof
next above such floor; provided that, for the purpose of determining the
required dimensions of yards and courts, when the average story height of a
building exceeds 12 feet, each 12 feet or fraction thereof the total building
height shall be considered a separate full story or fractional story
respectively, except the first story which may be 15 feet high.
      STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
palates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than
four feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any partial
story used for residence purposes, other than janitor or caretaker and his or
her family, shall be deemed a full story.
      STREET. A general term used to describe a public right-of-way which
provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and which may provide
for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may
also provide space for the location of utilities (both above and below ground).
      STREET, COLLECTOR. A trafficway which carries traffic between sections of
the community or which serves as a connector between rural areas and the
community.
      STREET, EXPRESSWAY. A limited access trafficway connecting two or more
communities.
      STREET, LOCAL. A trafficway which serves primarily for access to abutting
properties.
      STREET, MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A trafficway connecting communities or
connecting to limited access trafficways which, in turn, connect to other
communities.
      STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A local street which is parallel to and adjacent
to primary streets and highways, and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast through-moving traffic on
the primary streets.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, STRUCTURES include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences,
billboards, poster panels, whirlpools, swimming pools, hot tubs and satellite
receivers.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
structure such as bearing walls, beams, girders or any substantial change in
the roof or exterior walls.
      TOBACCO SHOP. Any premises where sales of tobacco, cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products, as defined by Iowa Code Chapter 453A as may be
amended, and/or accessory products account for 50% or more of the gross sales
within the premises. Accessory products include any miscellaneous products that
could be used in the production or consumption of tobacco, cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products. TOBACCO SHOPS may be known as VAPE SHOPS, SMOKE
SHOPS, HOOKAHS or other similar names.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational
propose, having a body width not exceeding State Department of Transportation
regulations.
      VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of this chapter by the Board of
Adjustments not to be contrary to the public interest, and where owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
      YARD. A required open space at grade unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure, except as otherwise provided herein. In
measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, depth
of a front yard or rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
line and the main building shall be used.
      YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as hereinafter specified.
      YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of a lot between a
building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as hereinafter specified.
      YARD, SIDE. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The person appointed to occupy the office
created herein, in which office is vested the chief administrative and
enforcement duties as outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2024-08, passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 2025-16,
passed 7-7-2025)
§ 6.00 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
§ 6.01 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Residential districts include the following:
   (A)   “SA” Suburban Agricultural District;
   (B)   “R-1” Single-Family Residential District;
   (C)   “R-2” Two-Family Residential District;
   (D)   “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential District;
   (E)   “R-MH” Mobile Home Park Residence District; and
   (F)   “PR” Planned Residence Overlay District.
§ 6.02 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Commercial districts include the following:
   (A)   “O-T” Office/Transitional District;
   (B)   “C-1” Neighborhood Commercial District;
   (C)   “C-2” Central Business District;
   (D)   “C-3” General Commercial District;
   (E)   “C-4” Highway-Oriented Commercial District; and
   (F)   “C/I” Commercial Industrial District.
§ 6.03 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Industrial districts include the following:
   (A)   “I-1” Light Industrial District;
   (B)   “I-2” General Industrial District; and
   (C)   “P/M” Public and Municipal District.
§ 6.04 “PUD” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
§ 7.00 ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
chapter are set forth on the map entitled “Zoning Map”, together with
everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of
this chapter as though fully set forth and described herein, the original of
which zoning map is properly attested and is on file with the City Clerk.
§ 8.00 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 8.01.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the center lines of such
streets, highways or alleys;
§ 8.02.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot
lines or other property lines shall be construed to be said boundary lines;
§ 8.03.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad
lines shall be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad
lines;
§ 8.04.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center
lines of streams, rivers or other watercourses shall be construed as following
the channel center line of such watercourses taken at a mean low water mark;
§ 8.05.   Boundaries shown as following or closely following the city limits
shall be construed as following such limits;
§ 8.06.   Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable
doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of the more
restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless
otherwise determined by the Board in accordance with provisions contained in §
17.02A of this chapter; and
§ 8.07.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
§ 9.00 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be classed
automatically as being in an “SA” Suburban Agricultural District until such
classification shall have been changed by amendment of this chapter as provided
hereafter.
§ 10.00 ORGANIZATION.
   The administration of this chapter is vested in the following five offices
of the government of the city: Building Official, Zoning Enforcement Officer,
Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment and the City Council. The
following sections shall first set out the authority of each of these four
offices, and then describe the procedure and substantive standards with respect
to the following administrative functions: issuance of zoning certificates and
occupancy permits, variances, appeals, uses on review and other powers of the
Commission and Board and amendments.
§ 11.00 BUILDING OFFICIAL AND ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
§ 11.01 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official shall discharge the following duties under this
chapter:
   (A)   Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
   (B)   Issue all occupancy permits and make and maintain records thereof;
   (C)   Issue occupancy permits regulating the erection of buildings or
structures and use of land for periods not to exceed ten days for specific
purposes, such as temporary carnivals, churches, charities, and revival
meetings which are not detrimental to the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, convenience or general welfare; provided, however, that said use or
operation and any incidental temporary structures or tents are in conformance
with all other chapters and codes of the city;
   (D)   Conduct inspection of buildings, structures and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
   (E)   Assist the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this
chapter; and
   (F)   Perform all duties which are required of him or her under the terms of
this chapter.
§ 11.02 ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   Appointment of Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council.
   (B)   Powers and duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall enforce this chapter, and in addition thereto and in
furtherance of said authority, shall:
      (1)   Conduct inspection of buildings, structures and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
      (2)   Assign street numbers in accordance with the city’s current street
numbering system;
      (3)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, uses on review, variances, appeals
and applications therefor;
      (4)   Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all
matters arising out of this chapter;
      (5)   Forward to the Commission all applications for amendments to this
chapter;
      (6)   Transmit to the Board applications for appeals, variances, uses on
review or other matters on which the Board is required to pass under this
chapter; and
      (7)   Initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the
provisions of the chapter and make reports of his or her recommendations to the
Board.
§ 12.00 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
§ 12.01 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established, which shall consist
of seven members. The terms of office of the members of the Commission and the
manner of their appointment shall be as provided by statute.
§ 12.02 JURISDICTION.
   The Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and
authority:
   (A)   Hear all applications for amendments to this chapter and report said
findings and recommendations to the Council;
   (B)   On its own initiative, to petition the Council requesting an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal of this chapter provided that it has
first held a public hearing thereon;
   (C)   Receive from the Zoning Enforcement Officer his or her recommendations
as related to the effectiveness of this chapter and report its conclusions and
recommendations to the Council not less frequently than once a year; and
   (D)   To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter.
§ 12.03 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings conducted by
said Board shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at
the hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
   (B)   The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict
with this chapter or with the applicable state statutes, and select or appoint
such officers as it deems necessary.
§ 12A.00 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
§ 12A.01 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of five
members. The terms of office of the members of the Board and the manner of
their appointment shall be as provided by statute.
§ 12A.02 JURISDICTION.
   The Board is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
   (A)   To hear and pass on all applications for uses on review in the manner
prescribed in this chapter;
   (B)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Official under
this chapter;
   (C)   To hear and pass upon the applications for variances from the terms
provided in this chapter in the manner prescribed and subject to the standards
established herein;
   (D)   To interpret the provisions of this chapter and the district map in
the manner provided for herein; and
   (E)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this chapter, as prescribed by the applicable provisions
of the Iowa Code.
§ 12A.03 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings conducted by
said Board shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at
the hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. The
Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (B)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official
actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Board shall be filed immediately in the office of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be a public record.
   (C)   The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict
with this chapter or with the applicable state statutes, and select or appoint
such officers as it deems necessary.
§ 12A.04 FINALITY OF DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   All decisions and findings of the Board of Adjustment, applications for a
variance or application for a use on review, after a hearing, shall, in all
instances, be final administrative decisions and shall be subject to judicial
review as by law may be provided.
§ 13.00 MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
§ 13.01 JURISDICTION.
   The Mayor and Council shall discharge the following duties under this
chapter:
   (A)   Appoint the Zoning Enforcement Officer whose responsibility will be to
enforce the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Appoint members to the Board as provided for in this chapter and state
statutes;
   (C)   Receive and decide upon all recommendations concerning amendments,
supplements, changes or repeal of the Zoning Chapter submitted to them by the
Commission;
   (D)   Receive from the Commission all recommendations on the effectiveness
of this chapter; and
   (E)   To decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter.
§ 14.00 ZONING CERTIFICATES AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
§ 14.01 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Issuance of zoning certificates. Except as hereinafter provided, no
permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any
officer, department or employee of the city, unless the application for such
permit has been examined by the Building Official and has affixed to it a
certificate, indicating that the proposed building or structure complies with
all the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or certificate issued in
conflict with the provisions of the chapter shall be null and void.
   (B)   Plats. In order to ensure that the building or structure conforms with
all the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official may require the
following prior to the issuance of a building permit:
      (1)   A plat (original or reproduction thereof), in duplicate of the
piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions, as certified by a “registered land surveyor” as a true copy
of the piece of parcel, lot or lots, block or blocks or portions thereof,
according to the registered or recorded plat of such land; and
      (2)   A plat, in duplicate, drawn to a scale in such form as may, from
time to time, be prescribed by the Building Official, showing the ground area,
height and bulk of the building lines in relation to lot lines; the use to be
made of the building, structure or land; and such other information as may be
required by the Building Official for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
§ 14.02 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date
of this chapter, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be
occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective date of this chapter, shall be
used for any purpose until an occupancy permit has issued by the Building
Official. No change in a use, other than that of a permitted use to another
similar permitted use, shall be made until an occupancy permit has been issued
by the Building Official. Every occupancy permit shall state that the use or
occupancy complies with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Application for occupancy permit. Every application for a
building permit shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy permit.
Every application for an occupancy permit for a new use of land where no
building permit is required shall be made directly to the Building Official;
and
      (2)   Issuance of occupancy permit. No occupancy permit for a building,
or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall
be issued until construction has been completed and the premises inspected and
certified by the Building Official to be in conformity with the plans and
specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. Pending the
issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be
valid for a period not to exceed six months from its date during the completion
of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. Reasons, in
writing, for refusal to issue an occupancy permit must be forwarded to the
applicant no later than 14 days after the request for an occupancy permit.
§ 15.00 VARIANCES.
§ 15.01 AUTHORITY.
   The Board, after a public hearing, may vary the regulations of this chapter
in harmony with its general purpose and intent only in the specific instances
hereinafter set forth and only in accordance with the standards hereinafter
prescribed.
§ 15.02 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCES.
   An application for a variance shall be filed in writing with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Said application shall contain such information as the
Board may, by rule, require.
§ 15.03 INITIATION OF VARIANCE.
   Variances may be requested by any person, firm, corporation or government.
§ 15.04 HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   The Board shall hold a public hearing on each application for a variance at
such time and place as shall be established by the Board. A record of such
proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner as the Board shall, by rule,
prescribe from time to time.
§ 15.05 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at
least once, not less than four days nor more than 20 days before the hearing,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional forms of notice as the Board, by rule, may
require.
(Ord. 2025-21, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 15.06 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Board shall not vary the regulations of this chapter, as
authorized in this section, unless there is evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
      (2)   The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
      (3)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make money out of the property;
      (4)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and
has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the
property;
      (5)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located;
      (6)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and
      (7)   The purpose of the variance shall not be to establish a use
otherwise excluded from the particular district in which it is requested.
   (B)   The Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the
standards established in this section.
§ 15.07 AUTHORIZED VARIANCES.
   Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be granted by the Board
only in accordance with the standards established in §
15.06 of this chapter and may be granted only in the following instances and in
no others:
   (A)   To permit any yard or setback line of less dimension than required by
the applicable regulations;
   (B)   To permit any building or structure to exceed the height limitations
imposed by the applicable regulations;
   (C)   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no
event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 70%
of the required area and width;
   (D)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required
facilities for two or more uses provided that substantial use of such facility
by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same
days of the week;
   (E)   To reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts
whenever the character or use of a building is such as to make unnecessary the
full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations
would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted
with merely being granted for a convenience;
   (F)   To permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or use
located on premises in a district which prohibits that use of land or building,
or the height and area of buildings existing at the time of the adopting of
this chapter where such alteration or enlargement is a necessary incident to
the use of the structure existing at the time of the adoption, amendment or
change of this chapter; and
   (G)   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or the public enemy to the extent
of more than 65% of its market value, as determined by the Board, where the
Board finds some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the
nonconforming use.
§ 15.08 FINDING OF FACT.
   All decisions by the Board on requests for variances must be supplemented
with a written finding of fact stating the conformity or nonconformity, as the
case may be, of its decision with the standards set forth in this section.
§ 15.09 GRANTING A VARIANCE.
   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to
grant a variance. No decision of the Board granting a variance shall be valid
for a period longer than 12 months from the date of such decision unless the
building permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration
of a building is started or the use is commenced within such a period.
§ 15.10 EFFECT OF DENIAL OF VARIANCE.
   No application for a variance that has been denied wholly or in part by the
Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order
of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence found to be valid by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 16.00 APPEALS.
§ 16.01 AUTHORITY.
   The Board, after a hearing, may determine and vary any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 16.02 INITIATION OF APPEAL.
   Any person, firm, corporation or any officer, department, board or bureau of
the city may request an appeal.
§ 16.03 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.
   An application for an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Said application shall contain such information as the
Board may, by rule, require.
§ 16.04 IMMINENT PERIL TO LIFE AND PROPERTY.
   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board, after the
application for the appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of
acts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property.
§ 16.05 HEARING ON APPLICATIONS.
   The Board shall hold a hearing on each application for an appeal at such
time and place as shall be established by the Board.
§ 16.06 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Due notice of the time and of the place of said hearing on an appeal shall
be sent to all affected parties.
§ 16.07 FINDINGS ON APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of three
members, reverse wholly or modify in part the interpretation. To that end, the
Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   (B)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain records of all actions
of the Board relative to appeals.
§ 17.00 USES ON REVIEW AND OTHER POWERS OF THE BOARD.
§ 17.01 USES ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The development and administration of this chapter is based upon
the division of the city into zoning districts, within which districts the use
of land and buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially
uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because
of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any
particular district or districts, without consideration in each case, of the
impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular locations.
      (2)   Such uses on review fall into two categories:
         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and
         (b)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation of use on review. Any person having a freehold interest in
land, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession or a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory
interest, either of which is specifically enforceable, may file an application
to use such land for one or more of the uses on review provided for in this
chapter in the zoning district in which the land is located.
   (C)   Application for use on review. An application for a use on review
shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer on a form as he or she shall
prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or date
prescribed by the Board and shall include a statement in writing by the
applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will, on review,
conform to the standards set forth in division (F) below hereinafter. Such
application shall be forwarded from the Zoning Enforcement Officer to the Board
with a request for a public hearing and report relative thereto.
   (D)   Hearing an application. Upon receipt in proper form of the application
and statement referred to in division (C) above, the Board shall hold at least
one public hearing on the proposed use on review. The hearing shall be
conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as
the Board shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be
published not less than four days preceding said hearing and at least once in
one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. Supplemental or
additional notices may be published or distributed as the Board may, by rule,
prescribe from time to time.
   (F)   Standards. No use on review shall be granted by the Board, unless such
Board shall find:
      (1)   That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use on
review will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare;
      (2)   That the use on review will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood;
      (3)   That the establishment of the use on review will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for
permitted uses in the district;
      (4)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
      (5)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets; and
      (6)   That the use on review shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the Board.
   (G)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any use on review,
the Board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the use on
review as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in division (F)
above. In all cases in which uses on review are granted, the Board shall
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied
with.
   (H)   Effect of denial of a use on review. No application for a use on
review that has been denied wholly or in part by the Board shall be resubmitted
for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
   (I)   Revocation of a use on review. In any case where a use on review has
not been established within one year after the date of granting thereof, then,
without further action by the Board, the use on review or authorization shall
be null and void.
(Ord. 2025-21, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 17.02 OTHER POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board is hereby vested with the following additional authority and
jurisdiction.
   (A)   Interpretation of district map. Where the applications of the rules of
interpretation of district boundaries contained in §
8.00 of this chapter leaves a reasonable doubt to the boundary between the two
districts, the Board, after notice to the owners of the property and after
public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   Temporary uses and permits. The Board may issue a permit for the
temporary use of a building or premises in any district for a purpose or use
that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by this chapter; provided
that such use be of a true temporary nature and does not involve the erection
of substantial buildings. Such permit shall be granted in the form of a
temporary and revocable permit for not more than a 12-month period, subject to
such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.
   (C)   Certain industries in “I-1” Districts. In determining whether certain
uses shall be located in a “I-1” or “I-2” District, the Board shall give due
regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures, and the
consistency therewith of the proposed use and development. Before authorizing a
use for a location in an “I-1” District, the Board shall determine whether the
proposed use would be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to
the surrounding neighborhood by reason of noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust
and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire and safety hazards,
sewage wastes and pollution, transportation and traffic, aesthetic and
psychological effects.
   (D)   Rear yard setback relief.
      (1)   To hear and decide applications in specific cases such relief from
the terms of this section with respect to rear yard setbacks that will not be
contrary to the public interest, where literal enforcement of the requirements
result in practical limitations for the use of the property and where granting
of the special exception will not significantly alter the essential character
of the surrounding neighborhood.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (D) only:
         (a)   Application. Application for rear yard setback reduction shall
not be accepted unless the following conditions are met:
               1.   The reduction of the rear yard shall not allow for a rear
yard of less than 25 feet;
               2.   The structure being considered shall be a single-family,
detached dwelling in an R-1 Single-Family Residential District. Attached
dwellings, duplexes, multi-family, attached carriage houses or townhouse type
structures shall not be considered;
               3.   Application shall not be submitted to the city within two
years of the date of the current certificate of occupancy as determined by the
Building Official;
               4.   The area occupied by the primary structure shall count
towards the percentage of required yard occupied in §
33.02 of this chapter;
               5.   A house location survey by a state licensed land surveyor
must be provided and the rear property pins shall be exposed or re-established;
               6.   Petitioner shall be signatory to an affidavit that all
restrictive covenants have been reviewed and are being complied with;
               7.   The encroachment shall not be allowed into the area of any
easement for any purpose;
               8.   No part of the primary residence shall be used as a church,
child care center, home occupation, bed and breakfast, rental for a period
where the contract is less than 30 days or other use where a hearing is
required. Approval of this rear yard reduction shall cause denial of any
subsequent application for any use under this section;
               9.   The height of the encroachment shall not exceed the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridges on gable, hip or gambrel roofs as
determined by the Building Official; and
               10.   The width of the encroachment shall not exceed 50% of the
width of the primary structure including attached garage.
         (b)   Standards. Standards include the following.
               1.   Approval of rear yard setback relief under this division
(D)(2)(b) shall be by supermajority.
               2.   In order to approve, the Board must find that the following
standards are met:
                  a.   The exception is reasonably necessary due to practical
difficulties;
                  b.   It will not impair an adequate supply of light and air
to adjacent properties;
                  c.   It will not unreasonably increase congestion in public
streets;
                  d.   It will not increase the danger of fire or endanger the
public safety;
                  e.   It will not unreasonably diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area;
                  f.   The exception is in harmony with the essential character
of the neighborhood of the land in question.
                  g.   It will not impair the public health, safety, comfort,
morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
                  h.   The structure shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations or standards of the zone in which it is located; and
                  i.   The approval does not conflict with the city’s
comprehensive plan.
         (c)   Process. The provisions and standards set forth at §
17.01 of this chapter shall be applied and followed for actions under this
subsection.
         (d)   Extension. Subject to the provisions of this division (D), the
extension of a single-family dwelling into a rear yard setback area.
(Ord. 2018-05, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 18.00 AMENDMENTS.
§ 18.01 AUTHORITY.
   For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
general welfare; conserving the value of property throughout the city; and
lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways, the
Council may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the
regulations imposed in the districts created by this chapter. The chapter may
be amended; provided that in all amendments adopted under the authority of this
section, due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation
of property values and the direction of building development to the best
advantages of the entire community, before the adoption of such amendment.
§ 18.02 INITIATION OF AMENDMENT.
   Amendments may be proposed by the Council, the Commission or by any
interested person or organization.
§ 18.03 APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT.
   An application for an amendment to the zoning district classification, to
the text regulations or a request for a PUD shall be filed with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer in such form and accompanied by such information as
required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such application shall be forwarded
to the Commission with the request to hold a public hearing on said application
for amendment.
§ 18.04 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF DISTRICT RECLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Rezoning signs. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, or person designated
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, shall provide each applicant requesting a
change to the official zoning map with at least two rezoning notification signs
containing the time, date and place of the Commission meeting. Said signs shall
be clearly posted by the applicant on the property for which the request has
been made. On large parcels, additional signs may be required to be posted. At
least one sign must be placed so that it may be seen from the street, and in
the case of through lots and/or corner lots, a sign shall be posted on both
street frontages. When a property is in the interior of a block or tract of
land, additional signs may be required to be posted adjacent to and facing the
surrounding properties. For each sign provided, the applicant shall pay a fee
in an amount established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
   (B)   Posting of notifications signs. Notification signs shall be posted at
least ten days before the Commission meeting date noted on the sign. It shall
be the applicant’s responsibility to see that said signs remain posted during
the entire ten-day period. If the signs are not posted in accordance with the
preceding requirements, the Commission may delay action on the application,
except that if the applicant satisfies the Commission that the signs were
initially posted at least ten days prior to the Commission meeting and that the
applicant made diligent efforts to keep the signs posted during the entire
period, and that only circumstances beyond the applicant’s control prevented a
continuous posting, then the Commission may act on the application.
   (C)   Courtesy notices to adjoining property owners. Notices stating the
applicant’s request, the general location of the property involved, date and
location of the Commission’s public meeting shall be sent at least five days
prior to the meeting date to all property owners adjacent to the property
requested to be reclassified. Such notices shall be sent by first class mail
with postage prepaid.
   (D)   Action at other then specified times. If the Commission is to
initially act on the applicant’s request at any time other then that specified
on the rezoning notification signs, the petitioner may be required to obtain
and post signs with the new dates.
   (E)   Removal of signs. Signs required to be posted pursuant to this section
must be removed within 72 hours after the meeting date listed on the sign.
§ 18.05 MEETING ON APPLICATION.
   The Commission shall hold a public meeting on each application for an
amendment at such time and place as shall be established by the Commission. The
meeting shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved
in such manner as the Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
§ 18.06 FINDINGS OF FACT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment,
the Commission shall make written findings of fact and submit the same,
together with its recommendations, to the Council.
   (B)   Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change
the zoning classification of particular property, the findings of fact and
recommendation shall incur the following information:
      (1)   Existing use of property within the general area of the property in
question;
      (2)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question;
      (3)   The suitability of the property in question to the permitted uses
under the existing zoning classification;
      (4)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes if any which have taken place since the
day the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification;
and
      (5)   The Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed
amendment, unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in the public
interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The Commission
may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning classification
of the property in question to any higher classification than that requested by
the applicant. For the purpose of this division (B)(5), the “SA” District shall
be considered the highest classification and the “I-2” District shall be
considered the lowest classification.
§ 18.07 ACTION BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Receive the Commission’s report. The Council shall not act upon a
proposed amendment to this chapter until it shall have received a written
report and recommendation from the Commission on the proposed amendment.
   (B)   Hearing on application. The Council shall hold a public hearing on
each application for an amendment.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be
published at least once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
city not less than four days nor more than 20 days before such hearing.
Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the
Council may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (D)   Approval or denial of application. The Council may grant or deny any
application for an amendment; provided, however, in the case the Board does not
approve the change or, in case of a protest against such change signed by the
owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed
change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending the depth
of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from there, or those directly opposite
lots, filed with the Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Council.
(Ord. 2025-21, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 18.08 EFFECT OF DENIAL OF AMENDMENT.
   No application for an amendment that has been denied wholly or in part by
the Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said
denial except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions
found to be valid by the Commission.
§ 19.00 SA SUBURBAN AGRICULTURE DISTRICTS.
   This district is intended to provide regulations for those areas situated on
the fringe of the urban area that are used for agricultural purposes, but which
will be undergoing urban development between existing agricultural uses and
planned residential, commercial or industrial uses.
§ 19.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in an “SA” Suburban Agricultural District shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Single-family dwelling;
   (B)   Farm;
   (C)   Nursery and greenhouse;
   (D)   Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises;
   (E)   Accessory uses or buildings, which are customarily incidental to any
of the above stated uses;
   (F)   Group home; provided that a new group home shall not be located within
one-fourth of a mile from another group home;
   (G)   Elder family home; provided that a new elder family home shall not be
located within one-fourth of a mile from another elder family home; and
   (H)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 19.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Church or temple;
   (B)   Cemetery;
   (C)   Child care center;
   (D)   Commercial excavation of natural materials;
   (E)   Golf course;
   (F)   Home occupation;
   (G)   Municipal administrative or public service building or properties,
except such cases as storage yard, warehouse or garage;
   (H)   Park or playground;
   (I)   Public school or school offering general educational courses the same
as ordinarily given in public schools;
   (J)   Riding stable, public or private;
   (K)   Sanitary landfill; and
   (L)   Sewage lagoon or treatment plant.
§ 19.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 19.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 20,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Lot width any yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot width        100 feet
Front yard depth 40 feet
Side yard width  12 feet
Rear yard dept   40 feet
 
§ 20.00 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land
is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and
educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive
residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and
protected from encroachment of uses that are not appropriate to a residential
environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are
encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings
and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional
relationship of the different uses.
§ 20.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in an “R-1” Single-Family Residential District shall
be used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Dwelling, single-family detached;
   (B)   Park, playground or community center;
   (C)   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above uses;
   (D)   Group home; provided that a new group home shall not be located within
one-fourth of a mile from another group home;
   (E)   Elder family home; provided that a new elder family home shall not be
located within one-fourth of a mile from another elder family home;
   (F)   Solar garden; and
   (G)   Accessory dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025; Ord. 2025-16, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 20.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Church or temple;
   (B)   Child care center;
   (C)   Home occupation;
   (D)   Municipal administrative or public service building or properties,
except such cases as storage yard, warehouse or garage;
   (E)   Public library and similar public culture uses;
   (F)   Public school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in public schools; and
   (G)   Sewage lagoon or treatment plant.
§ 20.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 20.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum requirement shall be 8,200 square feet.
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot width              75 feet
Front yard depth       30 feet
Side yard least width  6 feet
Side yard sum of width 15 feet*
Rear yard depth        30 feet
* Where no alley is located to the rear of the lot and an attached garage is
not constructed, a side yard of at least 12 feet shall be provided on one side
of the principal structure.
 
§ 21.00 R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   This is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population
density but with basic regulations similar to the “R-1” District. The principal
use of land is for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, one-family
row dwelling (party wall) with not more than two dwellings in a row or building
and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally
required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal
stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for
adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and
through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different
uses.
§ 21.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in an “R-2” Two-Family Residential District shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Any permitted use in the “R-1” Single-Family Residential District;
   (B)   Two-family dwelling;
   (C)   One-family row dwelling (party wall) with not more than two dwellings
in a row or building, the units of which may be on individual fee simple lots;
   (D)   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated uses; and
   (E)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 21.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Any permitted use on review in the “R-1” Single-Family Residential
District; and
   (B)   Parking areas accessory to a use in an adjoining less restricted
district when abutting or directly across an alley, subject to the applicable
conditions contained herein and such further conditions as may be stipulated by
the Board.
§ 21.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in
height.
§ 21.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area.
      (1)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 
                                      Two-Family Dwellings
One-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area Minimum per Family Minimum Total Lot Area
7,500 square feet                     5,000 square feet  10,000 square feet
 
      (2)   The regulations for two-family dwellings shall be utilized for one-
family row dwellings with two dwellings in a row or building.
   (B)   Lot width and yard area requirements.
      (1)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 
                        Single-Family Dwelling Two-Family Dwelling
Lot width               60 feet                75 feet
Front yard depth        25 feet                25 feet
Side yard least width   5 feet                 5 feet
Side yard sum of widths 12 feet*               12 feet
Rear yard depth         30 feet                30 feet
* Where no alley is located to the rear of the lot and an attached garage is
not constructed, a side yard of at least 12 feet shall be provided on one
side of the principal structure.
 
      (2)   The regulations for two-family dwellings shall also be utilized for
one-family row dwellings with two dwellings in a row or building.
      (3)   In the case of one-family row dwellings, it shall be permissible to
plat or replat zoning lots which shall utilize zero foot lot lines and party
walls to create individual fee simple lots.
§ 22.00 R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   This is a residential district to provide for medium and high
population density. The principal use of land may range from single-family to
multiple-family dwelling units, including duplex and four-plex units and one-
family row dwelling (party wall) with not more than six dwellings in a row or
building.
   (B)   Certain uses are permitted which are more compatible functionally with
intensive residential uses than with commercial uses. The recreational,
religious and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly
and attractive residential area are included. Internal stability,
attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate
light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through
consideration of the proper functional relationship of each use permitted in
the district.
§ 22.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in an “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential District
shall be used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Any permitted use in the “R-2” Two-Family Residential District;
   (B)   Dwellings for any number of families;
   (C)   One-family row dwelling (party wall) with not more than six dwellings
in a row or building, the units of which may be on individual fee simple lots;
   (D)   Boarding and lodging houses; and
   (E)   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated uses.
§ 22.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Any permitted use on review in the “R-2” Two-Family Residential
District;
   (B)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes;
   (C)   Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature.
   (D)   Physicians’ and dentists’ offices and private clinics for human care;
professional office of architects, engineers, lawyers and the like; barber and
beauty shops; offices devoted to real estate, insurance, management and similar
enterprises when not displaying or handling merchandise on the premises. The
buildings permitted under this subsection shall be of a design and location
compatible with the permitted residential uses; and
   (E)   Public and private schools for academic instruction, including
dormitories.
§ 22.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 22.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area.
      (1)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Single-Family
Per dwelling 6,000 square feet
Per lot      6,000 square feet
Two-Family
Per dwelling 4,000 square feet
Per lot      8,000 square feet
Multiple-Family
Per dwelling 2,500 square feet
Per lot   10,000 square feet
 
      (2)   The regulations for two-family and multiple-family dwellings shall
be utilized for one-family row dwellings with up to six dwellings in a row or
building.
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements.
      (1)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 
                      Single-Family Two-Family Dwelling Multiple-Family
                      Dwelling                          Dwelling
Lot width             60 feet       70 feet             80 feet
Front yard depth      25 feet       25 feet             25 feet
Side yard least width 5 feet        5 feet              5 feet
Side yard sum of      12 feet*      12 feet             12 feet
widths
Rear yard depth       30 feet       30 feet             30 feet
* Where no alley is located to the rear of the lot and an attached
garage is not constructed, a side yard of at least 12 feet shall be
provided on one side of the principal structure.
 
      (2)   The regulation for two-family and multiple-family dwellings shall
be utilized for one-family row dwellings with up to six dwellings in a row or
building.
      (3)   In the case of one-family row dwellings, it shall be permissible to
plat or replat zoning lots which shall utilize zero foot lot line and party
walls to create individual fee simple lots.
§ 22A.00 R-MH MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   The R-MH Mobile Home Park Residence District is intended to accommodate
mobile home parks in those areas of the city where such uses will be compatible
with existing and indicated future development. This district will generally be
associated with outlying areas of the city and should be well served by
arterial streets to provide adequate access.
§ 22A.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in an R-MH Mobile Home Park Residence District shall
be used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Mobile home parks, in accordance with all applicable state regulations
and
Title D, Chapter 5;
   (B)   Recreational facilities, as follows:
      (1)   Golf courses, but not commercial golf driving ranges, pitch and
putt or miniature golf courses; and
      (2)   Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and facilities
and community centers operated by public agencies.
   (C)   Religious facilities;
   (D)   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above uses; and
   (E)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 22A.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Day care center;
   (B)   Utility and public uses;
   (C)   Private, nonprofit recreational and social facilities; and
   (D)   Travel trailer sites for overnight rental.
§ 22A.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed two habitable stories or 35 feet in
height.
§ 22A.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 
Mobile home park        5 acres
Recreational facilities 15,000 square feet
Religious facilities    15,000 square feet
 
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
                         Mobile Home Park Recreation Religious Facilities
Lot width, feet          200              90
Front yard width         50               30
Side yard least width    50               10
Side yard combined total 100              25
Rear yard width          50               35
 
   (C)   Additional bulk regulations for mobile home parks.
      (1)   There shall be provided and maintained a minimum distance of 25
feet between mobile homes.
      (2)   The individual mobile home lot shall be not less than 100 feet in
depth, 60 feet in width and shall contain not less than 8,000 square feet in
area. However, such minimum lot area may be reduced by an amount equal to an
area included in common space, which is defined as an area permanently reserved
as open space, not including land in individual lots, parking areas or streets,
contiguous and immediately available to the individual lot or lots having
reduced minimum areas, and by means of location, size, shape and landscaping
being designed primarily for the utilization and enjoyment of the inhabitants
of the said contiguous lot. However, in no case shall an individual mobile home
lot be reduced in area to less than 5,000 square feet.
      (3)   The maximum overall density shall be five mobile homes per acre of
all land within the mobile home park.
      (4)   Recreational areas shall be provided at a rate of a minimum of 250
square feet for each individual lot. This amount of area shall be computed in
addition to any common open space provided to offset lot size reduction.
§ 22A.05 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   No permits shall be issued nor any work begun on the site until a
development plan has been approved by the City Council. A development plan
shall be submitted which complies with the requirements of §
23.12 of this chapter. The plan shall be reviewed as specified in this section
except that the initial filing fee shall be $100.
§ 23.00 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   This is a district that provides more flexibility in development by
releasing a developer from compliance with the strict site and structure
requirements of §§
20.00,
21.00 and
22.00 of this chapter, Residential Districts, and providing a small increase in
density. This zone retains the same land use requirements and primary controls
as are stipulated in the underlying zone contained in each of §§
20.00,
21.00 and
22.00 of this chapter, as well as retaining the same general intent for the
district as the description at the beginning of each zone through compliance
with the procedure outlined below.
§ 23.01 PROCEDURE.
   Each zone in §§
20.00,
21.00 and
22.00 of this chapter is hereby overlaid with an additional planned zone named
PR-(appropriate number) (appropriate district descriptive name) Planned
Residential Overlay District, which may be considered for any land within the
city. Zones contained in §§
20.00,
21.00 and
22.00 of this chapter are hereby made underlying zones to be used for partial
regulation of the rezoned tract. Each tract shall be at least 5,000 square feet
in size. This zone shall be established in the same manner as all other zoning
districts, but shall revert to the prior zoning classification without rezoning
when special procedures as outlined in §
23.13 of this chapter are appropriate. As part of the application, the
developer shall state the reason the Planned Overlay District is desired and
why a regular zoning classification would not be appropriate. Nothing in this
section shall be interpreted as waiving any portion of the city’s Building Code
or standard specifications and standard drawings.
§ 23.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Same as §§
20.01,
21.01 and
22.01 of this chapter depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.03 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   Same as §§
20.02,
21.02 and
22.02 of this chapter depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.04 MINIMUM LOT AREA.
   None required.
§ 23.05 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH.
   None required.
§ 23.06 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   Same as §§
20.03,
21.03 and
22.03 of this chapter depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.07 FRONT YARD.
   None required except where adjacent to non-planned residence zones, then the
requirements of §§
20.04(B),
21.04(B) and
22.04(B) of this chapter shall apply depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.08 SIDE YARD.
   None required except where adjacent to non-planned residence zones, then the
requirements of §§
20.04(B),
21.04(B) and
22.04(B) of this chapter shall apply depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.09 REAR YARD.
   None required except where adjacent to non-planned residence zones, then the
requirements of §§
20.04(B),
21.04(B) and
22.04(B) of this chapter shall apply depending on the underlying zoning.
§ 23.10 MAXIMUM DENSITY.
   A total density shall be set by ordinance for the rezoning of any Planned
Residential Overlay District when said zoning is approved by the City Council.
Said density shall be defined as a total maximum number of dwelling units or
bedrooms or combination. The total density may range between one dwelling unit
and 15% over what the rezoned tract could have had under ideal conditions if
developed under the underlying zoning classification.
§ 23.11 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   All special provisions in the base zone are required in the overlay planned
residence zone, unless specifically changed or noted by the Commission and City
Council on the development plan.
§ 23.12 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   In order to obtain a building permit in a planned residence district, the
developer must prepare a development plan or plans as the Commission and City
Council may approve. The Commission and the City Council may approve
generalized concepts for the entire tract and require a more detailed
development plan as phases of the project are submitted in accordance with the
development schedule. The development plan may be submitted with preliminary or
final plats which may be needed, or may be submitted separately if the
requirements of
Title D, Chapter 1 have been met. The development plan shall be submitted and
approved by the commission and the City Council in the same manner as final
plats as specified in Title D, Chapter 1, §§
11.00 through
15.00. The development shall contain those items listed in §
30.00 of this chapter which the Commission or City Council may deem necessary.
The development plan shall be filed with an appropriate application form and
fee of $50. The developer will also reimburse the city for any review made by
the City Engineer. The Commission shall record in its minutes where the
development plan makes appropriate use of the flexibility possible in this
zone.
§ 23.13 TIME LIMIT.
   The development plan shall be filed with the city within a submittal period
of one year after the approval of the planned residential zoning. The one-year
period of submittal may be extended up to one additional year by City Council
resolution. If the development plan is not filed within the submittal period,
the zoning of the tract shall automatically revert to the prior zoning district
effective at the end of the submittal, or upon denial or withdrawal of the
development plan, if after the end of the submittal period. Planned residence
zoning can be re-established by a new zoning procedure as stated in §§
18.01 through
18.07 of this chapter.
§ 23.14 SCHEDULE.
   In addition to the information in §
30.00 of this chapter, the development plan shall include a development
schedule indicating the stages and dates of actual development. If the
development becomes more than 270 days behind the approved schedule, the City
Council may, by resolution, remove the planned residence zoning and replace it
with the prior zoning district for all or part of the zoning district, or the
City Council may amend the development schedule by resolution as it may deem
appropriate.
§ 23.15 ALTERNATIVES.
   The developer may submit the development plan with the rezoning application
and use the one-year period to obtain approval of the development schedule. The
developer may also submit with the application a preliminary development plan,
which, if approved, shall subsequently bind the Commission and City Council to
approval of a development plan to the extent of the items contained in the
preliminary plan. Where the developer has extra density, it should be expected
that some aspect of the development shall work to the city’s benefit so as to
offset in some manner the extra cost incurred by the city in servicing the
extra people in the area.
§ 23.16 COMPLETED PROJECT.
   (A)   Upon completion of development, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
notify the City Council. The City Council shall, upon its consideration and
agreement, pass a final resolution determining that the development is
complete.
   (B)   Any questions as to permitted development occurring after passage of
the final resolution shall be applied for to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with normal Board procedures. The Board shall decide if the proposal
is in compliance with the intent and spirit and continued practical usefulness
of the plans and requirements of the planned residential district and may
approve amendments as it may deem necessary.
§ 23A.00 O-T OFFICE/TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.
   The O-T Office/Transitional District is intended to provide land and
structures used primarily to provide office space. Some residential-type
structures, for both permanent and transient occupancy and including
institutions, are permitted. Limited commercial uses, which conform to the
pattern of the district, are also permitted. The uses permitted are
characterized by a low volume of traffic and limited outdoor advertising, so as
to protect the abutting and surrounding residential districts. This district is
normally small in size and is often located as a buffer between residential and
commercial areas.
§ 23A.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in the O-T Office/Transitional District shall be used
only for the following uses:
   (A)   Business and personal service establishments, which perform services
on the premises as follows:
      (1)   Banks and other financial institutions;
      (2)   Business and management consultant;
      (3)   Business office, in which goods, wares or merchandise are not
displayed or sold on the premises;
      (4)   Chamber of Commerce;
      (5)   Charitable organization offices;
      (6)   Civic organizations;
      (7)   Credit agency;
      (8)   Crisis center;
      (9)   Day care centers, preschools;
      (10)   Detective agency;
      (11)   General office buildings;
      (12)   Insurance offices;
      (13)   Investment and brokerage company;
      (14)   Labor union and organizations;
      (15)   Merchant association;
      (16)   Parking lots and structures;
      (17)   Political organization offices and headquarters;
      (18)   Professional membership association;
      (19)   Real estate office;
      (20)   Religious facilities;
      (21)   Specialized medical treatment centers;
      (22)   Social and fraternal associations, clubs and lodges, non-profit
and not ordinarily carried on as a business;
      (23)   Trade associations; and
      (24)   Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor.
   (B)   Professional office establishments such as:
      (1)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping offices;
      (2)   Artist and designer office;
      (3)   Attorney and law office;
      (4)   Chiropractor’s office;
      (5)   Clinics and outpatients centers;
      (6)   Doctors and dentists office;
      (7)   Engineering and architectural services;
      (8)   Laboratories - medical, dental, research and testing;
      (9)   Landscape architect;
      (10)   Optician’s office;
      (11)   Osteopath’s office; and
      (12)   Veterinarian office with all activities within a completely
enclosed structure.
   (C)   Residential uses:
      (1)   Assisted living complexes;
      (2)   Convalescent, nursing home, rest home and sanatorium;
      (3)   Dwellings - multiple-family, rooming and boarding houses and
single-family and two-family only when located above the ground floor; and
      (4)   Halfway houses, group homes, rehabilitation houses.
   (D)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings:
      (1)   City hall, police stations, fire stations; and
      (2)   Educational facilities; public and private elementary schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools - nonboarding and not
utilizing, servicing or repairing vehicular or heavy equipment or machinery and
having no product sales. No outdoor activity area shall be lighted for night
use.
   (E)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 23A.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Meeting halls and banquet facilities;
   (B)   ATM machines when not included as part of a financial institution
building on the same site;
   (C)   Pet grooming studios, including product sales only when clearly
incidental and subordinate to the care and grooming of pets and, further, when
no more than 20% of the total floor area of any establishment is used for any
such product sales and no boarding or kennel facilities are provided;
   (D)   Single-family or two-family dwelling;
   (E)   Kennel completely enclosed;
   (F)   Photography studio;
   (G)   Lighted outdoor activity areas for night use; and
   (H)   Other uses determined to be similar to the permitted uses.
§ 23A.03 ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.
   Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or use on review may
be permitted; provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or use on review.
§ 23A.04 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height.
§ 23A.05 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for structures containing
dwelling units are the same as those in the “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential
District (§
22.04(A) of this chapter) otherwise no minimum area is required.   
   (B)   Lot width. No minimum width is required.
   (C)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard depth: 25 feet;
      (2)   Side yard depth: ten feet minimum each side except when adjacent to
another district, then the same as the adjacent yard requirement if greater
then ten feet; and
      (3)   Rear yard depth: ten feet except where adjoining an “R” District,
then the same as required in the “R” District.
§ 24.00 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   This commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and personal
service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the
people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an
integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential,
religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive requirements for
light, air, open space and off-street parking are made than are provided in
other commercial districts.
§ 24.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in a “C-l” Neighborhood Commercial District shall be
used only for the purposes outlined in divisions (A) through (O) below.
   (A)   Any permitted residential use allowed in the “R-3” Multiple-Family
Residential District; provided that such use is located above the ground or
first floor and that the ground or first floor is used for a principal
permitted use listed in divisions (B) through (P);
   (B)   Antique retail shop, not to include furniture refinishing;
   (C)   Art and school supply store book or stationary shop;
   (D)   Bank and other financial institutions:
   (E)   Barber shop and beauty shop;
   (F)   Camera, computer shop;
   (G)   Dry cleaning or laundry pick up and drop off stations;
   (H)   Grocery store, meat market, bakery, delicatessen, candy, dairy or ice
cream store;
   (I)   Florist shop, gift shop, jewelry store;
   (J)   Municipal administrative or public service office, library or other
culture uses;
   (K)   Pharmacy;
   (L)   Photographer or artist studio;
   (M)   Professional and business office;
   (N)   Shoe repair, tailor or wearing apparel shop;
   (O)   Variety store, toy store;
   (P)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses;
   (Q)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses; and
   (R)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 24.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Model home;
   (B)   Drive-up windows for any permitted use;
   (C)   Outdoor storage and display of items; and
   (D)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses on review.
§ 24.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed two stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 24.04 LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for structures containing
dwellings are the same as those in the “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential
District (§
22.04(A) of this chapter).
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot   None
width
Front
yard  25 feet
depth
Side  5 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as the least width
yard  in that “R” District
width
Rear  10 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same are required in
yard  that district
depth
 
§ 25.00 C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The intent of this district is to protect and improve the Central Business
District for the performance of its functions. This district is the primary
center for commercial, financial, professional, governmental and cultural
activities.
§ 25.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in the “C-2” Central Business District shall be used
only for the purposes outlined in divisions (A) through (N) below:
   (A)   Any permitted use in the “C-l” Neighborhood Commercial District;
   (B)   Automobile service station;
   (C)   Bar, tavern or restaurant:
   (D)   Bicycle sales, rental and repair store;
   (E)   Convenience store;
   (F)   Department store;
   (G)   Gunsmithing, locksmith;
   (H)   Indoor theater;
   (I)   Laundry and dry cleaning shop;
   (J)   Parking lots and parking garages;
   (K)   Pet shop;
   (L)   Private club or lodge;
   (M)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses;
   (N)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses; and
   (O)   Solar garden.
(2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 25.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Garages for the repairing and servicing of motor vehicles not
including body repair or painting;
   (B)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;
   (C)   Drive-up windows for any permitted use;
   (D)   Outdoor storage and display of items; and
   (E)   Any other use determined by the Board to be compatible with the other
permitted uses allowed in this district.
§ 25.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 25.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for structures containing
dwelling units are the same as those in the “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential
District (§
22.04(A) of this chapter).
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot width  None
Front yard None
depth
Side yard  None, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as the
width      least width in that “R” District
Rear yard  None, except where adjoining an “R” District, then 10 feet is
depth      required
 
§ 26.00 C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   This Commercial District is designed to accommodate the needs of a larger
consumer population than is served by the “C-l” Neighborhood Commercial
District. Thus, a wider range of services and goods is permitted for both daily
and occasional shopping and service needs of persons living in the community
and in the surrounding trade territory.
§ 26.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in “C-3” General Commercial District shall be used
only for the purposes outlined in divisions (A) through (S):
   (A)   Any permitted use in the “C-2” Central Business District;
   (B)   Amusement establishments, including: bowling alleys, miniature golf
course, practice golf range, pool halls, dance halls, swimming pools, skating
rinks, archery ranges, shooting galleries and similar amusement facilities;
   (C)   Animal hospitals and kennels;
   (D)   Auction rooms;
   (E)   Automobile laundries;
   (F)   Automobile, boat, farm implement, machinery, motor vehicle and mobile
home sales not including junk yards;
   (G)   Frozen food locker;
   (H)   Fuel and oil sales;
   (I)   Furniture refinishing, repair and upholstery;
   (J)   Garages - for storing, repairing and servicing of motor vehicles,
including body repair, painting and engine rebuilding providing all work and
storage is completely within an enclosed structure;
   
   (K)   General retail merchandising, including furniture and discount stores;
   (L)   Hotel or motel;
   (M)   Medical and dental laboratories;
   (N)   Monument sales, mortuary and funeral homes;
   (O)   Printing, publishing, engraving or lithographing shop;
   (P)   Produce market;
   (Q)   Storage warehouse, rental storage units;
   (R)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses;
   (S)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not including any use that may
become noxious or offensive in a “C-3” District;
   (T)   Adult movie theater (subject to the restrictions of §
43A.00 of this chapter);
   (U)   Adult book store (subject to the restrictions of §
43A.00 of this chapter);
   (V)   Adult entertainment facility (subject to the restrictions of §
43A.00 of this chapter);
   (X)   Multiple family housing intended for senior citizens. The lot area per
dwelling unit will follow the provisions of the “R-3” Multiple Family District.
Deed restrictions will be required during the site plan review process
documenting the terms of eligibility for persons inhabiting the housing
development. Such deed restrictions are considered a provision of the zoning
ordinance of the city, and may only be amended by following the procedure found
in §
18.00 of this chapter;
   (Y)   Child care centers; and
   (Z)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 26.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Contractor shop and construction office;
   (B)   Model home and garage displays;
   (C)   Outdoor storage and display of items;
   (D)   Stadium and auditorium;
   (E)   Water treatment plant; and
   (F)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses on review, but not any use which may
become noxious or offensive in a “C-3” District.
§ 26.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 26.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for structures containing
dwelling units are the same as those in the “R-3” Multiple-Family Residence
District (§
22.04(A) of this chapter).
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot width  None
Front yard 25 feet
depth
Side yard  5 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as the
width      least width in that “R” District
Rear yard  10 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then 10 feet is
depth      required
 
§ 27.00 C-4 HIGHWAY-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   This commercial district is designed to provide an area near a major highway
in which the principal use of land is devoted to commercial and service
establishments, which cater specifically to the needs of the motoring public
and tourist-oriented trade.
§ 27.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in a “C-4” Highway-Oriented Commercial District shall
be used only for the purposes outlined in divisions (A) through (E) below:
   (A)   Automobile and truck service stations and stops;
   (B)   Full service car and truck washes;
   (C)   Hotel or motel;
   (D)   Restaurants, including those with drive-up windows;
   (E)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses;
   (F)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not any use that may become
injurious to the district; and
   (G)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 27.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Water treatment plant;
   (B)   Amusement establishments, including: bowling alleys, miniature golf
course, practice golf range, pool halls, dance halls, swimming pools, skating
rinks, archery ranges, shooting galleries and similar amusement facilities;
   (C)   Outdoor storage and display of items; and
   (D)   Any other use determined by the Board to be of the same general
character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not any use which may become
noxious or offensive.
§ 27.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 27.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for structures containing
dwelling units are the same as those in the “R-3” Multiple-Family Residential
District (§
22.04(A) of this chapter).
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot width  None
Front yard 25 feet
depth
Side yard  5 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as the
width      least width in that “R” District
Rear yard  10 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then 10 feet is
depth      required
 
§ 27A.00 C/I - COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT.
   This district is intended to be used in those areas that have a mix of
commercial and industrial uses and may be expected to transition toward more
extensive commercial development. This district may also be used in those
instances where it may serve as a buffer or transition between areas to be
developed for industrial uses and areas to be developed for commercial uses.
§ 27A.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   No uses shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises
shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, for other than one or more of the following specified
uses:
   (A)   Commercial uses:
      (1)   Any permitted use allowed in the “C-2” Central Business District,
except that no residential dwelling units shall be allowed;
      (2)   Auction rooms;
      (3)   Automobile tires, battery and accessory stores, including those
that install the items they sell but not including body work nor major overhaul
of engines or other major vehicle parts;
      (4)   Automobile carwash;
      (5)   Blueprinting establishment;
      (6)   Convenience store with or without gas pumps;
      (7)   Engineering/industrial testing firm;
      (8)   Hotel or motel;
      (9)   Restaurants, carry out or eat-in with pick-up window; and
      (10)   Any other use that is determined by the Board to be of the same
general character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not including any use
which may become noxious or offensive. In determining the character of such
use, the Board shall refer to §
17.02(C) of this chapter and the criteria so stated to evaluate the use.
   (B)   Wholesale and warehouse uses:
      (1)   Wholesale meat cutting, processing, but not including meatpacking;
      (2)   Direct selling establishments, where products are stored and
distributed; and
      (3)   Wholesale and retail sales lumber yard, building material sales and
storage in a completely enclosed structure.
   (C)   Industrial uses:
      (1)   Assembly firm, without fabrication, except cutting of material to
length, bending and welding as necessary for assembly, of otherwise completely
fabricated parts;
      (2)   Printing, publishing and lithography establishment; and
      (3)   Any other use that is determined by the Board to be of the same
general character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not including any use
which may become noxious or offensive. In determining the character of such
use, the Board shall refer to §
17.02(C) of this chapter and the criteria so stated to evaluate the use.
   (D)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 27A.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Child care center and preschool;
   (B)   Contractor’s office, shop and completely enclosed storage area;
   (C)   Machine shop with no exterior storage; and
   (D)   Outside storage of materials or products when screened from view from
surrounding streets.
§ 27A.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
§ 27A.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirement shall be 15,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot   None
width
Front
yard  25 feet
depth
Side
yard  10 feet minimum on one side. 25 feet total
width
Rear  15 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as required in that
yard  district
depth
 
§ 27A.05 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Parking. No parking or driveways shall be allowed in the first ten
feet of the required front yard adjacent to the property line, except that
entrance driveways may cross the first ten feet of the required front yard.
   (B)   Landscaping requirements. One tree for each seven parking spaces
provided on site shall be planted and maintained in the front yard. All trees
shall be at least six feet tall at the time of planting.
   (C)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage is prohibited unless approved by the
Board of Adjustment
§ 28.00 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   This Industrial District is intended to provide for light and medium
industrial, warehousing and wholesaling uses with adequate protection to
adjacent district uses and sufficient control of external effects to protect
one industry from another. Some commercial business services are permitted that
require large tracts of land to operate and, therefore, are not economically
feasible to be located in a conventional commercial district.
   (B)   Outside storage may only be permitted when, in the opinion of the
Board of Adjustment, there will not be a negative impact on adjoining
properties or views from adjacent roadways. Any outside storage areas which are
authorized must be screened from the view of adjacent roadways.
§ 28.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises
shall be erected altered, enlarged, occupied or used, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, for other than one or more of the following specified
uses;
   (A)   Automobile and motor vehicle repair garage doing major repair;
   (B)   Bottling works;
   (C)   Contractor’s shop and enclosed storage yards;
   (D)   Environmental agency approved fertilizer blending plants, liquid and
dry, and sale of feed or fuel;
   (E)   Grain elevator and associated enclosed warehouses;
   (F)   Lumber yard, wholesale and retail sales, including millwork, building
materials sales and storage;
   (G)   Machine and welding shops;
   (H)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries
and food products;
   (I)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise for the following previously prepared materials: canvas,
cellophane, cloth, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-
precious metals or stone, rubber, textiles, wood and yarn;
   (J)   The manufacture or assembling of electrical appliances, instruments
and devices;
   (K)   Trucking or motor freight terminals;
   (L)   Printing, publishing and lithography establishments;
   (M)   Wholesale and warehouse uses;
   (N)   Laboratory and research firm involved in the research, experimentation
or testing of materials, goods or products;
   (O)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities, such
as, but not limited to, essential services, gas-regulator station, telephone
exchange, electric substation, public service/municipal garage and related
facilities, public utility establishment, vocational school and community
center;
   (P)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses; and
   (Q)   Automobile, boat, farm implement, machinery, motor vehicle and mobile
home sales not including junk yards;
   (R)   Tobacco shops;
   (S)   Any uses not listed above would be considered a use on review, unless
prohibited in §
28.03 of this chapter;
   (T)   Solar garden; and
   (U)   Solar farm.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2023-19, passed 9-5-2023; Ord. 2024-08,
passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 28.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Sewage lagoon or treatment plant;
   (B)   Above and below ground storage of Class I, II and III materials not to
exceed 100,000 gallons that shall comply with all applicable codes;
   (C)   Waste handling or disposal such as a transfer station or recycling
center;
   (D)   Transmission towers;
   (E)   Outdoor storage when associated with a principal use on the lot;
   (F)   Professional offices which have characteristics similar to, or are
associated with, industrial uses allowed in this district.
   (G)   Self storage facilities; and
   (H)   Outdoor storage facilities: all such storage shall be screened from
view of roadways by at least seven feet solid decorative fencing. Storage area
must located on a dust free durable surface. Areas used for the storage of
wheeled equipment, such as semi-trailers, campers, boats, hauling trailers and
the like, shall be designed so that all driving surfaces used to hook up to
such equipment is constructed of asphaltic concrete or PCC concrete.
(Ord. 2023-19, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 28.03 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses are specifically prohibited in the “I-1” Light Industrial
District:
   (A)   Dwellings, except for guards or caretaker on the premises;
   (B)   Churches or temples, schools, hospitals, clinics and the institutions
for human care, except when incidental to a permitted use; and
   (C)   Auto salvage and wrecking operations, industrial metal waste salvage
operations and junk yards.
§ 28.04 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Building height is governed by building code and fire protection
requirements; provided that no building or structure shall exceed 100 feet in
height.
§ 28.05 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirement shall be 10,000 square
feet. Lot depth shall not be more than three times the lot width.
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot   None
width
Front
yard  25 feet
depth
Side  5 feet minimum on one side and a total of 15 feet for both sides, except where
yard  adjoining an “R” District, then same as the least width in that “R” District
width
Rear  10 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as required in that
yard  district
depth
 
§ 28.06 ENCLOSURE OF USE.
   All industrial operations shall take place within completely enclosed
buildings, unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 2023-19, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 29.00 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   This Industrial District is intended to provide for heavy or intense
industries. The District is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling
and fabricating activities, including large scale or specialized operations
whose external effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts.
Less restriction is placed upon outdoor use and storage.
   (B)   Certain uses having a nuisance potential are permitted only in this
district, and there only by permit use on review.
§ 29.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises
shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, for other than one or more of the following specified
uses:
   (A)   Uses permitted in the “I-1” District, as listed in §
28.01 of this chapter and unless specifically listed as a prohibited use in §
29.03 of this chapter;
   (B)   Cement block manufacture;
   (C)   Concrete and asphalt mixing plants;
   (D)   Drop forge;
   (E)   Foundry;
   (F)   Meat packing, but not stockyard and slaughterhouse;
   (G)   Planning mill and saw mill;
   (H)   Stamping mill and other metal working processes;
   (I)   Grain storage and processing;
   (J)   Wood products manufacturing;
   (K)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities, such
as, but not limited to, essential services, gas-regulator station, telephone
exchange, electric substation, public service/municipal garage and related
facilities, public utility establishment;
   (L)   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses;
   (M)   Any uses not listed above would be considered a use on review unless
prohibited in §
29.03 of this chapter; and
   (N)   Solar garden.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 9-5-2023; Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 29.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following principal uses may be permitted on review by the Board in
accordance with provisions contained herein:
   (A)   Above and below ground storage of Class I, II or III materials not to
exceed 200,000 gallons that shall comply with all applicable codes;
   (B)   Automobile salvage or junk yard, building material salvage yard, scrap
metal storage yard or other salvage yard of any kind; provided that all such
operations are conducted in such a manner that all operation, display or
storage of material or equipment is so screened by ornamental fences, walks
and/or permanent planting that it cannot be seen from a public street or from
adjoining lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level, and provided,
further, however, that no such screening in excess of seven feet in height
shall be required;
   (C)   Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture;
   (D)   Chemical and petroleum refining;
   (E)   Disposal plants of all types, including trash, garbage, recycling
centers, transfer station and sewage treatment;
   (F)   Transmission towers;
   (G)   Wholesale of gasoline, propane or butane or other petroleum products;
   (H)   Automobile, boat, farm implement, machinery, motor vehicle and mobile
home sales not including junk yards;
   (I)   Parking lots, public and private;
   (J)   Landfill;
   (K)   Recycle yards;
   (L)   Rail storage yards and transfer stations; and
   (M)   Outdoor storage facilities: all such storage areas shall be screened
from view of roadways by at least seven feet solid decorative fencing. Storage
area must be on a dust free durable surface. Areas used for the storage of
wheeled equipment, such as semi-trailers, campers, boats, hauling trailers and
the like shall be designed so that all driving surfaces used to hook up to such
equipment is constructed of asphaltic concrete or PCC concrete.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2023-20, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 29.03 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses are specifically prohibited in the “I-2” General
Industrial District:
   (A)   Dwellings, except for guard or caretaker on the premises; and
   (B)   Churches or schools, hospitals, clinics and other institutions for
human care, except when incidental to a permitted use; and
   (C)   Solar farm.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 29.04 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Building height is governed by building code and fire protection
requirements; provided that no building or structure shall exceed 100 feet in
height.
§ 29.05 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area requirement shall be 10,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed:
 
Lot   None
width
Front
yard  25 feet
depth
Side  5 foot minimum on one side and a total of 15 feet for both sides, except where
yard  adjoining an “R” District, then same as the least width in that “R” District
width
Rear  10 feet, except where adjoining an “R” District, then same as required in that
yard  district
depth
 
§ 29A.00 P/M PUBLIC AND MUNICIPAL DISTRICT.
   The P/M district is intended to provide regulations for those areas which
are used for public facilities and municipal buildings, or which are otherwise
controlled by the city or other public or quasi-public agency.
§ 29A.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Property and buildings in the P/M Public and Municipal District shall be
used only for the purposes outlined in divisions (A) through (L) below:
   (A)   Cemetery;
   (B)   Community recreation centers open to the general public;
   (C)   Fire stations;
   (D)   Golf courses open to the general public;
   (E)   Municipal administrative or public service buildings or properties not
having outside storage;
   (F)   Parks and playgrounds;
   (G)   Public parking lots;
   (H)   Public child care center;
   (I)   Public library;
   (J)   Public schools and private schools offering general educational
courses the same as ordinarily given in public schools;
   (K)   Sport complexes - indoor and outdoor facilities not having lights; and
   (L)   Water treatment plants.
§ 29A.02 PERMITTED USES ON REVIEW.
   The following public and quasi-publicly operated uses may be permitted on
review by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained
herein:
   (A)   Electrical substations;
   (B)   Waste water treatment facilities - enclosed plants and open lagoons;
   (C)   Sanitary landfill;
   (D)   Water towers;
   (E)   Unenclosed storage yards;
   (F)   Publicly operated outdoor sports fields and complexes lighted for
night use;
   (G)   Other public facilities not listed; and
   (H)   Single-family dwelling; provided that such residential use is located
above the ground or first floor and that the ground or first floor is used for
a principal permitted use in the P/M Public Municipal District.
§ 29A.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structures shall exceed three stories or 45 feet, unless
approved by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 29A.04 LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot area. No minimum size lot area is required. All lots used for any
of the above uses shall be large enough to provide area required to meet all
setbacks, parking and landscaping requirements.
   (B)   Lot width. All lots shall be wide enough to provide for the proposed
use and allow for setback, parking and landscaping requirements.
   (C)   Yard requirements. When a parcel is adjacent to or across from a
residential district, yards shall at least be equal to those required in the
Residential District. The Board of Adjustment may require greater yards then
listed below, when it is felt necessary to provide adequate buffers between
existing or proposed uses and permitted uses on review. In all other instances,
the minimum yards shall be as follows:
 
Front yards 25 feet
Side yards  10 feet
Rear yards  25 feet
 
§ 29A.05 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All outside storage, when allowed by the Board of Adjustment, shall be
screened from view of adjacent properties by using screen fencing, landscaping
or decorative walls. Such fencing or walls shall not be located within a
required yard. Landscaping approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be provided between any fence or wall and the property line.
   (B)   Any fences or walls required for security purposes around any of the
uses permitted within this District shall be located within the buildable area
of the lot and not within any required setback yard area.
   (C)   Landscaping required by §
35.03(D) of this chapter shall be provided in addition to any landscaping
required for screening purposes.
   (D)   Any lighting provided for security or night activity purposes shall be
designed and located so as to not provide direct or indirect light or glare
into any residential area.
§ 30.00 “PUD” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
§ 30.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Planned Unit Development “PUD” District is to
promote to the extent possible:
      (1)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the
public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this chapter;
      (2)   Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas
and facilities;
      (3)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic and geologic features;
      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better development, design and the construction of
aesthetic amenities;
      (5)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets and other facilities; and
      (6)   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare.
   (B)   The “PUD” District is intended to provide for a development
incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and
developed as a unit but departs from the normal standards and requirements of
other sections of this chapter.
   (C)   The “PUD” may provide amenities not otherwise required by law and may
establish facilities and open space greater than the minimums required by law.
Such development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots or provide for
development by a land use and zoning plan which establishes the location and
extent of the features of the “PUD” in keeping with the purpose of the plan.
   (D)   The foregoing purposes and principles shall not be interpreted to
permit the reduction of standards set forth in this section.
§ 30.02 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The owner, owners or bona fide buyer of any tract of land may petition
the Council for a zoning change to the “PUD” Zoning District in accordance with
the provisions of §
18.00 of this chapter.
   (B)   A “PUD” shall be authorized in accordance with the following
procedures:
      (1)   Application procedure.
         (a)   The application for a rezoning to the “PUD” Zoning District
shall be accompanied by an application plan meeting the requirements of §
30.03(A) of this chapter; and show evidence that the proposed development will
conform to the comprehensive plan and to the purpose of the “PUD” District set
forth in §
30.01(A) of this chapter. The Commission and Council shall grant or deny said
application pursuant to the provisions contained in §
30.03(A) of this chapter. Approval of the “PUD” shall constitute an expression
of approval by the Council of the application plan as a guide to the
preparation of the preliminary “PUD” plan. The applications shall be
accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by the Council, payable to the
city.
         (b)   To reduce the number of steps involved in the approval of a
planned unit development, a preliminary “PUD” plan meeting the requirements of
division (B)(2) below and §
30.03(B) of this chapter may be submitted in lieu of an application plan
required in (B)(1)(a) above. This type of application shall be accompanied by a
fee as established from time to time by the City Council.
      (2)   Approval of the preliminary plan.
         (a)   Supporting data. In accordance with §
30.03(B) of this chapter, the following apply:
            1.   A filing fee of $200 if procedure in division (B)(1)(a) above
was followed, otherwise it has already been included in the cost noted under
procedure in division (B)(1)(b) above;
            2.   Copies of the preliminary “PUD” plan and supporting data shall
be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for certification as to
conformity with these regulations, recommendations and suggestions regarding
the overall design, if any; and
            3.   a.   Copies of the preliminary “PUD” plan shall be submitted
to the Commission and the Board of Adjustment who shall hold public hearings on
the application for a preliminary “PUD” plan giving notice of the times and
places as required by state law by publishing a notice thereof at least once in
a newspaper publication having general circulation within the city. Following
the public hearings, a recommendation of approval or denial of the preliminary
PUD plan shall be made by the commission to the Council.
               b.   The Board shall review the preliminary PUD plan and grant
or deny any exceptions or variances needed from the requirements of §§
31.00 or
34.00 of this chapter.
         (b)   Findings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth the
reasons for the recommendation, and said recommendation shall set forth how the
proposal would be in the public interest, including, but not limited to,
findings of facts on the following:
            1.   In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the
stated purpose of the planned unit development requirements;
            2.   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements
and standards of the Planned Unit Development District;
            3.   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use and
the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest;
            4.   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in
which said design makes adequate provision for public services, provides
adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated
common open space and furthers the amenities of light, air, recreation and
visual enjoyment;
            5.   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood;
            6.   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development,
tax base and economic well-being of the entire community;
            7.   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive
plan; and
            8.   Specific points noted on the plan that have impact on its
design, function and visibility in the community.
         (c)   Approval. Following receipt of the recommendation by the
Commission, and approval by the Board, the Council shall, within 60 days,
recommend approval, modification within limits of a minor change or disapproval
of the “PUD” plan. As a condition to the approval of the preliminary “PUD”
plan, the Council shall set forth findings of fact in accordance with this
section on which it base its approval and describing how the proposal meets the
standards of §
30.04 of this chapter.
         (d)   Delineation. All conditions, documents and plans required by the
Council must be delineated on the plat or agreed to in writing prior to Council
approval.
         (e)   Special conditions. The Council may require such special
conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of
all comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of the Planned Development
District and established city policies.
         (f)   Final plan.
            1.   Approval of a preliminary planned unit development shall not
constitute approval of the final plan. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression
of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the
preparation of the final plan which will be submitted for approval of the city
and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations and conditions of the preliminary plan approval, if any. The final
plan shall be approved as the final land use and zoning plan if it conforms
substantially with the preliminary land use and zoning plan.
            2.   The final plan may be considered as a preliminary and final
plan and may be submitted for preliminary and final approval, if all of the
land is to be developed at one time and if all requirements hereof are met.
      (3)   Approval of final plan.
         (a)   The final “PUD” plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer who shall refer same to the Commission. The final “PUD”
plan shall conform to the preliminary “PUD” plan as approved or subject to
minor changes, and may be submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the
approved preliminary plan; provided, however, that such stage conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
         (b)   The required procedure for approval of a final plan shall be the
following.
            1.   A final “PUD” plan and other supporting data required for
approval shall be in accordance with the provisions of §
30.03 of this chapter. Final plans must be submitted for approval in accordance
with agreed-to scheduling, but not later than five years from the approval of
the preliminary plan by the Council. The Council may grant an extension in time
or the developer may resubmit an application; in the event that same is not
done, the Council shall initiate such zoning changes as it deems necessary to
preserve the public interest. If construction falls more than two years behind
the schedule filed with the final plan, the plan becomes subject to revocation.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer and the City Inspector shall monitor all pending
“PUD” projects and inform the Council of those six months or more behind
schedule.
            2.   The final plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer for certification that the final plan is in
conformity with these regulations and in agreement with the approved
preliminary plan.
            3.   After review of the final plan, the Commission shall submit
the planned unit development plan to the Council with a recommendation for
approval, disapproval or approval with minor modifications as reviewed at the
public hearing. Any changes or modifications which arise subsequent to the
public hearing shall be specifically noted and referred to the Council who
shall determine whether the change constitutes a major or minor change and
whether another public hearing is required.
            4.   The Council shall, within 60 days, approve, disapprove or
extend the time period for another 60 days in taking action on the final plan.
            5.   All conditions, documents and plans required by the Council
must be delineated on the plan or agreed to in writing prior to council
approval.
      (4)   Recording the final “PUD” plan. The construction of any public
improvement in the “PUD” shall be initiated only after recording of the final
“PUD” plan with the County Recorder. Building permits are to be issued only
after the final “PUD” plan has been recorded with the County Recorder, and
shall be issued in full conformance with this chapter. The use of all parcels
in the “PUD” must be recorded on the plat along with the statement: “See the
City Code of Eldridge, Iowa § 30.00 “PUD” District”. The recording of the final
plan shall inform all who deal with the “PUD” of the restrictions placed upon
the land and will act as a zoning control device.
      (5)   Changes in the “PUD”. The “PUD” shall be developed according to the
approved and recorded final plan, except where authorized changes or amendments
are permitted. The recorded plan and supporting data together with all recorded
amendments shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and
assigns, and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of
structures in the “PUD” project as set forth therein.
         (a)   Major changes. A change in the approved preliminary “PUD” plan
or final “PUD” plan which alters the concept or intent of the planned unit
development, including a change in usage, the configuration, increase in floor
area or the height of buildings, an increase in intensity, a reduction of
proposed open space, a change in road locations or standards, a change in the
final governing agreement, provisions or covenants or other major changes,
shall be approved only by submission of a new preliminary “PUD” plan in
accordance with the procedures as previously set forth for the approval of
preliminary and final “PUD” plans. All approved major changes in the final
“PUD” plan shall be recorded with the County Recorder as amendments to the
final “PUD” plan.
         (b)   Minor changes. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may approve minor
changes in the planned unit development which do not change the concept of
intent of the development, without going through the “preliminary approval”
steps. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as a major change.
§ 30.03 SPECIFIC CONTENT.
   The “PUD” plans and supporting data shall include at least the following
information:
   (A)   Application stage. Application stage includes the following:
      (1)   General site information. Data regarding site conditions and
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing
covenants and other related information; and
      (2)   Sketch plan. A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of the land uses, streets, lots and other features.
   (B)   Preliminary plan stage. Preliminary plan stage includes the following:
      (1)   Design plan.
         (a)   A drawing of the “PUD” shall be prepared at a scale of either
one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 50 feet, or such other scale that
may be recommended by city staff. Any change in scale between the preliminary
and final plan shall be accompanied by a signed statement from the developer
attesting that there have been no modifications. All plans shall show the
general location of proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and
their uses, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service
areas and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed
development.
         (b)   The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and
drawings and shall include:
            1.   Boundary lines: bearing and distances;
            2.   Easements: general location, width and purpose;
            3.   Public and private streets on and adjacent to the tract:
street names, right-of-way widths, existing proposed centerline elevations,
pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, distance to nearest
intersection and the like;
            4.   a.   Utilities (public or private) on and adjacent to the
tract: location, size and invert elevations of sanitary, storm and combined
sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants,
electric and telephone lines and street lights on the tract; and
               b.   The direction and distance to the nearest usable water
mains and sewers anticipated to be utilized by the development and elevations
of sewers. Drainage district boundaries and appropriate design criteria
necessary for storm drainage plans.
            5.   Existing ground elevations on the tract: for land that slopes
less than 0.5%, show one foot contours, show spot elevations at all breaks in
grades along all drainage channels or scales and at selected points not more
than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than 0.5%,
show two foot contours.
            6.   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the
Commission or Council: location and results of tests made to generally
ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground
water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; the location and
results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed;
            7.   Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or
more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings and other significant
features;
            8.   Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and
gradient of ground slopes, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and general location of buildings, including a notation on the front
setback, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby non-residential land
uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent
platted land refer to subdivision plan by name and show approximate per cent
built-up, typical lot size and dwelling type;
            9.   Zoning: zoning on and adjacent to the tract;
            10.   Proposed public improvements: highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract;
            11.   Open space: all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use of all property owners with the purpose indicated;
            12.   Other buildings: general location, purpose and height, in
feet or stories, of each building other than single-family residences on
individually platted lots;
            13.   Map data: name of development, north point and scale, date of
preparation, acreage of site and name and address of developer, designer and
engineer; and
            14.   Miscellaneous: such additional information as may be required
by the Commission, Board, Zoning Enforcement Officer, City Engineer, Council or
found in the subdivision control ordinance.
      (2)   Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit
development and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations;
      (3)   Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land
within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in offices of the County Recorder;
      (4)   Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
         (a)   Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area,
density, use and public facilities, such as open space to be developed with
each stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material;
         (b)   Completion date or dates of new construction for above and below
ground facilities, utilities and buffer planting. See also §
29.02(C) of this chapter; and
         (c)   If different land use types are to be included within the “PUD”,
the schedule must normally include the mix of uses to be built in each stage.
      (5)   Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions or covenants which will
govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned development
and any of its common open space;
      (6)   Density. Provision of information on the density of residential
uses and the number of dwelling units by type;
      (7)   Use. Provision of a list of uses planned for the ancillary and non-
residential areas;
      (8)   Service facilities. Provision of information on all service
facilities and off-street parking facilities;
      (9)   Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all
primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an
understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building and
the number, size and type of dwelling units; and
      (10)   Facilities plans (public and/or private). Preliminary plans for:
         (a)   Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of
pavement, typical construction details and plan and profile drawings;
         (b)   Sanitary sewers;
         (c)   Storm drainage and erosion;
         (d)   Water supply system, if required by the Board;
         (e)   Lighting program, if required by the Board; and
         (f)   Grading.
   (C)   Final plan stage. Final plan stage includes the following:
      (1)   Final detailed plan.
         (a)   A final land use and zoning plan suitable for recording with the
County Recorder shall be prepared. The purpose of the land use and zoning plan
is to designate the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other land, not so treated, into common open areas and building
areas.
         (b)   The final land use and zoning plan shall include, but not be
limited to:
            1.   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of the entire
area under immediate development within the planned development;
            2.   A subdivision plan of all subdivided lands in the same form
and meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision final plan;
            3.   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each
separate unsubdivided use area, including common open space;
            4.   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
construed in unsubdivided areas;
            5.   Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use area, including land
area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units and dwelling units per
acre; and
            6.   Architectural plans unless waived by Council during the
preliminary stage.
      (2)   Common open space documents. All common open space shall be either
conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to non-profit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefitting the owners and
residents of the planned unit development, or retained by the developer with
legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the City Attorney, that the
common open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as open area.
All land conveyed to a non-profit corporation or like entity shall be subject
to the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for
maintenance and improvement of the common open space;
      (3)   Engineering data. All public utilities or improvements required by
the city in the development of a planned unit development shall be constructed
only after the approval of the final plan. Supporting data to be submitted with
the final plans shall include final engineering drawings (construction plans),
as required by the City Engineer;
      (4)   Guarantee deposit. Prior to the acceptance by the Council of public
utilities and improvements, the contractor(s) for the owner of the land shall
furnish to the city a good and sufficient bond with surety to secure to the
city the actual construction and installation of such public utilities or
improvement according to city specifications within two years from the date of
approval by the Council of the final plan or a petition to the Council to
provide the required public facilities or improvements and to assess the cost
thereof against the subdivided property in accordance with the local
requirements regarding special assessments; provided, however, that the
subdivider or property owners shall be responsible for any differences between
the cost of the public utilities or improvements and the amount that can be
legally assessed by the city against the subdivided property, and shall furnish
the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the entire costs of the
public utilities or improvements. A maintenance bond shall be provided for the
repairs necessitated by defects in material or workmanship not to exceed four
years from the date of completion as certified by the engineer;
      (5)   Dedication and recording documentation. Certificates, seals and
signatures required for dedication of lands and recording document, as set
forth in the subdivision regulations; and
      (6)   Covenants. Final agreements, provisions or covenants which will
govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit
development.
§ 30.04 STANDARDS.
   The planned unit development must meet the following standards.
   (A)   Comprehensive plan. A planned unit development must conform with the
intent and spirit of the comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Size. The site of the total planned unit development must be under
single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than 60,000 square feet
area.
   (C)   Compatibility. The permitted uses in a planned unit development must
be of a type and so located so as to exercise no undue detrimental influence
upon surrounding properties.
   (D)   Space. Distances and open spaces between buildings shall be subject to
approval during the review process.
   (E)   Yards.
      (1)   The required yards along the periphery of the PUD project shall be
at least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent zoning district.
      (2)   All other yards shall be subject to approval during the review
process.
   (F)   Traffic. That adequate provision be made to providing ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. The
Commission and Council may require a professional traffic engineer to
investigate and submit a traffic study.
   (G)   Parking requirements. Adequate, adjacent parking shall be provided and
in no event shall the parking be less than that provided for in §
35.00 of this chapter.
   (H)   Other standards. The planned unit development may depart from strict
conformance with the required density dimension, area, height, bulk, use and
other regulations for the standard zoning districts and other provisions of
this chapter to the extent specified in the preliminary land use and zoning
plan and documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as the
planned unit development project will not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. All new construction
shall conform to city specifications and regulations.
§ 30.05 CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.
   Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the Council may
stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics,
operation and other elements of planned unit development as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the development,
protection of the adjacent area and to secure compliance. In all cases in which
planned unit developments are granted, the Council shall require such evidence
and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated
in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
§ 30.06 DETAILED SITE PLAN.
   When required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission for
development, a site plan for an area may contain and locate by notation, as the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission may require:
   (A)   Existing grading and proposed grading at two foot contours;
   (B)   Proposed street and existing street with both paving and right-of-way
indicated;
   (C)   All utility easements, both privately owned and municipal, and any
proposed;
   (D)   Outline of proposed or existing building on the site;
   (E)   Proposed or existing paving or surfaced area for driveways or parking
lots, or other uses for durable surface;
   (F)   Proposed or existing sidewalk locations and easements, if appropriate;
   (G)   Proposed and existing landscaping and other existing natural features;
   (H)   Proposed or existing sign location and sign height;
   (I)   Location map, locating the site within the city;
   (J)   Identification of existing and proposed plats and development on
adjacent property as well as the location of existing and proposed signs within
100 feet of the site;
   (K)   Proposed or existing property lines;
   (L)   Proposed or existing fencing and identification of the type and height
of fence;
   (M)   Proposed or existing access or other easements;
   (N)   Location of proposed or existing manholes, drainage intake, fire
hydrants, utility pole anchors and guides;
   (O)   Front, side and rear setbacks;
   (P)   Key plan, legend and notes;
   (Q)   The scale, north point and date;
   (R)   Proposed and existing features not otherwise mentioned, such as
specific recreational areas and equipment, water retention areas, ponds,
waterways and the like;
   (S)   Perspective drawing of the site showing concept described in the site
plan, specifically representing the building and sign appearance and contour
effect of the site;
   (T)   Elevation plans for exterior vertical and horizontal design of the
buildings and signs that are being contemplated;
   (U)   Construction plans for public or private improvements for streets and
sewer in accordance with the procedures established in the city code; and
   (V)   Legal documents, such as, but not limited to, homeowners’ association,
restrictive covenants, agreement contracts or other documents necessary to
insure the concept involved.
§ 31.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 31.01 ZONING AFFECTS EVERY STRUCTURE AND USE.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or land shall be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered or repaired,
except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the class of
district in which it is located.
§ 31.02 MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE, LOT OF RECORD, NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON LOT AND
LOTS UNSERVED BY SEWER OR WATER.
   (A)   Minimum street frontage. No lot shall be created after the adoption of
this chapter, unless it abuts at least 40 feet on a public street, except when
the lot is in a PUD or PR zoning district and then the frontage shall be as
approved in the development plan.
   (B)   Lot of record. In any Residential District on a lot of record at the
time of enactment of this chapter, a single-family dwelling may be established
regardless of the size of the lot; provided all other requirements of this
chapter are complied with. However, where two or more vacant and contiguous
substandard recorded lots are held in common ownership, they shall be combined
and shall thereafter be maintained in common ownership and shall be so joined
and developed for the purpose of forming an effective and conforming lot. For
the purposes of this section, the razing of a building on a substandard lot
shall constitute the formation of a vacant lot.
   (C)   Number of buildings on a lot. Except in the case of planned
developments, not more than one single-family detached residential building
shall be located on a lot, nor shall a principle detached single-family
residential building be located on the same lot with any other principle
building.
   (D)   Lots unserved by sewer. In any residential district where public
sanitary sewer is not reasonably available, one single-family detached dwelling
may be constructed; provided the otherwise specified lot area and width
requirements shall be a minimum of 30,000 square feet, and 100 feet
respectively.
§ 31.03 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED OR USED BY ANOTHER BUILDING.
   No lot, yard, court, parking area or other space shall be so reduced in area
or dimension as to make any area or dimension less than the minimum required by
this chapter, and if already less than the minimum required, it shall not be
further reduced. No required open space provided about any building or
structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another
building or structure.
§ 31.04 CONVERSION OF DWELLING.
   The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for
similar occupancy would be permitted under the chapter, and only when the
resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, dimensions of yards and other open spaces and such further
requirements as may be specified hereinafter within the section applying to
such district.
§ 31.05 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ACROSS CORNER LOTS.
   In an “R” District on any corner lot, no fence, structure, wall, screening
or planting shall be erected or maintained within 25 feet of the “corner” of
the lot line so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner.
§ 31.06 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other chapters of the community, it being the intention hereof to exempt such
essential services from the application of this chapter.
§ 31.07 SPECIAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   No structure except signs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be erected
less than 90 feet from the center line and signs shall be erected no less than
75 feet from the center line of the following streets:
   (A)   LeClaire Road, east of First Street;
   (B)   First Street; and
   (C)   Scott Park Road (IA 956).
§ 31.08 VALIDITY OF EXISTING BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated uses of any development, building,
structure or part thereof, for which the official approvals and required
building permits have been granted before the enactment of the chapter, the
construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started
prior to the effective date of the chapter and the completion thereof carried
on in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, and not
discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder’s control.
§ 31.09 LOCATION ON LOT OF SATELLITE RECEIVERS.
   No satellite receiver shall be erected or placed unless a permit therefor
has been obtained from the building inspector. If the proposed placement and
installation of the satellite receiver conforms to the requirements of all
applicable statutes and ordinances, the permit shall be issued upon payment of
a fee as established by the Uniform Building Code. No satellite receiver shall
be located on any residentially zoned lot, except as set forth herein.
   (A)   No satellite receiver shall be erected or placed in any front or side
yard, except as noted in division (D) below.
   (B)   A satellite receiver may be erected or placed in any rear yard
provided that it is located no nearer to any side lot line than the required or
actual distance between the principal building on said lot and the side lot
line, whichever is greater and no less than ten feet from the rear lot line;
and provided further, that a satellite receiver must be located at least 30
feet from any lot line that abuts a public street or highway.
    (C)   No satellite receiver larger than 36 inches in diameter shall be
erected upon or affixed to any building.
   (D)   A satellite receiver may be erected or placed in any corner lot
provided it is located only in the side yard that is opposite the front yard
used for the street address of the residence.
   (E)   No satellite receiver shall be located on any commercially zoned or
industrially zoned lot unless it complies with all building code requirements
and zoning requirements for that district.
§ 31.10 ADJOINING LOTS.
   No structure may be constructed across lot lines except in the case of
adjoining lots where the property owner(s) sign and record a “Restrictive
Covenant and Agreement Not to Sever” in cooperation with the Planning and
Zoning Commission. For the purposes of enforcing this section, the adjoining
lots shall be treated as one lot with respect to enforcing setback provisions
and enforcement of §
30.02(B) of this chapter.
§ 31.11 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   In accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city, it is essential
that developments meet established minimum standards for the design of such
developments which will protect existing developments; ensure adequate
provisions for public/private utilities, such as sewer, water and roads; and
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. A site plan
review shall be required whenever development is proposed for a tract of land
for other then single-family or duplex residential use.
   (B)   (1)   Application and procedure. Any person, firm, corporation or
other group planning a development on a tract of land shall submit an
application for a site plan review. Said application shall be accompanied by
such information and number of copies as may be required by the Community
Development Director and a filing fee as may be established, from time to time,
by resolution of City Council. The proposed development plans shall be reviewed
by the Site Plan Review Committee consisting of the Community Development
Director, City Engineer, Street Superintendent, Building Inspector and a
Planning Commission member. The Review Committee may approve the plans as
submitted, approve with conditions or modifications or reject the plans with
written reasons listed for the rejection. No permits shall be issued for any
development until a development plan for the tract of land has been approved by
the Review Committee. The Committee shall complete its review within ten
working days once all required materials have been submitted.
      (2)   Appeal of the Site Plan Review Committee decision. Any applicant
not agreeing with the decision of the Site Plan Review Committee may appeal the
Committee’s decision to the City Council prior to the issuance of a building
permit. The City Council, following review of the Committee’s decision and the
applicants objections, may affirm the Committee’s decision, affirm the decision
of the Committee with modifications or reject the Committee’s decision in total
and act on the proposed plan with or without conditions. Council action shall
be by resolution listing any required conditions.
      (3)   Site plan review standards. The standards of site design listed
below are intended only as minimum requirements, so that the general
development pattern of the city may be adjusted to a wide variety of
circumstances and topography, and to ensure reasonable and orderly growth in
the city.
         (a)   All proposed developments shall conform to the land use policies
of the comprehensive plan of the city; the subdivision ordinance standards and
procedure, where applicable; such other city ordinances as may pertain to such
developments; and any applicable rules and regulations of the state.
         (b)   Internal roads and streets shall be adequately constructed to
accommodate the traffic generated. Entrances and exits onto public streets
shall not unduly increase congestion or traffic hazards on the public streets
and the proposed site.
         (c)   The proposed development shall be designed with appropriate
regard to the topography, surface drainage, natural drainageways and streams,
wooded areas and other naturally sensitive areas that lend themselves to
protection from degradation.
         (d)   The proposed development shall be designed with adequate water
supply and sewage treatment facilities and storm water drains and structures
necessary to protect the health and welfare by not overloading existing public
utilities. Runoff from the development shall comply with the storm water
detention ordinance (incorporated in
Title D, Chapter 10).
         (e)   The proposed development shall be designed, and the buildings
and improvements shall be located within the tract or parcel in such a manner
as not to unduly diminish of impair the use and enjoyment of adjoining or
surrounding property. And to such end, the developer shall provide for such
fences, landscaping and other improvements as are proper and necessary to
buffer the proposed use from the existing or potential surrounding land uses.
         (f)   The proposed development shall be designed not to unduly
increase the public danger of fire, explosion and other safety hazards on the
general public and the persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
properly.
      (4)   Changes to an approved site development plan.
         (a)   Site development plan. The development shall be developed
according to the approved site development plan except where authorized changes
are permitted. The approved site development plan and supporting data shall be
binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns.   
         (b)   Major changes. A change in the approved site development plan
which alters the concept of intent of the development, including a change in
configuration, increase in floor area or the height of the building, an
increase in intensity, a reduction of proposed open space, a change in road
location or standards or other major changes, shall be approved only by
submission of a new site plan in accordance with the procedures as previously
set forth for the approval of site development plans.
         (c)   Minor changes. The Community Development Director may approve
minor changes in the site development plan which do not change the concept or
intent of the development.
      (5)   Approved plans superseded by approved revised plans. All approved
site development plans superceded by an approved revised site development plan
shall be considered to be null and void at the time of approval of the revised
plan.
§ 31.12 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ADJACENT TO A TRANSMISSION PIPELINE EASEMENT.
   The area of a transmission pipeline easement, within which a pipeline
exceeding six inches in diameter is located, shall not be included as part of
the minimum lot area of a lot to be used for residential development, nor shall
it be included as part of any required yard.
§ 32.00 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
§ 32.01 GENERAL.
   The requirements and regulations specified elsewhere in this chapter shall
be subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, modifications and
interpretations contained in this section.
§ 32.02 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply in
the following situations:
   (A)   To barns, silos or other farm buildings or structures on farms
provided these are not less than 50 feet from every lot line; to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, watertowers, fire and hose towers,
masts and aerials; to parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the
limiting height of the buildings. However, if, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, such structure would adversely effect adjoining or adjacent
properties, such greater height shall not be authorized except by the Board;
and
   (B)   To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevator penthouses, water tanks,
monitors and scenery lofts, to monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling
towers, grain elevators, gas holders or other structures, where the
manufacturing process requires a greater heights than specified, such may be
authorized by the Board.
§ 32.03 FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard requirements do not apply to the following: bay windows or
balconies occupying in the aggregate not more than one-third of the front wall;
provided that these projections come entirely within planes drawn from either
main corner of the front wall, making an interior angle of 22.5 degrees in the
horizontal plane with the front wall; chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders,
sills, pilaster, uncovered porches, plantings or similar features not over
three feet high above the average finished grade and five feet distant from
every lot line.
   (B)   In any district where the average depth of two or more existing front
yards on lots within 100 feet of the lot in question and within the same block
front is less or greater than the least front yard depth prescribed, front
yards may be varied. The depth of the front yard on such lot shall not be less
than the average depth of said existing front yards or the average depth on the
two lots immediately adjoining or, in the case of a corner lot, the depth of
the front yard on the lot immediately adjoining; provided, however, that the
depth of a front yard on a lot in any “R” District shall be at least ten feet
and need not exceed 60 feet.
§ 32.04 SIDE YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Along any district boundary line, any abutting side yard on a lot in
the less restricted district shall have a least width equal to that required in
the more restrictive district. Where a lot in an “I” District abuts a lot in an
“R” District, the side yard shall be increased by three feet for each story
that the building proposed on such lot exceed the height limit of the said “R”
District.
   (B)   On a corner lot, the least width of a side yard along the side street
lot line shall be equal to the required front yard along the side street. No
part of any accessory building shall be nearer a side street lot line than the
least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
   (C)   The following projections or structures may be permitted in side
yards:
      (1)   Accessory buildings or structures subject to the provisions
contained elsewhere in this chapter;
      (2)   Fences, planting or walls not over six feet above the average
natural grade;
      (3)   Fire escapes, three feet from side lot line. Bays and balconies not
more than three feet from the building; provided these projections are entirely
within planes drawn from either main corner of the side wall, making an
interior angle of 22.5 degrees in the horizontal plane with the side wall. The
sum of the lengths of such projection shall not exceed one-third of the length
of the wall of the main building;
      (4)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters and
lintels, ornamental features, cornices, gutters and the like into or over a
required side yard not more than one and one-half feet; and
      (5)   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features, not
higher than the elevation of the ground story of the building and distant three
feet from a side lot line.
   (D)   Whenever a lot of record has an average width that is 20 or more
percent less than the minimum average width required in the district in which
it is located, the width of the side yards may be reduced to 10% of the average
width of the lot, but no side yard shall be less than three feet in width
unless authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 32.05 REAR YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   The following projections or structures may be permitted in rear yards:
   (A)   Accessory buildings or structures subject to the provisions contained
elsewhere in this chapter:
   (B)   Fences, planting or walls, not over six feet above the average natural
grade;
   (C)   Fire escapes, six feet, bays and balconies, not more than three feet;
provided these projections are entirely within planes drawn from either main
corner of the rear wall, making an interior angle 22.5 degrees in the
horizontal plane with the rear wall. The sum of the lengths of such projections
shall not exceed one-half of the width of the rear wall;
   (D)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves and the like into or over a required rear
yard not more than one and one-half feet; and
   (E)   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches or similar features not more than
ten feet into a required rear yard no closer than six feet of an alley or
within ten feet of a rear lot line, nor any alley lot line.
§ 32.06 ELECTRIC AND BARBED WIRE FENCE.
   Electric and barbed wire fences are prohibited in “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3” and
all commercially zoned districts, and are permitted in industrially zoned
districts only upon approval of the Board.
§ 33.00 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
§ 33.01 TIME OF CONSTRUCTION.
   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory.
§ 33.02 PERCENTAGE OF REQUIRED YARD OCCUPIED.
   No detached accessory building or buildings shall occupy more than 30% of
the area of a required yard.
§ 33.03 HEIGHT OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of one
story.
§ 33.04 LOCATION ON LOT.
   No accessory building shall be erected in any front yard. Accessory
buildings shall be no closer than three feet from all lot lines of adjoining
lots which are in any “R” District and at least four feet from alley lines.
§ 33.05 MOBILE HOMES.
   Mobile homes may not be used for accessory buildings.
§ 33.06 ADJOINING LOTS.
   An accessory building may be built on the adjoining subdivision lot or
tract, if both parcels are owned by the same individual, family or firm, and
the owner signs and records a “Restrictive Covenant and Agreement Not to Sever”
in cooperation with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 34.00 TEMPORARY PERMIT USES PERMITTED.
   Upon application to and issuance by the Zoning Administrator of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
§ 34.01 REAL ESTATE SUBDIVISION SIGN.
   Not to exceed 100 square feet for each face. Sign shall be non-illuminated.
Each permit shall specify the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than 180 days and may be renewed until the
development of the subdivision is 90% complete or for ten renewals, whichever
comes first, and shall be conditioned upon the good maintenance of the sign;
§ 34.02 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION ACCOMMODATIONS.
   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than six calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than
four successive periods at the same location; and
§ 34.03 TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five successive
periods at the same location.
§ 35.00 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS AND LOADING SPACES.
§ 35.01 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES.
   In all districts, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 2,500 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied by uses requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of materials or merchandise there shall be provided and maintained on
the same premises with such building at least one off-street loading space
accessible from an alley, easement of access or, when there is no such alley or
easement of access, from a street, plus one additional such loading space for
each 10,000 square feet or major fractions thereof or gross floor area so used
in excess of 15,000 square feet. Such space may occupy all, or any part of a
required rear yard, or upon authorization of the Board, part of any other yard
of court space on the same premises.
§ 35.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply and govern in all zoning
districts.
   (B)   The following general requirements shall apply.
      (1)   The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking space shall be
the joint and several responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the use
and/or land for which off-street parking space is required to be provided and
maintained.
      (2)   For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or operated on
the effective date of this chapter, there shall be provided such off-street
parking space as was required for such land, structures or uses by any previous
chapter. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed
through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity,
additional employment or other unit of measurement specified herein, there
shall be provided, for that increment of expansion only, at least the amount of
off-street parking space that would be required hereunder if the increment were
a separate land, structure of use established or placed into operation after
the effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   For all uses established or placed into operation after the
effective date of this chapter, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved
and maintained the amount of off-street parking space hereinafter set forth.
      (4)   Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or premises shall be
increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, additional employment or other unit of measurement, such additional
parking as required herein to provide for the expanded use shall be provided.
      (5)   Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or land area is
changed to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided as required by the
new use. However, if the use existed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, parking is required only in the amount that the new use would exceed
the requirements for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking
provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   Parking in existence on the effective date of this chapter or that
was provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be
reduced below, or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below, the
requirements of this chapter for a new use.
      (7)   All off-street parking space, whether or not required by this
chapter and when provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or
in accordance with the provisions of any former chapter, shall be used,
maintained and operated as hereinafter required.
      (8)   Parking for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or
open parking areas conforming with the provisions of this chapter.
      (9)   Where sufficient existing “public parking facilities” are located
so as to provide or supplement part or all of the required parking space, the
Board may reduce the number of spaces required for a particular use or group of
uses.
      (10)   Parking may be with or without charge.
§ 35.03 LOCATION.
   Off-street parking space shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use
for which provided, except as otherwise specifically provided.
   (A)   Special location plan.
      (1)   Off-street parking. Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth
in §
35.04 of this chapter, either part or all of the required off-street parking
space may be located off the lot of the use for which the space is provided.
The following limitations shall apply to the “special location plan”.
      (2)   Separation from use. Off-street parking shall be located as
hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be
the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to
the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve. In
all Commercial Districts, parking facilities shall be located within 300 feet
of the building they are required to serve. In all Industrial Districts,
parking facilities shall be located within 600 feet of the building they are
required to serve.
   (B)   Application. All applications for approval of a “special location
plan” hereunder shall be filed with the Board by the owners of the entire land
area to be included within the “special location plan”, the owner or owners of
all structures then existing on said land area and all encumbrances of said
land area; shall contain sufficient evidence to establish to the satisfaction
of the Board that the applicants are the owners and encumbrances of the
designated land and structures; shall contain such information and
representation required by this chapter or deemed necessary; and shall include
plans showing the following details: the location of the uses or structures for
which off-street parking space is required and the location at which the off-
street parking space is to be provided.
   (C)   Parking lot setbacks. In the “SA”, “R-1”, “R-2” and “R-3” Districts,
for single-family and duplex structures, no vehicle shall be parked in any
front yard except upon a regularly constructed driveway. Parking lots for all
other uses shall be setback the distance indicated in the chart below. Parking
lots may be allowed in the front yard in an “SA”, “R-1”, “R-2” or R-3” District
if authorized by the Board of Adjustment and provided that the district does
not require that the front yard be landscaped and devoted to no other use, and
further provided that the parking is in accordance with all other chapter
provisions. In Commercial and Industrial Districts, parking lots shall be
setback as indicated in the chart below for each yard:
District Front Side Rear
District Front   Side    Rear
SA       30 feet 10 feet 30 feet
R-1      30 feet 8 feet  30 feet
R-2      25 feet 5 feet  30 feet
R-3      25 feet 5 feet  15 feet
C-1      20 feet 5 feet  5 feet
C-2      0 feet  5 feet  5 feet
C-3      15 feet 5 feet  5 feet
C-4      15 feet 5 feet  15 feet
C/I      10 feet 5 feet  10 feet
I-1      25 feet 5 feet  10 feet
I-2      25 feet 5 feet  10 feet
 
   (D)   Landscaping requirements. One tree for each seven parking spaces
provided on site shall be planted and maintained in the front yard or within
the parking lot. All trees shall be at least six feet tall at the time of
planting. For all vehicle use areas greater then 4,000 square feet, an area
equivalent to a minimum of 6% of the total vehicular use area shall be
landscaped. The required landscaping shall be located in the interior of the
vehicular use area. The interior landscaping may be provided in the corners of
the parking area, islands and strip plantings. All vehicular use areas must
terminate at least five feet from any exterior building wall. An exception may
be made where it is necessary to cross the non-vehicular use area to gain
access to the building and for drive up facilities, such as banks and
restaurants.
   (E)   Parkway. No parking shall be permitted between the property line and
the curb line or edge of the pavement or roadway in the event no curb exists.
   (F)   Combined space. Off-street parking space shall be provided for each
use. However, two or more uses located on the same zoning lot may jointly
provide for one combined parking facility.
      (1)   Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two
or more uses having different standards for determining amount of off-street
parking space required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide
the sum total of off-street parking space requirements of all such uses.
      (2)   Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two
or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off-street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes of this subsection,
shall be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in
all structures on the same lot or the number of employees of all such uses in
all structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard, shall be
taken as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street
parking space required.
   (G)   Sharing of space. Two or more uses may share the same off-street
parking space if the schedules of operation of all such uses are such that none
of the uses sharing the space requires the off-street parking space at the same
time as any other use sharing the space. Each such use that is sharing space
shall be considered as having provided such shared space individually.
   (H)   Design, development and maintenance. Every parcel of land hereafter
used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot
and also an automobile or trailer sales lot, shall be designed, developed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of
any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies, except when parking is a
permitted principal or special use;
      (2)   Shall be provided with an all-weather surfacing maintained, at all
times, in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and to be free of
dust, trash and debris;
      (3)   Shall be pitch and drained so as to prevent the flow of water from
such areas onto adjoining property or onto streets or alleys that have no
drainage facilities;
      (4)   All weather surfacing shall be equivalent to a minimum of two
inches of asphaltic concrete placed over a suitable rolled stone base;
      (5)   Within the “I-1” and “I-2” Zoning Districts, or “P/M” with a use on
review, only those parking areas and driveways located between the building
line and the street right-of-way shall be required to be surfaced with an all-
weather surfacing. All other parking areas and driveways located behind the
building line may be a rock surface that is treated and maintained with oil,
calcium chloride, seal coat or other equivalent type material, which creates a
dust free surface and is kept free of weeds and other vegetation;
      (6)   The driveway approach from the edge of the street to the right-of-
way line shall be constructed of PCC concrete with a five-foot wide sidewalk
delineated through the approach. The Zoning Administrator or City Engineer, or
their designee, prior to construction, shall approve the proposed approach
width, location, radii and overall design.
      (7)   Storage areas located in the “I-1” and “I-2” Zoning Districts, or
“P/M” with a use on review, for the storage of materials and equipment used or
produced in the conduct of the business and for which access to the area is
restricted to employees of the company only, may be a rock surface that is
treated and maintained with oil, calcium chloride, sealcoat or other equivalent
type material, which creates a dust free surface and is kept free of weeds and
other vegetation. Any driveway necessary to access the storage area must meet
the all-weather surfacing requirements of parking areas; and
      (8)   (a)   All parking areas shall been designed and laid out according
to the parking table below included in these regulations. All required parking
spaces shall be delineated by durable painted stripes. If a one-way parking
layout is used, then directional arrows or signs shall be provided at parking
lot entry points. Entrance driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide for a
one-way drive and 24 feet for a driveway having two-way traffic.
         (b)   For residential zoned properties the width of the driveway shall
not exceed 30 feet, measured at the street side of the sidewalk, and 36 feet at
the curb line. For commercial zoned properties, the width of the driveway shall
not exceed 36 feet measured at the street side of the sidewalk (or where the
sidewalk would normally be located if no sidewalk exists) and 42 feet at the
curb line. For industrial zoned properties, the maximum width shall be 45 feet
measured at the sidewalk or property line with a maximum radius on the driveway
of 25 feet.
         (c)   In all cases noted above, if a detailed engineering analysis can
show that alternative widths can be justified in order to avoid having vehicle
turning movements into opposing lanes, the City Engineer and Zoning
Administrator will consider alternative widths.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5930.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2023-09, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2025-09, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 35.04 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applications for a “special location plan” shall be reviewed and
maybe approved by the Board. Any approval may include necessary conditions and
limitations. Upon approval of a “special locations plan”, a copy of such plan
shall be registered and recorded among the records of the city.
   (B)   All “special location plans” registered and recorded hereunder shall
be binding upon the applicants for such special plans, their successors and
assigns; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of all zoning
permits and zoning certificates; and shall restrict and limit the use and
operation of all land and structures included within such special plans to all
conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the approvals thereof.
All “special location plans” registered and recorded hereunder may be amended
pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and
requirements by such plans were approved, registered and recorded.
   (C)   Upon applications to the Board by the owner or owners of the entire
area included within any “special location plan” registered and recorded
hereunder, the owner or owners of any structure then existing thereon and all
encumbrances of said land and structures, any such plan may be withdrawn,
either partially or completely, from registration and released from recording
if all uses, land and structures remaining under such plan can be made to
comply with all conditions and limitations of the plans and all uses, land and
structures withdrawn from such plan can be made to comply with all regulations
established by this chapter and unrelated to any “special location plan”.
§ 35.05 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   At least the following numbers of useable off-street parking spaces shall be
provided; also adequate provision for ingress, egress and maneuvering shall be
provided.
   (A)   Residential.
 
Use                                   Parking Spaces Required
Fraternities, sororities, dormitories 1 for each 2 active members, plus 1 for
                                      the manager and each employee thereof
                                      1 for each guest room, sleeping room or
Hotels, motels, inns and auto courts  suite, plus 1 for owner, manager and each
                                      employee
Mobile home parks                     Subject to mobile home park ordinances
Multiple-family dwellings             2 for each dwelling unit
One- and two-family dwellings         2 provided for each dwelling unit
 
   (B)   Commercial uses.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                                                       Parking Spaces
                                                                          Required
                                                                          Stacking
                                                                          places to
                                                                          accommodate
                                                                          automobiles
                                                                          equaling
                                                                          number to 5
Automobile laundry                                                        times maximum
                                                                          capacity of
                                                                          automobile
                                                                          laundry for
                                                                          each washrack,
                                                                          plus 1 for
                                                                          each 2
                                                                          employees
                                                                          1 for each
                                                                          1,000 square
Automobile or machine sales and service garages                           feet of floor
                                                                          area, plus 1
                                                                          for each full-
                                                                          time employee
                                                                          2 for each
                                                                          island pumps
Automobile service stations                                               and each
                                                                          service stall,
                                                                          plus 1 for
                                                                          each employee
                                                                          1 for each 200
                                                                          square feet of
                                                                          floor area.
                                                                          Drive-in
                                                                          establishment,
Banks and other financial                                                 6 stacking
                                                                          places per
                                                                          teller,
                                                                          customer
                                                                          service window
                                                                          or ATM machine
                                                                          2 for each
Barber shop                                                               barber chair,
                                                                          plus 1 for
                                                                          each employee
                                                                          2 for each
                                                                          chair, plus 1
Beauty shop                                                               for each
                                                                          employee at
                                                                          work
Bowling alleys                                                            6 for each
                                                                          alley
                                                                          1 for each 3
                                                                          washers and/or
                                                                          cleaning
Coin-operated laundries and/or dry cleaning establishments                machines, plus
                                                                          1 for each
                                                                          employee at
                                                                          work
                                                                          6 per chapel
                                                                          room or parlor
                                                                          or one for 50
                                                                          square feet of
                                                                          room used for
Funeral home, mortuaries                                                  services
                                                                          whichever is
                                                                          greater, plus
                                                                          1 for each
                                                                          funeral
                                                                          vehicle kept
                                                                          on premises
                                                                          1 for each 3
                                                                          seats, plus 1
Restaurants                                                               for each 2
                                                                          employees at
                                                                          work at the
                                                                          same time
                                                                          1 for each 50
                                                                          square feet of
                                                                          floor area,
Restaurants - carry out                                                   plus 1 for
                                                                          each 2
                                                                          employees at
                                                                          work at the
                                                                          same time
                                                                          1 for each 20
                                                                          square feet of
                                                                          floor area,
                                                                          plus not less
                                                                          than 1/3 of
Restaurants - drive in                                                    the total
                                                                          ground area be
                                                                          devoted
                                                                          exclusively to
                                                                          parking and
                                                                          accessways
                                                                          1 for each 200
                                                                          square feet of
                                                                          floor devoted
Retail stores - drug, grocery, hardware, convenience and similar stores   to sales, plus
                                                                          1 for each
                                                                          full-time
                                                                          employee
                                                                          1 for each 500
                                                                          square feet of
Shopper’s goods - appliance, household equipment, furniture and similar floor area,
stores                                                                    plus 1 for
                                                                          each full-time
                                                                          employee
                                                                          1 for each 2
                                                                          seats, plus 1
Taverns and bars                                                          for each
                                                                          employee at
                                                                          work
Theaters - indoor                                                         1 for each 4
                                                                          seats
                                                                          Reserved
                                                                          parking spaces
                                                                          at the
                                                                          entrance to
                                                                          the theater
Theaters - outdoor                                                        shall be
                                                                          provided equal
                                                                          to 10% of the
                                                                          vehicle
                                                                          capacity of
                                                                          the theater
 
   (C)   Office use.
 
Use                               Parking Spaces Required
Business and professional offices 1 for each 200 square feet of floor area
Medical or dental clinics         2 for each office, examining room and
                                  treatment room, plus 1 for each employee
 
   (D)   Industrial use.
 
Use                             Parking Spaces Required
                                1 for each employee on maximum working shift,
Manufacturing plants            plus 1 for each vehicle used in conduct or
                                enterprise
Truck terminals                 1 for each employee, plus 1 for each truck
Warehouse and storage buildings 1 for each employee, plus 1 for each vehicle
                                used in conduct of enterprise
Wholesale establishments        1 for each employee on maximum work shift
 
   (E)   Schools, institutions and places of assembly.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                    Parking Spaces Required
Auditoriums, gymnasiums, convention    1 for each 3 seats or parking spaces
halls and all places of assembly with  equal to 1/3 capacity of facility in
fixed seats                            persons
Churches                               1 for each 4 seats in principle
                                       auditorium
                                       1 for each 3 students based on maximum
Colleges, universities and trade       number of students facility is designed
schools                                to handle at 1 time, plus 1 for each
                                       employee
Dance halls and assembly halls without A number equivalent to 1/2 the certified
fixed seats                            fire capacity
Elementary schools                     2 for each classroom or 1 for each 4
Junior high schools                    seats in principal auditorium, whichever
                                       is greater
                                       1 for each 4 students based on maximum
                                       number of students facility is designed
High school                            to handle at one time or 1 for each 4
                                       seats in principal auditorium whichever
                                       is greater, plus 1 for each employee
                                       1 for each 2 beds, plus 1 for each
Hospitals                              doctor or visiting doctor 1 for each 2
                                       employees
Library                                1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor
                                       area
Nursery school                         1 for each 4 students, plus 1 for each
                                       employee
Nursing home, convalescent home and    1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each
similar type establishment             employee
Private clubs and lodges               Parking spaces equal to 1/3 of capacity
                                       of facility in persons
 
   (F)   Other uses. For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed uses, or as determined by the Board.
   (G)   Plot plan. Any application for a building permit or for a certificate
of occupancy shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned, showing all parking facilities required by this chapter.
§ 35.06 DEFINITION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Parking space. Each parking space rectangular in shape shall be not
less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long, or not less than 180 square feet in
area exclusive of access drives or aisles. Parking spaces for the disabled
shall be not less than 13 feet wide and 20 feet long.
   (B)   Loading space. Each loading space shall not be less than ten feet
wide, 40 feet in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of access and turning
area.
   (C)   Floor area. In the case of merchandising or service types of uses,
FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by
tenants, or for service to the public or customers, patrons or clients, but
shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as toilet
or rest rooms, utilities or dressing rooms.
   (D)   Benches in place of public assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas,
churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators
occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 20 inches of
such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of
determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under the chapter.
   (E)   Employees. Employees shall be based on the maximum number of persons
on duty or residing or both, on the premises at any one time.
   (F)   Fractions. When units of measurement result in the requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space.
§ 35.07 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Off-street accessory parking areas shall be of usable shape, and shall be
improved, in accordance with requirements of §
35.03(H) of this chapter, with a durable and dustless surface and so graded and
drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. Any
lighting used to illuminate such parking areas shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light downward and away from adjoining premises in any “R”
district.
§ 35.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   The Board may authorize on appeal a modification, reduction or waiver of the
foregoing requirements, if it should find that, in the particular case, the
peculiar nature of the use, or other exceptional situation or condition would
justify such modification, reduction or waiver.
§ 36.00 TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES AND TRUCKS.
   Trailers of all types, mobile homes that are not manufactured homes, trucks
or other recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored on any lot
occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any Residential District, except in
accordance with the following provisions.
§ 36.01 MAJOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of §§
36.01 through
36.03 of this chapter, MAJOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES are defined as including
boats and boat trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on
automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers and similar vehicles.
Trailers used for hauling which are required to be licensed by the state are
also included under provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Parking on public property. No major recreational vehicle shall be
parked on city streets or other public ways for more than 48 hours. At no time
that the vehicle is parked on public property shall it be utilizing public
utilities.
   (C)   Parking and storage in residential district. No major recreational
vehicle shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district, except
in a carport, enclosed building or behind the front yard and side yard setback
of a residential lot.
   (D)   Number of vehicles allowed. No more than three major recreational
vehicles or hauling trailers per family on the premises shall be permitted.
   (E)   Prohibited uses. A camping or travel trailer, motorized dwelling or
similar vehicle shall not be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes
while it is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits, except
in a mobile home park authorized under ordinances of the city, unless a permit
is obtained from the Clerk. Such permit can be obtained for $15 and shall limit
such occupancy to no more than four times per year per address for no longer
than a 72-hour period; provided such vehicles are parked on private property.
§ 36.02 MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   A mobile home that is not a manufactured home shall be parked or
stored only in a mobile home park or mobile home sales area.
   (B)   A mobile home that is not a manufactured home shall not be occupied
either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area
within the incorporated limits except in a mobile home park authorized under
the ordinances of the city.
§ 36.03 TRUCKS.
   (A)   No person shall park or store in areas zoned residential any truck
that is one and one-half tons or larger. Trucks may be parked for the purpose
of loading or unloading adjacent to the place of parking for a period not to
exceed 24 hours.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to school buses, but shall
not apply to city or county maintenance vehicles, parked adjacent to the
project, or other vehicles so designated by the Council.
§ 37.00 SIGNS.
§ 37.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This section is intended to control and regulate the development of signs
within the city. There is a significant relationship between the manner in
which signs are displayed; the public health, safety and welfare; and the
value, compatibility and economic stability of adjoining property, its land use
and the city. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a service to the
people in the conduct of competitive commercial and industrial activity and to
promote freedom of expression. The regulations in this section establish
standards for the display of signs in direct relationship to the above stated
purposes and directives.
§ 37.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   When the regulations of this section require a permit, said permit
shall be obtained from the building inspector.
   (B)   Where sections of the city code as applied to structures, particularly
the uniform sign ordinance as adopted by the city, is applicable; said permits
must also be approved by the City Building Inspector.
§ 37.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All signs must comply with the following conditions.
   (A)   No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct vision at street
intersections and driveway intersections for oncoming vehicles.
   (B)   When a permit is required on any particular sign, said sign shall
display the name of the owner and erector.
   (C)   No sign shall block any required accessway or window.
   (D)   No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole.
   (E)   All signs not authorized by this section are prohibited.
   (F)   No signs other than public service and safety signs shall be permitted
on public property, unless authorized by the governmental agency having control
thereof.
§ 37.04 REMOVAL AND CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to recognize that the eventual
elimination, as expeditiously as it is reasonable, of existing signs that are
not in conformity with the provisions of this section is as much a subject of
the health, safety and welfare of the public as is the prohibition of new signs
that would violate the provisions of this section. It is also the intent of
this section that any elimination of nonconforming signs shall be affected so
as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights.
The Building Inspector or Zoning Officer shall cause removal of a sign or sign
structure if the property owner fails to comply with the standards of this
section within ten days after being issued a written notification from the
Building Inspector or Zoning Officer. Any expense incurred by the city in
removing or repairing the sign or sign structure shall be paid by the owner of
the property to which the sign is attached. Yard signs, as defined in this
chapter, found in violation of this chapter can be removed and disposed of by
the Zoning Officer, or his or her designee, without notice.
   (B)   (1)   Obsolete signs.
         (a)   Any nonconforming off-premises sign which does not advertise a
bona fide business, product or organization or becomes obsolete because the
business or organization has relocated shall be removed by the owner within 120
days of the termination or relocation of the business, product or organization
being advertised. Removal of obsolete signs shall include the supporting
structure, exclusive of any building, if all signs on the structure are
obsolete.
         (b)   Any nonconforming off-premises sign which is severely damaged
and requires over 65% of the cost of replacement for repair shall be removed
within 120 days after the date of the damage. Removal of damaged signs shall
include the supporting structure, exclusive of any building, if all signs on
the structure are nonconforming.
      (2)   Removal of signs. Any obsolete sign which does not advertise a bone
fide business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the structure upon
which such sign may be found within ten days after written notification from
the Zoning Administrator. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified in such order, the building inspector may cause removal of such
sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
property to which such a sign is attached.
      (3)   Unsafe and unlawful signs. If the building inspector shall find
that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of
this section, he or she shall give written notice to the person to whom the
sign certificate has been issued. If he or she fails to remove or alter the
sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after
such notice, such sign may be removed or altered to comply by the building
inspector at the expense of the sign certificate issue or owner of the property
upon which it is located. The building inspector shall refuse to issue a sign
certificate to any such party or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed.
The building inspector may cause any sign that is an immediate peril to persons
or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
      (4)   Alterations. No display sign or outdoor advertising device shall be
altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The repainting, changing of parts and preventive
maintenance of signs shall not be deemed to be alterations.
      (5)   Maintenance. The owner of any sign requiring a permit shall be
required to maintain an exterior which is properly painted, galvanized or
otherwise treated to prevent rust and deterioration of all parts and supports.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 37.05 PERMITTED SIGN WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   This section sets forth which types of signs are permitted in the
various zoning districts of the city. It is divided into four categories for
ease of locating the zoning district involved. To the right of each type of
sign is set forth the zoning districts in which it is permitted, listed by
abbreviations. The notation “NP” indicates that “no permit” is required for
that sign. The notation “P” indicates that a permit is required for that sign.
   (B)   (1)   The following signs are permitted in the agricultural districts
as indicated below. Detailed regulations for each number are listed in §
37.06 of this chapter.
Agricultural
Agricultural
02 Nonprofit signs - SA, NP
06 Church bulletins - SA, P
08 For sale or for lease - SA, NP
09 Flags - SA, NP
11 House number - SA, NP
13 Church directional signs - SA, NP
14 Nameplates - SA, NP
19 Parking lot instructional - SA, NP
20 Parking entrance/exit - SA, NP
21 Political signs - SA, NP
23 Temporary banner - SA, NP
24 Temporary mobile - SA, P
25 Tee marker with off-premises advertising - SA, P
27 Subdivision temporary - SA, P
 
      (2)   The following signs are permitted in the residential districts as
indicated below. In any Planned Overlay Residential District, the regulations
of the residential zone being overlaid shall apply unless more restrictive
agreements pertain. Detailed regulations for each number are listed in §
37.06 of this chapter.
Residential
Residential
02 Nonprofit signs - R-1, R-2, R-3, NP
06 Church bulletins - R-l, R-2, R-3, P
07 Entryway - R-1, R-2, R-3, P
08 For sale, for lease or open house - R-l, R-2, R-3, NP
09 Flags - R-l, R-2, R-3, NP
10 Garage sale - R-1, R-2, R-3, NP
11 House number- R-l, R-2, R-3, NP
13 Church directional signs - R-1, R-2, R-3, NP
14 Nameplates - R-l, R-2, R-3, NP
19 Parking lot instructional - R-3, NP
20 Parking entrance/exit - R-3, NP
21 Political signs - R-1, R-2, R-3, NP
27 Subdivision temporary - R-1, R-2, R-3, P
 
      (3)   The following signs are permitted in the commercial districts as
indicated below. Detailed regulations for each number are listed in §
37.06 of this chapter.
Commercial
Commercial
01 Awning sign - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
02 Nonprofit signs - O-T, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
03 Automobile gas station sign tire rack - C-2, C-3, C-4, NP
04 Automobile gas station sign door - C-2, C3, C-4, NP
07 Entryway - O-T, C-1, C-2, C-3, P
08 For sale, for lease or open house - O-T, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
09 Flags - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
11 House number - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
13 Church directional signs - O-T, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
14 Nameplate - C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
15 Off-premises advertising - use on review - C-3, C-4 and C/I, P
18 On-premises identification - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, P
19 Parking lot instructional - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
20 Parking lot entrance/exit – O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
21 Political signs - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
23 Temporary banner - C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
24 Temporary mobile - O-T, C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, C/I, NP
27 Subdivision temporary - C-1, C-2, C-3, P
 
      (4)   The following signs are permitted in the industrial districts as
indicated below. Detailed regulations for each number are listed in §
37.06 of this chapter.
Industrial
Industrial
02 Nonprofit signs - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
07 Entryway - I-1, I-2, PM, P
08 For sale, for lease or open house - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
09 Flags - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
11 House number - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
13 Church directional signs - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
14 Nameplate - I-1, I-2, NP
15 Off-premises advertising - I-1, I-2, P
18 On-premises identification - I-1, I-2, P/M, P
19 Parking lot instructional - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
21 Political signs - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
23 Temporary banner - I-1, I-2, P/M, NP
24 Temporary mobile - I-1, I-2, P/M, P
 
      (5)   Electronic sign regulations.
         (a)   Signs within 660 feet of Highway 61. All electronic signs
located within 660 feet of Highway 61 shall conform to IDOT standards.
         (b)   Time duration. Any image or message or portion thereof displayed
on a sign shall have a minimum display time duration of eight seconds and shall
be static display. Transition time shall be no longer than two seconds and
black space is not permitted between message changes. Gas price signs, time and
temperature signs and similar electronic signs are exempt these regulations.
         (c)   Brightness. The maximum brightness of electronic signs shall not
exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and shall
not exceed 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk and dawn. All
electronic signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control which
produces a distinct illumination change from the higher allowed illumination
level during daytime hours to the lower allowed level for the time period
between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise.
         (d)   Public decency. All graphics and lettering displayed on
electronic signs shall meet public decency standards.
         (e)   Railroad crossings. No electronic sign shall be permitted within
200 feet of any railroad crossing.
         (f)   Government signs. The provisions of this section do not apply to
government signs.
         (g)   Portable signs. Portable electronic signs are prohibited.
         (h)   Projection and location. Electronic signs shall conform to the
regulations of §
37.00 of this chapter.
         (i)   Malfunction. Electronic signs shall contain a default design
that will freeze the display or design in one position in the event of a
malfunction.
         (j)   Audio and pyrotechnics. Electronic signs shall not contain or
utilize audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 37.06 SPECIFIC SIGN REGULATIONS.
   All signs which are listed in §
37.05 of this chapter are listed below. The following regulations govern the
use of specific types of signs which are allowed within the applicable zoning
districts. Divisions (A) through (H) below explain the standards, phrases and
abbreviations subsequently used for each type of sign.
   (A)   Type.
      (1)   Each sign has a “Type Str.” (structure) item which shows the
permitted type of sign structure which is permitted as shown in the applicable
table.
         (a)   “Temp” shall indicate a sign mounted on a wooden post or meta.
         (b)   “Mon” shall indicate a ground-mounted monument sign.
         (c)   “Pole” shall indicate a sign mounted upon a pole or poles raised
up seven feet above ground level.
         (d)   “Bldg” shall indicate signs attached to a building.
         (e)   “1 face” shall indicate a sign structure with not more than one
sign surface.
         (f)   “2 face” shall indicate a sign with one sign surface or not more
than two sign surfaces where the two sign surfaces back to each other and face
opposite or nearly opposite directions.
         (g)   “Yard” shall indicate a common yard sign one or two-sided most
commonly 24 inches by 18 inches but up to four feet by eight feet set on wire
frame or posts that embed in the ground.
      (2)   Types of sign not listed below are not permitted for that sign.
   (B)   Size. Any sign shall not exceed the maximum number of square feet
listed for that sign on any one side or surface as shown in the applicable
table.
   (C)   Illumination. Signs may be illuminated when indicated in the
applicable table by one of four general methods shown as “Ill.”:
      (1)   “Flood” for an illumination permitted by a light shining upon the
sign located apart from the sign structure and directed toward the sign;
      (2)   “Back” for an illumination permitted by producing a sign
translucent in total or in part and placing light behind and within the
structure of such sign;
      (3)   “Sil” for an illumination permitted by producing a sign with opaque
characteristics and placing a light behind the characteristics so as to outline
the characteristic with the glow from the lighting source creating a
silhouette; and
      (4)   “None” for no illumination permitted at all.
   (D)   Height. Any sign shall not exceed the maximum height in feet above
average ground level listed for that sign as shown in the applicable table. The
bottom of any pole sign shall not be lower than seven feet above average ground
level. “NTE” refers to “not to exceed”.
   (E)   Location. Signs (not attached to buildings) are permitted on that
portion of each parcel indicated for that sign as shown on the applicable
table. The notation “NCT” shall mean that a sign must be located “not closer
than” the designated distance from the property line. “None” shall mean that
the sign may be located anywhere within the property or parcel lines other than
as noted in §
37.03 of this chapter.
   (F)   Number. No category of sign shall be displayed in greater number than
listed in the applicable table except the phrase “one per interior lot” shall
also mean two per corner lot with one sign oriented to each of the streets
forming the corner.
   (G)   Special conditions. Each sign may have a “special conditions” item
which may indicate other condition or restriction not previously listed.
   (H)   Projection. Sign may project from a building into the setback by not
more than the applicable number shown in the table below.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 37.07 TABLE OF SIGN TYPES, DEFINITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   Listed below are the types of signs permitted followed by a definition of
each sign type and a table of the standards governing the characteristics of
each:
   (A)   01 Awning sign: a sign which is designed into the material composing
the awning which may serve as an on-premises identification and advertising
sign:
 
Height:     Same as awning NTE 30 feet
Ill:        Flood
Loc:        Same as awning
Number:     Same as awning up to 4
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       300 square feet each per frontage
Type Str.:  On awning, 1 face
 
   (B)   02 Nonprofit sign: a sign identifying a nonprofit service club with a
charter in the city:
 
Height:             10 feet
Ill:                Flood
Loc:                On public property
Number:             1 per organization
Size:               4 square feet consistent with other signs in group
                    Sign must be grouped with other nonprofit organization
                    signs at location approved by the City Council or Park
Special conditions: Board if on park property; or placed on a public project
                    the organization funded. Signs must be ordered by the city
                    or be made of materials approved by the city
Type Str.:          1 face
 
   (C)   03 Automobile gas station sign tire rack: a sign on a tire rack at a
service station:
Height:             10 feet
Ill:                None
Loc:                On tire rack within 15 feet of building
Number:             2
Projection:         None
Size:               Area of tire rack
Special conditions: Signs only permitted at gasoline service stations
Type Str.:          Attached to rack, 1 face
 
   (D)   04 Automobile gas station door sign: a sign painted or otherwise
attached to the door on a service station:
Height:             Same as doors
Ill:                None
Loc:                Buildable area on overhead door
Number:             Same as doors
Projection:         None
Size:               Same as doors
Special conditions: Signs only permitted at service stations
Type Str.:          Attached to door of building, 1 face
 
   (E)   05 Clocks: a commercial size clock capable of being read beyond the
property on which it is located:
 
Ill:        Back, flood
Loc:        Buildable area only
Height:     30 feet
Number:     1 per interior lot
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       300 square feet
Type Str.:  Mon, pole, bldg, 2 face
 
   (F)   06 Church bulletins: a sign which may contain the name of the church
or other religious organization involved, located on the immediate church
grounds, which has moveable type or other manner of changing copy and shows the
names of officials of the church and gives times and other information of
coming church activities:
 
Height:     10 feet
Ill:        Back, flood, sil
Loc:        NCT 10 feet to front property line and other buildable areas
Number:     1 per interior lot
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       32 square feet
Type Str.:  Mon, pole, bldg, 2 face
 
   (G)   07 Entryway sign: a sign located at the entrance to a development or
subdivision which contains the name of the development and/or the names of
businesses located therein:
Height:             6 feet above street elevation
Ill:                None in Residential District, all other back, flood, sil
                    In Residential Districts, sign must be setback 5 feet from
Loc:                each lot line. Signs in a boulevard must be setback 25 feet
                    from the intersection corner
Number:             1 each side of primary entrance
Projection:         None
Size:               64 square feet
                    The design and location of all entryway signs must be
Special conditions: approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
                    Council before construction will be allowed
Type Str.:          Mon, 2 face
 
   (H)   08 For sale, for lease and open house: a sign which is temporary,
located on and is intended to indicate that the immediate perimeter or land is
available for sale or for lease or that the structure located thereon may be
visited during certain hours and contains the corporate and/or private name and
phone and/or address of the agent who may be contacted for inquiries concerning
the property:
 
Height:     15 feet
Ill:        None
Loc:        No restriction
Number:     1 per interior lot
Projection: None
Size:       32 square feet in “R” districts, 64 square feet in all other
            districts
Type Str.:  Temp, mon, pole, bldg, 2 face, yard
 
   (I)   09 Flags: a flag of the United States, the state or the city. Insignia
of the United States, state, city or other flags representing national, state
or local concerns when displayed with one of the above:
 
Height:     50 feet
Ill:        Flood
Loc:        No restriction
Number:     No limit
Projection: 30 feet from pole
Size:       No limit
Type Str.:  Pole, bldg, 2 face
 
   (J)   10 Garage sale signs: a sign which advertises a general sale, open to
the public conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone,
for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited
to, all sales entitled garage, lawn, yard, attic, porch, room, backyard, patio,
flea market, rummage or moving sale:
Ill:               None
Height:            4 feet
                   No restriction on the garage sale premises. Signs may be
                   posted off-premises provided that the premises upon which
                   the garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare
Loc:               as shown on the major street map and permission to erect
                   said sign is received from the property owner upon whose
                   property such signs are to be placed. No signs shall be
                   placed on any public right-of-way or structure thereon
Number:            4 on-premises, 4 off-premises
Projection:        None
Size:              2 square feet off-premises, 4 square feet on-premises
                   No off-premises sign shall be exhibited prior to the day of
Special condition: the sale. No sign on the premises of the garage sale shall
                   be exhibited more then 48 hours prior to the sale. All signs
                   must be removed at the close of the garage sale
Type Str.:         Temp, 2 face, yard
 
   (K)   11 House numbers: also known as street address numbers; is a small
sign with the numerals or written number which has been assigned as the
progressive number which indicates the relative location along a street or
place of the premises concerned:
 
Height:     10 feet bldg, 4 feet for mon
Ill:        Back, flood, sil
            Residential District - no restrictions. Commercial or Industrial
Loc:        District - minimum of 15 feet from the property line or 1/2 the
            distance of the required yard, whichever is greater or within the
            buildable area
Number:     1 for each wall of each building, 1 mon per street frontage
Projection: 2 feet from structure
Size:       Residential District - 2 square feet, Commercial or Industrial
            District - 48 square feet
Type Str.:  Bldg, mon, 2 face
 
   (L)   12 Marquee sign or changeable copy sign: a fixed sign either mounted
on the ground, on a pole or on a building, which has letters which can be
changed so as to make new messages:
 
Height:     30 feet
Ill:        Back, flood
Loc:        Buildable area
Number:     1 per interior lot
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       300 square feet
Type Str.:  Pole, bldg, mon, 2 face
 
   (M)   13 Church directional sign: a sign directing motorist to church
location:
 
Height:             8 feet above street
Loc:                On public property in city right-of-way
Number:             2 per organization
Size:               3 square feet
Special conditions: Sign must be ordered by the city and be made of materials
                    approved by the city
Type Str.:          1 face
 
   (N)   14 Nameplates: a small sign which contains the name of one individual
or a married couple or a family surname or company name, as an identification
for a specific doorway or building:
 
Height:     15 feet
Ill:        Flood, back
Loc:        No restrictions
Number:     1 per dwelling
Projection: 2 feet
Size:       1 square feet
Type Str.:  Bldg, mon, 2 face
 
   (O)   15 Off-premises advertising: a sign which advertises a business,
service, product or activity at a location other than where the business,
service, product or activity is located:
 
            30 feet for a separate structure, or when attached to a building, 4 feet above roof
Height:     parapet line not to exceed 30 feet, whichever is lower, except in the “I-2” District
            the maximum height may be up to 40 feet
Ill:        Back, flood, all lighting shall be shielded as to avoid casting bright light beyond the
            property on which the sign is located
Loc:        Buildable area, except front of building
            2 (2 face signs) on one structure not to exceed a total of 300 square feet per
Number:     orientation or up to 672 square feet in the “I-2” District, if approved by the Board of
            Adjustment. The total number of sign structures shall not exceed 1 per 2 square miles
            of area within the corporate limits of the city
            Maximum of 300 square feet in all districts. Board of Adjustment may allow a sign up to
Size:       672 square feet only in the “I-2” District as a use on review. The Board of Adjustment
            may also allow the use of extensions on a sign in the “I-2” District up to a total of
            100 square feet. The extensions may be in addition to an increase in sign size
            Signs located in the “C-3”, “C-4” and “C/I” districts are allowed only as a use on
Special     review. Signs in the “I-1” and “I-2” Districts are a permitted use. No sign shall be
conditions: located closer than 1,000 feet to a Residential District, school or park with a play
            area. All off-premises advertising sign structures must be separated from each other by
            a minimum of a 1/2 mile radius
Type Str.:  Pole, mon, bldg except front, 2 face, yard
 
   (P)   16 Reserved: reserved;
   (Q)   17 Tethered floating signs: a sign which advertises a business,
service, product or activity at the premises on which the sign is tethered:
Height:      Maximum of 100 feet to the top of the balloon or blimp
Ill:         May be internally or externally illuminated
Number:      Only one such sign shall be allowed per business at a time
Restriction: A sign permit shall be obtained from the building inspector for up to the 72-hour display period.
             The permit fee shall be $50
Loc:         The anchor point for the tether must be located within the buildable portion of the lot
Size:        Maximum of 200 square feet area includes the actual sign area and the balloon or blimp needed to
             transport the sign
             The sign may be allowed only in the “C-1”, “C-2”, “C-3”, “C-4”, “C/I”, “I-1” and “I-2” Zoning
Special      Districts. The sign must be tethered at a location for which the height of the tethered sign will be
conditions:  less then the distance to the nearest property line on which it is tethered. No sign shall be
             permitted for more then 72 hours. Said sign shall be removed for at least 30 days before any similar
             type sign is again displayed
Type Str.:   Floating sign made of mylar, rubber, nylon or other similar material which is anchored to the ground
             or structure by means of a flexible tether such as a wire cable, rope or other similar material
 
   (R)   18 On-premises identification and advertising sign: a sign which
displays the name and/or products and/or service which can be purchased on the
premises where the sign in located. May include time and temp information:
 
Height:     “O-T”, “C-1” and “C-2” District - 20 feet; “C-3” District - 30 feet if erected at or behind
            the required yard line, 20 feet if erected within the required yard; “C-4” District - 30 feet
Ill:        Back, flood, sil
Loc:        Minimum of 15 feet from the property line or 1/2 the distance of the required yard, whichever
            is greater or within the buildable area
Number:     1/business/street frontage
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       300 square feet if erected at or behind the required yard line. 60 square feet if erected
            within a required yard
Type Str.:  Pole, mon, building, 2 face, yard
 
   (S)   19 Parking lot instructional signs: a sign located adjacent to
driveway and/or within parking areas which instructs the users as to
restriction and regulations controlling the parking area, such as, but not
limited to, private parking areas, hours of parking, one-way entrances, no
parking area, towing policy and the like:
Height:             7 feet
Ill:                Back, flood, sil
Loc:                Buildable area
Number:             1 per entrance
Projection:         4 feet
Size:               9 square feet
                    Signs identifying the specific use of individual parking
Special conditions: spaces are allowed; provided they are located within a 3
                    foot distance of the identified space and do not exceed 4
                    square feet in area
Type Str.:          Bldg, pole, mon, 2 face
 
   (T)   20 Parking lot entrance/exit: a sign located along a driveway entrance
or exit to some type of parking area which indicates the use of the driveway as
an entrance and/or exit:
 
Height:     7 feet
Ill:        Back, flood, sil
Loc:        No restriction
Number:     1 per entrance
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       2 square feet
Type Str.:  Bldg, pole, mon, 2 face
 
   (U)   21 Political signs: political signs are permitted in all districts,
subject to the following conditions:
 
Height:    5 feet
Ill:       None
Loc:       No restriction, except no sign shall be within 30 feet of a corner street lot
           line intersection
Number:    No restriction
Size:      32 square feet and not longer then 8 feet horizontally
           No sign shall be erected on public right-of-way. Such signs shall be removed,
           or caused to be removed, by the person or organization responsible for the
           erection or distribution of such signs, or by the owner of the property upon
           which they are located, or by such owner’s agent no later than seven days
Special    after the election to which such signs pertain, unless a primary or special
condition: election sign continues to be pertinent to an election to be held within 45
           days after said primary or special election, in which case such signs may
           remain for a period not to exceed 7 days after such general election. Any
           person who violates this section will be given 48 hours from the time the
           violation is discovered and the offender notified to come into compliance
           herewith. Thereafter, the offense may be prosecuted as a municipal infraction
Type Str.: Temp, yard
 
   (V)   22 Public service and safety: a sign authorized by a governmental
agency with highway directions, parking restrictions, information of government
regulations for traffic control, street traffic control, street names or other
public purposes:
 
Height:     No limit
Ill:        Back, flood
Loc:        On public property
Number:     No limit
Projection: No limit
Size:       No limit
Type Str.:  Pole, bldg, mon, 2 face
 
   (W)   23 Temporary banner sign: signs which are temporary in nature and are
typically used to advertise a product or event on the site the sign is posted.
The signs are usually fastened to the existing building, other structures on-
site or temporary posts of some sort:
                   Maximum of 15 feet; however, if the bottom of the sign is
                   less then 7 feet above the average ground height and located
Height:            between 2 poles, fence type posts or other similar type
                   structure, then the bottom of the sign shall be no higher
                   than 3 feet above the average ground height
Ill:               None
                   Minimum of 15 feet from the property line or 1/2 the
Loc:               distance of the required yard, whichever is greater or
                   within the buildable area
Number             2/business/street frontage
Projection:        None
Size:              30 square feet
                   No sign shall be permitted for more than 30 consecutive
Special condition: days. Said sign shall be removed for at least a 15-day
                   period before a similar type sign advertising a similar type
                   product is displayed on the site
Type Str.:         Pole, bldg, 2 face
 
   (X)   24 Temporary mobile sign: signs which are temporary and can easily be
moved to another location and which have moveable type:
Height:             No limit
Ill:                Back, flood
Loc:                No restriction
Number:             2
Projection:         None
Size:               40 square feet
                    No sign shall be permitted for more than 30 days and one
Special conditions: renewal of 30 days. No additional reapplication shall be
                    considered sooner than 90 days after termination of the
                    last such permit
Type Str.:          Mon, 2 face
 
   (Y)   24 Tee marker with off-premises advertising: a sign located at a tee
an a golf course containing a graphic representation of the current hole on the
front and off-premises advertising on the opposite side:
Height:               7 feet maximum
Ill:                  None
Loc:                  Within 20 feet of the area designated for the tee
Number:               1 per tee
Projection:           None
Size:                 9 square feet
                      No sign shall be located so that any advertising is
                      visible from any adjoining roadway or property outside of
                      the golf course. The front side may contain, in addition
Special restrictions: to the graphic representation of the current hole, the
                      name or logo only of the advertiser on the opposite side.
                      Said name or logo shall cover no more than 20% of the
                      sign face
Type Str.:            Mon, 2 face, wood with an etched surface
 
   (Z)   26 Shopping center: a sign which identifies a complex of retail or
office establishments which are serviced by common parking and driveway
facilities and are in a complex of at least three commercial establishments on
the same property or adjacent properties. Such a sign is allowed in lieu of on-
premises identification pole signs for each individual business:
 
Height:     Minimum 8 feet, maximum 30 feet
Ill:        Back, flood, sil
Loc:        No restriction
Number:     1 per interior lot
Projection: 4 feet
Size:       500 square feet
Type Str.:  Pole, 2 face
 
   (AA)   27 Subdivision, temporary: a sign located at a new development where
there are multiple lots, which is intended to identify the development until
the lots are sold and/or initial construction of buildings and sales are
complete:
Height:             35 feet
Ill:                None
Loc:                Buildable area
Number:             1 per entrance to area
Projection:         None
Size:               100 square feet
Special conditions: 180-day period can be renewed until project is 90%
                    completed or 10 renewals maximum.
Type Str.:          Pole, mon, 2 face
 
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2025-10, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 38.00 FENCES/SCREENING/WALLS.
   No fence shall be constructed closer to a front lot line than that of the
principal building that exists on the lot or that of the neighboring property
in the case of double frontage lots. Lots that have a second or third front lot
line, as defined by §
5.00 of this chapter, can consider the second or third lot line directly
opposite the front of the principal building as the rear lot line for purposes
of fences, screening and wall setbacks. For lots with more than two front lot
lines, front yards will be determined by the Zoning Officer or Building
Official. Decorative corner treatments which do not exceed six feet in length
or three feet in height are not considered fences, screening or walls. Fencing,
screening or walls in non-residential districts erected for security or privacy
purposes will be considered upon review. Fences erected to secure swimming
pools must conform to the International Pool and Spa Code currently adopted by
the city. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be considered a
municipal infraction, as provided in Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.01 and § 3.02.
(Ord. 2023-10, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2025-22, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 39.00 STREET NUMBERS.
   Every new residence, commercial or industrial establishment built on any
property in the city, subsequent to the date of the adoption of this chapter,
shall receive a street number to be assigned by the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
in accordance with the current numbering system.
§ 40.00 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
§ 40.01 GENERAL.
   A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter may be continued, maintained and repaired, except as otherwise
provided in this section. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or
structure declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
§ 40.02 ALTERATION OR ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDING AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or
enlarged in any manner, unless said building or structure, including additions
and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district
in which it is located; provided, however, that a building or structure is
conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street
parking space, said building or structure may be enlarged or added to provided
that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard and height and off-
street parking requirements of the district in which said building or structure
is located.
   (B)   No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in
part to another location on the lot unless every portion of said building or
structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
§ 40.03 DESTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.
   Any nonconforming building or structure, which has been or may be damaged by
fire, flood, explosions, earthquake, war, riot or any act of God, may be
reconstructed and used as before if it is done within one year of such
calamity, unless damaged more than 65% of its fair market value, as determined
by the Board, at the time of such damage, in which case construction shall be
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 40.04 BUILDING VACANCY.
   A building or structure or portion thereof, which is nonconforming as to
use, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a
continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use
which conforms to the use regulations of the District in which it is located.
§ 40.05 CHANGE IN USE.
   (A)   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be
expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or
structure or changed except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming use,
or a portion thereof, is discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any
future use of such building, structure or portion thereof shall be in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or
structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or
structure may be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was
designed or intended if occupied within a period of one year after the
effective date of this chapter, but otherwise, it shall be used in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a
use of the same or a more restricted district classification; but where the use
of nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more restricted
district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to a use of a less
restricted district classification; provided, however, that a building or
structure is nonconforming as to use at the time of adoption of this chapter.
§ 40.06 STANDARDS FOR REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   A building or structure or portion thereof, which is nonconforming as to
use, shall be subject to the regulations of the district in which that building
or structure would normally be located, unless the district in which the
building or structure is located is more restrictive than would be the normal
district, then the more restrictive regulations would apply.
§ 41.00 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than $500, existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter, may be continued for a period of not more than five years
thereafter; provided that the following apply.
§ 41.01.   Said nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor shall it
occupy more area than was in use on the effective date of this chapter.
§ 41.02.   If said nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for
a period of one year, or changed, any future use of such land, or change in
use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the District in which said
land is located.
§ 42.00 GREENBELTS.
   A greenbelt or landscaped reservation shall be provided by easements in all
areas of interface between industrial and residential zones.
§ 42.01 SIZE.
   Greenbelts shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide.
§ 42.02 USE.
   Greenbelt easements may be developed for bicycle or pedestrian traffic and
may have benches, trees and shrubs, and such uses must be specifically provided
for in the language of the easement.
§ 42.03 RESTRICTIONS.
   No driveway, parking area, structure, sign or similar item shall be
construed within a greenbelt easement; however, a greenbelt easement may be
fenced.
§ 42.04 WAIVER AND VACATING.
   Greenbelts may be waived by the Board of Adjustment when a street or other
dedicated way provides an equivalent function. Where land previously zoned
residential is changed to industrial zoning, thereby negating an established
greenbelt, the easement shall be vacated by the Council.
§ 43.00 FEES AND PENALTIES.
§ 43.01 FEES.
   Any application for an amendment to the zoning district classification, to
the text regulations or a request for a PUD, a use on review, a variance or
appeal filed by or on behalf of the owner of the property affected, shall be
accompanied by a fee as established, from time to time, by resolution of City
Council.
§ 43.02 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm or corporation, agent, employee or contractor of such who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit
not less than $1 nor more than $100 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 43A.00 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT LAND USES.
§ 43A.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the enactment of this chapter is to protect the health,
welfare and property values from secondary affects of the location of various
adult entertainment land uses within the city limits. The city has reviewed
various ordinances, communicated with other communities and reviewed various
studies relating to such location of adult entertainment land uses, and has
determined that the protection sought is best served by enacting provisions of
regulation as are set forth subsequent hereto.
§ 43A.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
43A.00 through
43A.05 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOK STORE. A retail store for the sale, rental or exchange of books,
magazines or video cassettes, distinguished or characterized by primary
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specific sexual
activities” or “specific anatomical areas”, as defined below. ADULT BOOK STORES
do not include business which sell, rent or exchange video cassettes as a
sidelight or adjunct to sales or rental of video cassettes not relating to
“specific sexual activities” or “specific anatomical areas”.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. Building in which:
      (1)   Entertainers routinely remove all or portions of their clothing as
a part of their performance, regardless of whether the business has a license
to sell alcohol; or
      (2)   Entertainers allow patrons to observe specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas involving such entertainers.
   ADULT MOVIE THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting motion picture
films, video cassettes, cable television or any other visual media,
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to “specific sexual activities” or “specific anatomical areas”, as
defined below, for observation by persons therein. For purposes of this
section, the size and description of the viewing room shall not affect
characterization of the building as a theater; however, nothing in this section
shall be deemed to regulate the viewing habits of persons in the privacy of
their homes.
   SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Shall include displays of the following:
      (1)   Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including
genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital, whether between human beings or
a human being and an animal;
      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed;
      (3)   Masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, including any
explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ;
      (4)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with unclothed pubic
areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of a female,
whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans
and animals in the act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; and
      (5)   An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are
employed to overcome the will of or achieve the consent of a person to an act
of sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence or drugs are
shown.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Shall include the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genital, pubic
region, buttocks and female breast below the point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   USED. Describes a continuing course of conduct exhibiting “specific sexual
activities” and “specified anatomical areas” in a manner that appeals to the
prurient interest.
§ 43A.03 ENTERTAINER.
   For the purpose of this section, an entertainer shall be a person who either
works as an employee of the business, is an agent of the business or an
independent contractor who has been hired or is allowed by the business to
perform for the apparent pleasure or gratification of the patron.
§ 43A.04 FACILITIES.
   Examples of adult entertainment facilities would include, but not be limited
to, gentlemen’s clubs, strip bars, “full-nudity” juice bars and nude modeling
clubs.
§ 43A.05 LOCATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Adult movie theaters, adult book stores and adult entertainment
facilities are prohibited within 1,000 feet from the following specified zones:
from residential zones “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3” and residential “PUD” or “PR”
developments.
      (2)   Adult movie theaters, adult book stores and adult entertainment
facilities are prohibited within 1,000 feet from the following specified uses:
         (a)   From any public or private school;
         (b)   From any church, religious facility or institution or community
center;
         (c)   From any public park; and
         (d)   From any public library.
      (3)   The distance provided in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall be
measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings,
from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to
be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use
district boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be separated.
   (B)   Adult movie theaters, adult book stores and adult entertainment
facilities are prohibited within 1,000 feet from the intersection of the
centerlines of E. LeClaire Road and US61.
   (C)   No adult movie theater, adult book store or adult entertainment
facility shall be located closer than 300 feet to any other adult movie
theater, adult book store or adult entertainment facility.
   (D)   Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize or permit
the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use
that violates any other provisions of law.
§ 44.00 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
§ 44.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow safe, effective, and efficient use
of solar energy conversion systems, and to establish permitted uses for them
within the City.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 44.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOLAR ACCESS. Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device, array of devices, or structural design
feature, the purpose of which is to provide for generation of electricity from
sunlight, or the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating or cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or water heating.
Installation types are:
      (1)   BUILDING-INTEGRATED. An integral part of a principal or accessory
building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to,
photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials,
windows, skylights, and awnings.
      (2)   GROUND-MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on a rack or pole that
rests on or is attached to the ground and not a roof or exterior wall of a
building. Ground-mount systems can be either accessory or principal uses.
      (3)   PARALLEL ROOF-MOUNT. A roof-mount solar energy system in which the
solar panels are installed parallel to the roof underneath and no more than 12
inches from the surface of the roof. A parallel roof-mount system must not
extend beyond the roof surface underneath it.
      (4)   ROOF-MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on a rack that is
fastened to or ballasted on a building roof. Roof-mount systems can be either
accessory or principal uses.
      (5)   WALL-MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on the side of a
principal or accessory building usually, but not always, for the purpose of
providing direct supplemental space heating by heating and recirculating
conditioned building air.
   SOLAR FARM. A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity by
means of photovoltaics (PV) for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of
generated electricity. A solar farm is the principal land use for the parcel on
which it is located.
   SOLAR GARDEN. A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array that provides
retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple
households or businesses residing or located off-site from the location of the
solar energy system. A community solar system/solar garden is a principal use.
   SOLAR RESOURCE. A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building
that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object for a minimum of
four hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Standard Time on all
days of the year.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 44.03 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE.
   Solar energy systems shall be allowed as an accessory use in all zoning
districts where structures of any sort are allowed, subject to certain
requirements as set forth below.
   (A)   Height. Solar energy systems must meet the following height
requirements for accessory use:
      (1)   Building or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height of a structure in any zoning district.
      (2)   Ground or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 12
feet in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
   (B)   Set-back. Solar energy systems must meet the accessory structure
setback requirements for the zoning district and primary land use associated
with the lot on which the system is located and shall only be in rear yards.
      (1)   Roof or building-mount solar energy systems. In addition to the
building setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted
solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the
building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the collector and
mounting system has been explicitly engineered to safely extend beyond the
edge, and setback standards are not violated. Exterior piping for solar hot
water systems shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on a back yard exposure. Solar collectors mounted on the sides of buildings and
serving as awnings are considered to be building-integrated systems and are
regulated as awnings.
      (2)   Ground-mount solar energy systems. Ground-mounted solar energy
systems may not extend into the side yard or rear setback when oriented at
minimum design tilt.
   (C)   Location and visibility.
      (1)   Building-integrated and wall-mount solar energy systems. Building-
integrated and wall-mount solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of
whether the system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided the
building component in which the system is integrated or mounted meets all
required setback, land use, and performance standards for the district in which
the building is located. The color of the solar collectors is not required to
be consistent with other building materials.
      (2)   Roof-mount solar energy systems. Roof-mount solar energy systems
shall not be restricted for aesthetic reasons if the system is not visible from
the closest edge of any public right-of-way other than an alley. Roof-mounted
systems that are visible from the nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-
way shall not have the highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on
which the system is mounted and shall be no higher than 12 inches above the
roof. The color of the solar collectors is not required to be consistent with
other roofing materials.
      (3)   Ground-mount solar energy systems. Except as indicated in other
parts of this chapter, ground-mount solar energy systems shall be treated as an
accessory structure and shall be subject to the requirements of an accessory
structure. A ground-mount solar energy system shall not be located in the front
yard or side yard of a lot. The city may require screening where it determines
there is a clear community interest in maintaining a viewshed.
      (4)   Reflectors. No solar energy system using an external reflector to
enhance solar production shall be installed within the city limits.
      (5)   Solar energy systems shall have non-reflective and neutral color
with no advertising or logos on system panels or supporting structure other
than a small identification of the manufacturer.
   (D)   Coverage. Roof or building-mount solar energy systems shall provide
roof access paths shall be provided as required in the International Fire Code
or the International Residential Code as they apply to the structure. Ground-
mount systems shall be exempt from impervious surface calculations if the soil
under the collector is maintained in vegetation and is not compacted.
Foundations, gravel, and compacted soils are considered impervious.
   (E)   Historic buildings. Solar energy systems on historically designated
buildings shall be installed only as allowed by the U.S. Department of
Interior.
   (F)   Site plan approvals and permits.
      (1)   Building permit and plan approval required. All solar energy
systems require a building permit from the city and shall provide a site plan
for review.
      (2)   Site plans shall be accompanied by a scale horizontal and vertical
(elevation) drawing. The drawings must show the location of the system on the
building or on the property for a ground-mounted system, including property
lines, and the property setbacks. In addition, they shall indicate the height
of the installation at maximum tilt and the ground footprint at minimum tilt,
along with a description of the ground cover to be used under the system.
      (3)   Site plans that meet the design requirements of this chapter shall
be granted administrative approval by the Zoning Officer and shall not require
Planning and Zoning Commission review. Administrative approval does not
indicate compliance with the Building Code or Electric Code.
   (G)   Approved solar components. Electric solar energy system components
must have a UL or equivalent listing and solar hot water systems must have an
SRCC rating.
   (H)   Compliance with Building Code. All solar energy systems shall be
consistent with the State Building Code, and solar thermal systems shall comply
with HVAC-related requirements of the Energy Code.
   (I)   Compliance with State Electric Code. All photovoltaic systems shall
comply with the State Electric Code.
   (J)   Compliance with State Plumbing Code. Solar hot water systems shall
comply with applicable State Plumbing Code requirements.
   (K)   Utility notification. All solar energy systems that connect with an
electric circuit serviced by the local electric utility (grid-tied systems)
shall comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility.
Systems not so connected (off-grid systems) are exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 44.04 PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   Solar garden. The city permits the development of community solar
gardens, subject to the following standards and requirements:
      (1)   Rooftop solar gardens. Subject to the requirements of this chapter,
rooftop solar gardens are a permitted use in all districts.
      (2)   Ground-mount solar gardens. Ground-mount community solar energy
systems must be less than two acres in total size and are a permitted use in
all districts. The city may require screening where it determines there is a
clear community interest in maintaining a viewshed.
      (3)   Interconnection. An interconnection agreement must be in place with
the local electric utility before work commences on installation of a solar
garden.
      (4)   Dimensional standards. All structures must comply with set-back,
height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system is
located.
      (5)   Site security. A solar garden located wholly or partly within the
city limits must be surrounded by a fence that meets National Electric Code
(NEC) guidelines. The city encourages the project operator or owner to invest
in fencing that facilitates movement of pollinators. All gates must always be
locked unless personnel are on site. All components must be located at least
four feet from the fence.
      (6)   Other standards. Ground-mount systems must comply with all required
standards for structures in the district in which the system is located.
      (7)   Ground cover. The city encourages (but does not require) owners of
groundmount solar gardens to plant the land underneath the solar collectors in
pollinator friendly wildflowers. Such plantings must be maintained in such a
way that they do not go to weeds or become predominately grass but afford
passers-by a predominantly flower view during blooming season. Such plantings
shall be considered flower beds and shall be exempt from the mowing
requirements of Title B, Chapter 9. If wildflowers are not planted, the land
underneath the collectors must be neatly maintained in compliance with Title B,
Chapter 9 of the Code of Ordinances.
      (8)   Building permit and site plan review. Development of a solar garden
inside the city limits requires the issuance of a building permit and site plan
review. Principal use solar arrays must be designed by an Iowa licensed design
professional.
      (9)   Decommissioning. The city requires that, as part of the
construction permit application, a decommissioning plan shall be submitted to
ensure that the facilities are properly removed after their useful life.
Decommissioning of the solar garden must occur in the event it (or a majority
part of it) is not in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include
provisions for removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of the
soil and vegetation, and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available
to fully decommission the site. Disposal of the solar panels, racks, and
foundations must meet state requirements applicable at the time of
decommissioning. The city shall require the posting of a bond, letter of
credit, or the establishment of an escrow account to ensure proper
decommissioning.
   (B)   Solar farm. The city permits the development of solar farms, subject
to the following standards and requirements:
      (1)   Development. A solar farm may be developed only on land zoned I-
1 Light Industrial Districts at the time of the development.
      (2)   Building permit. Development of a solar farm inside the city limits
requires the issuance of a building permit.
      (3)   Stormwater and NPDES. If the city has stormwater management,
erosion, or sediment control provisions, or NPDES permit requirements at the
time of the development, solar farms shall be subject to those requirements.
      (4)   Ground cover and buffer areas. Ground around and under solar arrays
and in project buffer areas shall be planted and maintained in perennial
vegetated ground cover, and meet the following standards:
         (a)   Topsoil shall not be removed during development unless it is
part of a remediation effort.
         (b)   Soils shall be planted and maintained in perennial vegetation to
prevent erosion, manage run off, and build soil. Seeds may include a mix of
grasses and wildflowers, but shall be predominantly wildflowers, ideally native
to the region that will result in a short stature prairie with a diversity of
forbs or flowering plants that bloom throughout the growing season. Blooming
shrubs may be used in buffer areas as appropriate for visual screening. Seed
mixes and maintenance practices should be consistent with recommendations made
by qualified natural resource professionals such as those from the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, Scott County Soil and Water Conservation
Service, or the Natural Resource Conservation Service. Plant material must not
have been treated with systemic insecticides, particularly neonicotinoids. Such
plantings must be maintained in such a way that they do not go to weeds or
become predominantly grass but afford passers-by a predominantly flower view
during blooming season. Such plantings shall be considered flower beds and
shall be exempt from the mowing requirements of Title B, Chapter 9. If
wildflowers are not planted, the land underneath the collectors must be neatly
maintained in compliance with Title B, Chapter 9.
         (c)   The city may require screening where it determines there is a
clear community interest in maintaining a viewshed.
      (5)   Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar panels’ racking, and support is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      (6)   Other standards and codes. All solar farms shall be in compliance
with all applicable local, state, and federal regulatory codes, including the
State Building Code, as amended; and the National Electric Code, as amended.
      (7)   Power and communication lines. Power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the city in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or
distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the city’s
consulting engineer.
      (8)   Site security. A solar farm located wholly or partly within the
city limits must be surrounded by a fence that meets National Electric Code
(NEC) guidelines. The city encourages the project operator or owner to invest
in fencing that facilitates movement of pollinators. All gates must always be
locked unless personnel are on site. All components must be located at least
four feet from the fence.
      (9)   Building permit. Development of a solar farm inside the city limits
requires the issuance of a building permit.
      (10)   Site plan required. A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, rights-of-way, easements, zoning districts,
service roads, floodplains, wetlands and other protected natural resources,
topography, electric equipment, and all other characteristics requested by the
city. The site plan shall be reviewed by city staff and the City Engineer and
approved by resolution by City Council.
      (11)   Aviation protection. For solar farms located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the
Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federally Obligated
Airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
      (12)   Agricultural protection. Solar farms must comply with site
assessment or soil identification standards that are intended to protect
agricultural soils.
      (13)   Decommissioning. A decommissioning plan shall be required to
ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life.
Decommissioning of the installation must occur if a majority of the solar
panels are not in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include
provisions for removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil
and vegetation, and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to
fully decommission the site. Disposal of the solar panels, racks, and
foundations must meet state requirements applicable at the time of
decommissioning. The city shall require the posting of a bond, letter of
credit, or the establishment of an escrow account to ensure proper
decommissioning.
      (14)   Once a solar farm enters commercial operation the City Council may
require the applicant/owner, or current owner of the facility, to make annual
contributions to the city as set forth in a contract provided by the city. This
contribution would be based upon the maximum rated AC production capacity
multiplied by the rate of $2,500 per MW per year. This rate can be adjusted by
resolution by the City Council. Payment would be due by March 31 each year for
the production the previous calendar year and will be pro-rated for the number
of days in operation during the previous calendar year. For clarity, if the
solar farm produces power for 100 days in a 365-day calendar year, the annual
contribution will be 100/365 times $2,500 dollars per MW.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 3: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Statutory authority, findings of fact and purpose
   
2.01   Power to enact regulations
   
2.02   Findings of fact
   
2.03   Statement of purpose
   
3.00   General provisions
   
3.01   Lands to which ordinance applies
   
3.02   Establishment of official floodplain zoning map
   
3.03   Rules for interpretation of Floodplain (Overlay) District
   
3.04   Compliance
   
3.05   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
3.06   Interpretation
   
3.07   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
3.08   Severability
   
4.00   Administration
   
4.01   Appointment, duties and responsibilities of local official
   
4.02   Floodplain development permit
   
5.00   Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
   
6.00   Standards for Floodplain (Overlay) District
   
6.01   Permitted uses
   
6.02   Performance standards
   
7.00   Appointment and duties of Board of Adjustment
   
7.01   Appointment and duties of Board of Adjustment
   
7.02   Appeals
   
7.03   Variance
   
7.04   Hearings and decisions of the Board of Adjustment
   
7.05   Appeals to the court
   
8.00   Nonconforming uses
   
8.01   Exceptions
   
8.02   Variance as conforming use
   
9.00   Penalties for violation
   
10.00   Amendments
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
§ 1.01.   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of the
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
§ 1.02.   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the 100-YEAR FLOOD.)
§ 1.03.   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation flood waters would reach at
a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
§ 1.04.   BASEMENT. Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see LOWEST FLOOR.
§ 1.05.   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. DEVELOPMENT does not include “minor projects” or
“routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities”, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing and similar practices that
do not involve filling or grading.
§ 1.06.   ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR. The floor of the lowest enclosed
area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of §
6.02(B)(4) of this chapter;
      (2)   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled and the
like) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access,
parking or storage;
      (3)   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      (4)   The enclosed area is not a “basement”, as defined in this section.
§ 1.07.   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
§ 1.08.   EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
§ 1.09.   EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
§ 1.10.   FACTORY-BUILT HOME. Any structure, designed for residential use which
is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, FACTORY-BUILT HOMES include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes; and also include
“recreational vehicles” which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
§ 1.11.   FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
§ 1.12.   FIVE HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD. A flood, the magnitude of which has a
0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
§ 1.13.   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
§ 1.14.   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map prepared as part of
(but published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both
the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
§ 1.15.   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s flood insurance rate map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
§ 1.16.   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as
a result of a flood.
§ 1.17.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. An overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
§ 1.18.   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
§ 1.19.   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
FLOODWAY area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot.
§ 1.20.   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the special flood hazard area
outside the floodway.
§ 1.21.   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
§ 1.22.   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
         (a)   An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
§ 1.23.   LOWEST FLOOR. The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement, except when the criteria listed in the definition of
enclosed area below LOWEST FLOOR are met.
§ 1.24.   MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
§ 1.25.   MINOR PROJECTS. Small development activities (except for filling,
grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.
§ 1.26.   NEW CONSTRUCTION (NEW BUILDINGS, FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARKS). Those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted
by the community.
§ 1.27.   NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
§ 1.28.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
§ 1.29.   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES.
      (1)   Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable
condition that do not trigger a building permit; provided they are not
associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged
structure.
      (2)   Such repairs include:
         (a)   Normal maintenance of structures, such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding;
         (b)   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
         (c)   Basement sealing;
         (d)   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
         (e)   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
§ 1.30.   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land within a community subject
to the “base flood”. This land is identified on the community’s flood insurance
rate map as Zone A, Al-30, AE, AH, AO, AR and/or A99.
§ 1.31.   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued; provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
§ 1.32.   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and/or
other similar uses.
§ 1.33.   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the
estimated cost of repair. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the
estimated cost of repair.
§ 1.34.   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      (1)   (a)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either:
            1.   Before the “start of construction” of the improvement; or
            2.   If the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
         (b)   The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of an
“historic structure”; provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as an “historic structure”.
      (2)   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25% or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the first
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added to
any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25%.
§ 1.35.   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulations.
§ 1.36.   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 2.00 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
§ 2.01 POWER TO ENACT REGULATIONS.
   The legislature of the state has, in Iowa Code Chapter 414, as amended,
delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure safety from
flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 2.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community.
   (B)   These flood losses, hazards and related adverse effects are caused by:
      (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
      (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
   (C)   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 2.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges and property of the city and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing those flood losses described in §
2.02(B) of this chapter with provisions designed to:
   (A)   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially;
   (B)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
   (C)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement;
   (D)   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard; and
   (E)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 3.01 LANDS TO WHICH ORDINANCE APPLIES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the city which are located within the boundaries of the
Floodplain (Overlay) District as established in §
5.00 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the county and incorporated
areas and the city, panels 19163C0200G, 0215G, 0220G, 0335G, dated March 23,
2021, and panels 19163C0335H, 0355H, 0360H, dated April 11, 2024, which were
prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for the county, is (are) hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be the official floodplain zoning map.
   (B)   The county flood insurance study is hereby adopted by reference and is
made a part of this chapter for the purpose of administering floodplain
management regulations.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 2-5-2024)
§ 3.03 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
   (A)   The boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District areas shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official flood insurance rate map. When
an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.04 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to
uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.05 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.06 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.07 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 3.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 4.00 ADMINISTRATION.
§ 4.01 APPOINTMENT, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied;
      (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental
agencies, including approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for floodplain construction;
      (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
         (a)   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures; or
         (b)   The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures
have been floodproofed.
      (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
      (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter;
      (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator;
      (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries;
      (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment
of potential conflict;
      (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s flood insurance rate maps
when the following apply.
         (a)   1.   Development placed within the floodway results in any of
the following:
               a.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
               b.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
            2.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH and Al-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            3.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
         (b)   Within six months of the completion of the development, the
applicant shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for
a letter of map revision.
      (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter; and
      (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 4.02 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. A floodplain development permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any human-
made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made;
      (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done;
      (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions;
      (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (5)   Elevation of the base flood;
      (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed;
      (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements; and
      (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Action on permit application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
   (D)   Construction and use to be as provided in application and plans.
Floodplain development permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the state, that the finished fill, structure
floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
use or occupancy of any structure.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 5.00 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
   The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are divided
into the following districts.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 5.01 FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
   Those areas identified as Zone A on the official floodplain zoning map. The
boundaries shall be as shown on the official floodplain zoning map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 6.00 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
§ 6.01 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All development within the Floodplain District shall be permitted to
the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of
the Floodplain District.
   (B)   (1)   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine:
         (a)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
         (b)   The base flood elevation.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the
determination.
   (C)   Review by the State Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
      (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less than
two square miles; and
      (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel modification
that constitutes a channel change as specified in I.A.C. § 567-71.2(2).
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 6.02 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   All development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and meet the following applicable performance standards. Where base
flood elevations and floodway data have not been provided in the flood
insurance study, the State Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted
to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make
such determination.
   (B)   (1)   Development requirements. All development shall:
         (a)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement;
         (b)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
         (c)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   Residential structures.
         (a)   All new or substantially improved residential structures shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above
the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 feet above the base flood elevation
and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any
structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers
subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment) may be allowed
where existing topography, street grades or other factors preclude elevating by
fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure
as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.
         (b)   All new residential structures located in areas that would
become isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with a
means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base
flood. However, this criterion shall not apply where the Administrator
determines there is sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life
and property. When estimating flood warning time, consideration shall be given
to the criteria listed in I.A.C. § 567-75.2(3).
      (3)   Non-residential structures. All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base flood
elevation, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
      (4)   All new and substantially improved structures.
         (a)   1.   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria.
               a.   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls on opposite sides of the foundation subject to approval by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.)
               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters.
            2.   Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access and low damage potential storage. Where the distance between
the floor and ceiling of the fully enclosed area below the “lowest floor” is
five feet or more, the applicant shall be required to sign and record with the
County Recorder a non-conversion agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area
remains compliant with the criteria outlined in this division (B)(4).
         (b)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         (c)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating,
air conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork) and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed) to a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (d)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with plumbing, gas lines, water/gas meters and other similar service utilities
either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed) to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation or
designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a level.
      (5)   Factory-built homes.
         (a)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (b)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Anchorage
systems may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
      (6)   Utility and sanitary systems.
         (a)   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located
or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
         (b)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment
facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (c)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (d)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      (7)   Storage of explosives. Storage of materials and equipment that are
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited
unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Other
material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
         (a)   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or
         (b)   Be readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.
      (8)   Flood control structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls and the like shall provide, at a minimum, protection from
the base flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall
provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural
Resources shall approve structural flood control works.
      (9)   Watercourse alterations or relocations. Watercourse alterations or
relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
must approve such alterations or relocations.
      (10)   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
      (11)   Accessory structures to residential uses. Detached garages, sheds
and similar structures that are incidental to a residential use shall comply
with the elevation requirements as outlined in §
6.02(B)(3) of this chapter.
      (12)   Recreational vehicles.
         (a)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of §
6.02(B)(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
            1.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days.
            2.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         (b)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements
of §
6.02(B)(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
      (13)   Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in
the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering.
      (14)   Maximum damage potential development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2% annual chance
flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation, is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2% chance flood elevation
data has not been provided in the flood insurance study, the State Department
of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant
will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make such determinations.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021; Ord. 2024-01, passed 2-5-2024)
§ 7.00 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 7.01 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall hear and decide (i)
appeals and (ii) requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and
shall take any other action which is required of the Board.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 7.02 APPEALS.
   Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall
be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the official from whom the
appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The
official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 7.03 VARIANCE.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment may authorize, upon request, in specific
cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship.
   (B)   Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      (1)   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (3)   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
      (4)   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 7.04 HEARINGS AND DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment an appeal or a
request for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well
as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board
may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is
reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or
evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources.
   (B)   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in division (B)(2) below.
      (2)   Factors upon which the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be
based. In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others;
         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the city;
         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location;
         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site;
         (l)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges; and
         (m)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
      (2)   Conditions attached to variances.
         (a)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of
Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter.
         (b)   Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
            2.   Limitation of periods of use and operation;
            3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions;
            4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees and other protective measures; provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter; and
            5.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood.
         (c)   The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit
a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 7.05 APPEALS TO THE COURT.
   (A)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality.
   (B)   Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the
filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 8.00 NONCONFORMING USES.
§ 8.01 EXCEPTIONS.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
   (B)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   (C)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the
cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places; provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 8.02 VARIANCE AS CONFORMING USE.
   Except as provided in §
8.01(B) of this chapter, any use which has been permitted as a variance shall
be considered a conforming use.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 9.00 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained prevent the
city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
violation.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 10.00 AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may, from time to
time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-15-2021)
CHAPTER 4: CAMPGROUNDS
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Location of campgrounds
   
3.01   Permit required
   
3.02   Living in recreational vehicle outside of campground
   
4.00   License and permit fees and extensions
   
4.01   Annual license fee and requirements
   
4.02   Application for license to operate a campground
   
5.00   General standards
   
5.01   Water and sanitation standards
   
6.00   Where applicable
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate campgrounds and travel trailer
parks in the city and provide for the minimum standard specification for the
construction, installation and operation of said parks.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPGROUND. Any lot, site, field or tract of land upon which two or more
recreational vehicles or tents or tent trailers are harbored either free of
charge or for revenue purposes.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses.
§ 3.00 LOCATION OF CAMPGROUNDS.
§ 3.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter establish, maintain,
conduct or otherwise operate within the corporate limits of the city any
campground, unless such person shall first obtain a special permit for the use
of the described area as provided by the
Title D, Chapter 2 and obtain a license therefor, as provided herein.
§ 3.02 LIVING IN RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OUTSIDE OF CAMPGROUND.
   A recreational vehicle may not be used for human occupancy on any premises
outside of a campground excepting a travel trailer used for construction
purposes at a job location with the permission of the Director of Public Works.
§ 4.00 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES AND EXTENSIONS.
§ 4.01 ANNUAL LICENSE FEE AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The annual license fee for each campground for each year, or part of a
year, shall be the sum of $50, and shall be due and payable by the licensee on
or before the first day of January of each year to the City Clerk and thereupon
the owner shall exhibit to the Clerk the statement of the County Treasurer
showing payment of all fees and charges as are required by the park operator by
Iowa Code Chapter 135D shall have been paid.
   (B)   The campground operator shall be required to report to the building
inspector of the city at the time of the installation to inspect the various
facilities of the campground, and to issue to the operator of said campground a
notice showing compliance with the regulations of the city. The charge for the
inspections shall be borne by the campground operator at the rate of $15 per
inspection. At the yearly anniversary of the issuance of the initial notice, a
renewal and new inspection shall be required at the same rate.
§ 4.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO OPERATE A CAMPGROUND.
   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring to operate or expand a campground shall
first file application for a campground license with the City Zoning Officer.
The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and land owner and
shall be accompanied by an initial license fee payment as provided in §
4.01 of this chapter. This initial license fee shall be for the period from the
date of first issue of said license to the third day of December next following
whereupon the provision for the annual license fee shall apply.
      (2)   The application shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   Street address location or legal description of the site, lot or
tract of land upon which the campground is to be located;
         (c)   Duplicate sets of the plat of the campground, and plans and
specifications of all buildings and other improvements shall have been filed
with the State Department of Health;
         (d)   Such further information as may be required by the Zoning
Officer and the City Fire Chief to determine if the proposed campground will
comply with all laws relating to the public health and safety; and
         (e)   Sufficient information to show complete compliance by the park
owner of Iowa Code Chapter 135D and all rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health.
   (B)   The Zoning Officer shall forthwith refer said application to the City
Fire Chief and Chief of Police. If the applicant is found to be of good
character, the Chief of Police shall so endorse said application. If the
proposed campground shall be found to comply with all laws related to the
public health and safety, the health officer and the City Fire Chief shall so
endorse said application which shall then be returned to the City Council for
consideration and action thereon.
§ 5.00 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   A maximum of 15 recreational vehicles or tents shall be permitted on
any acre of ground including streets within a campground.
   (B)   The site, lot or tract of land upon which the park is located shall be
well drained by being graded to ensure adequate and proper drainage and freedom
from pools of standing water.
   (C)   The entrance to the park from a public highway or street shall have
the approval of the Director of Public Works with reference to location, width,
grade and drainage.
   (D)   Individual camp sites shall be developed and no more than one
recreational vehicle or tent shall occupy a site at the same time.
   (E)   Each site shall be specifically developed appropriate to its use with
easy access for trailers or motor homes, adequate parking, separate underground
water and electric service and shall be clearly marked with an identifying
number.
   (F)   The owner shall provide blanket overhead and underground easements for
the installation of utilities as requested.
   (G)   All construction, including electric and plumbing work, shall be done
to standards of national, state and local codes as each applies and shall meet
the approval of the appropriate inspecting official of the city.
   (H)   Provisions shall be made for emptying holding tanks.
   (I)   All fires shall be made in stoves or other equipment provided for that
purpose. Open unattended fires shall not be permitted.
   (J)   Playground equipment suitable for small children shall be provided by
the park operator.
   (K)   The park operator shall assume all responsibility for the necessary
insect and rodent control on the premises of the park.
   (L)   The park operator shall be required to keep an accurate and complete
record of the overnight guests harbored in his or her park. Said records shall
include the guest’s name, address, auto license number and the year and make of
car. Also date of arrival and departure. This record shall be shown upon
request to any duly authorized representative of any law enforcement agency or
health officer.
   (M)   No guest shall stay in a travel trailer longer than seven days,
exceptions shall be made for sickness within the party or equipment breakdown
of the guest’s auto or trailer in which case another week will be allowed.
   (N)   The park shall be lighted at night with not less than 200 watt lamps
at intervals of 100 feet, or equivalent lighting approved by the electrical
inspector. Lamps must be located at least 15 feet above the ground.
§ 5.01 WATER AND SANITATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   An adequate supply of safe, potable water for drinking and domestic
services shall be provided for each site. An adequate supply of hot water shall
be provided, at all times, in the service buildings for bathing, washing,
cleaning and laundry facilities.
   (B)   Each and every rule and regulation as has been or shall be promulgated
by the State Department of Health and all city regulations now in effect or
which may hereafter be enacted affecting public health shall be complied with.
Disposal for sewage from tanks and self-contained aircraft type units shall be
maintained by the park operator. Said unit shall be conveniently located for
units entering and/or leaving the park. These facilities shall be inspected by
the Director of Public Works at least once a year. The campground shall be
serviced by the public sewer system of the city or by private disposal system
which shall have the approval of the Director of Public Works, the Health
Officer and the State Department of Health. All sewage disposal apparatus,
including appurtenances thereto, shall be provided, maintained and operated in
such a manner as will not create a nuisance or health hazard. All plumbing
provided in the campground shall comply with state laws and local ordinances
governing plumbing in the city.
   (C)   An adequate system of refuse, garbage collection and necessary
containers therefor shall be provided by the campground operator and full use
shall be made of these services available for waste and garbage disposal. It
shall be the responsibility of the campground operator to provide such an
adequate service as may be required by the city.
§ 6.00 WHERE APPLICABLE.
   All requirements with respect to expansion or addition to existing parks
shall be with respect to said additions or expansion, and shall not require
anything with respect to the existing parks, except as specifically provided in
this chapter, which would not have been required in the absence of such
addition or expansion.
CHAPTER 5: MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILER COURTS
Section
   
1.00   Definitions
   
2.00   Zoning requirements
   
3.00   Exceptions to zoning requirements
   
4.00   Planned unit development
   
5.00   Subdivision requirements
   
6.00   Exceptions to subdivision requirements
   
7.00   Requirements of mobile home parks
   
8.00   Licenses and permits
   
9.00   Pre-existing mobile home parks
   
10.00   Travel trailers
   
11.00   Responsibilities of the park owner
§ 1.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMON FACILITIES. Includes restrooms, recreational facilities, laundry
facilities, snack bar, playgrounds, storm shelters and the like, operated by
the park for use of all permanent and/or temporary residents of the park.   
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle without motive power or so manufactured or
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets
and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the
vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but
shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor
vehicle in the state. A MOBILE HOME is factory-built housing built on a
chassis. A MOBILE HOME shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other
form of recreational vehicle. A MOBILE HOME shall be construed to remain a
MOBILE HOME, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not
wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and
regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. However, certain MOBILE
HOMES may be classified as “manufactured homes”. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as permitting a MOBILE HOME in other than an approved mobile home
park, unless such MOBILE HOME is classified as a manufactured home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one
or more mobile homes.
   MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE. A written license by and upon the authority of the
City Council permitting a mobile home park or a travel trailer park as referred
to herein to operate under the provisions of this chapter. The license
described herein shall be in addition to any license required by the state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having
a body width not to exceed eight feet.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two or
more travel trailers or similar vehicles designed for recreational purposes are
harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes.
   UTILITY. The Eldridge Municipal Electric and Water Utility and/or its Board
of Trustees, or any other franchised utility providing service in the city.
§ 2.00 ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of the “Zoning Chapter of the City of Eldridge, Iowa” apply
to any and all mobile home parks or parts of such parks, except as may be
specifically provided in §
3.00 of this chapter.
§ 3.00 EXCEPTIONS TO ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   Mobile home parks are provided for in the R-MH “Mobile Home Park Residence
District”. Other than cited exceptions below, the provisions of that zoning
district shall apply. The following shall apply to each lot on which a mobile
home is placed.
   (A)   Front yard depth shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   (B)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided on each
lot, each space being at least ten feet in width and 20 feet in depth. The
total width of the parking space area shall not be greater than 31 feet. The
parking space may begin at the lot line of the street and may extend up to but
not beyond the limit of the front yard depth.
Title D, Chapter 2, § 35.03(H) requiring an all weather surface shall apply.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically waived or modified by action of the
Board of Adjustment, two wheel ramps constructed of six-inch thick portland
cement concrete shall be provided for each lot. Location and dimensions shall
be as shown in figure one attached to this chapter. Each ramp shall be at least
two feet in width by 54 feet in length.
   (D)   Rear yard depth shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   (E)   All lots shall be so designed that mobile homes are oriented to the
right side of the lot when the mobile home is viewed from a point in front of
the hitch of the mobile home.
   (F)   Side yard requirements shall be based on the specified location of
wheel ramps. Each lot shall be developed either for mobile homes having a width
of 14 feet or less or for mobile homes having a width greater than 14 feet. In
no case shall the right side yard be less than ten feet and the sum of the two
side yards shall not be less then 25 feet.
   (G)   A sidewalk shall be provided from the parking spaces to the front door
for each mobile home. Sidewalks shall be of portland cement concrete
construction, a minimum of four inches thick.
   (H)   No porch, canopy or other addition shall be built onto any mobile
home. Decks may be constructed next to a mobile home providing they are not
attached to the mobile home, comply with all required setbacks and are open to
the sky. The deck railing shall not be higher then 48 inches.
   (I)   One additional building suitable for storage as opposed to habitation
may be built on a mobile home lot; provided that such building has a floor area
not more than 100 square feet and provided that such building is located to
align with the rear of a mobile home and is not closer than 12 feet to any
mobile home or other such storage building.
   (J)   Both sides of corner lot adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be
considered front yards and meet the front yard setback requirements.
§ 4.00 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   When a mobile home park is developed as a Planned Unit Development (PUD),
the specific provisions of lotting and orientation of the mobile homes to each
other and to the streets and other public services may be varied to provide an
aesthetically pleasing layout. However, overall density standards shall be
maintained.
§ 5.00 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of the “Subdivision Chapter of the City of Eldridge, Iowa and
Contiguous Area” shall apply except as specifically provided in §
6.00 of this chapter.
§ 6.00 EXCEPTIONS TO SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   Streets required to provide through service shall be located at the
rear of lots in a mobile home park. All other streets shall be developed in
such a manner as to discourage through traffic.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be required on all streets.
   (B)   Blocks. The width of blocks shall be not less than 200 feet.
   (C)   Easements. Easements along rear lot lines shall be as provided in
other chapters. Easements along side lot lines shall be confined to the left
lot line and shall be ten feet in width.
   (D)   Connections. Electric, telephone and gas connection facilities shall
be conveniently located on the right side of the lot line of each mobile home
lot.
   (E)   Parking for other equipment. A parking area suitable for storage of
boats, travel trailers, extra automobiles and other equipment not allowed on
individual lots shall be provided. This area need not be paved but shall be
surrounded by screened fencing or plant materials that will provide year round
screening.
   (F)   Common facilities shall be provided. At least one structure shall be
provided which can function as a storm shelter for park residents during time
of severe weather.
§ 7.00 REQUIREMENTS OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Items noted in this section are related specifically to mobile home parks.
   (A)   Water service. Water service shall be by means of meters for
individual lots constructed in freeze protected pits built to city
specifications.
   (B)   Gas service. Gas service shall be provided by means of natural gas
provided by the franchised gas utility.
   (C)   Connection and freeze protection. The connection and freeze protection
of water, sewer and gas services shall be the responsibility of the mobile home
park and shall be in compliance with established building codes.
   (D)   Skirting. All mobile homes shall be skirted, i.e., shall have the
entire underneath portion of the mobile home enclosed so as to prevent animals
from intruding beneath the home and providing for improved insulation and
improve the appearance of the mobile home. Trailer hitches that cannot be
removed from the mobile home shall be skirted and/or screened from view from
the adjoining roadway.
   (E)   Landscaping. Landscaping of all lots shall consist of sod or suitable
seeding with grass and a minimum of two live trees of not less than six feet in
height as a part of development. Two or more shrubs or other plantings per lot
shall be used to delineate rear lot lines and/or promote a pleasing appearance
to the park as a whole.
   (F)   Fences. Fences are prohibited on lots occupied by mobile homes.
   (G)   Electrical service. Electrical service to each lot shall be a minimum
of 100 amperes and shall be installed underground and as required by the
subdivision ordinance (incorporated in
Title D, Chapter 1).
   (H)   Sanitation. The city’s sanitation ordinances, policies and procedures
apply in mobile home parks. Garbage collection shall be to each mobile home and
be by the contractor contracted by the city to provide collection services to
residential areas unless the City Council approves an alternate collection
plan.
   (I)   Street lights. Street lights shall be provided at all street
intersections and between intersections when the distance between lights
exceeds 300 feet. Standard city street lighting specifications shall apply. The
requirement for street lights may be waived by the City Council if an alternate
plan will provide equivalent or better lighting.
§ 8.00 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Only mobile homes complying with the standards and requirements
prescribed by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Standards and/or ANSI 119.1 shall be permitted in a mobile home park in
the city. That compliance with the aforestated standard shall be determined by
the Building Official; that a certificate issued by the manufacturer of the
mobile home shall be permanently affixed on a readily visible location on the
exterior of the mobile home shall be prima facie evidence of such compliance.
   (B)   A license is required for operation of a mobile home park, said
license to be issued only upon an approved final plat for the mobile home park
or for an addition thereto. On or before April 1 of each year, the owner of the
park shall submit a request to renew said license. Prior to renewal, the park
shall be inspected by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with all
applicable regulation governing the park. Fees for mobile home park licenses
shall be set by City Council resolution.
   (C)   Iowa Code provisions requiring tie downs for mobile homes shall be
effective in the city. These provisions and other state requirements are made a
part of the city’s Building Code and shall be enforced in the same manner as
other Building Code provisions.
   (D)   A building permit is required for each mobile home before a mobile
home may be occupied, such permit based on an inspection by the Building
Official. The fee for a mobile home building permit shall be $50.
   (E)   Inspections shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Sitting on the mobile home lot;
      (2)   Connections to sewer, water, gas and electric services in
compliance with codes and good practices;
      (3)   Compliance with the state, the county and the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and/or ANSI 119.1
requirements; and
      (4)   Adequacy of wiring, plumbing and heating provisions of the mobile
home.
§ 9.00 PRE-EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Any mobile home park established and operating before the effective date of
this code or one which by virtue of annexation shall come under the provisions
of this chapter shall be required to substantially meet the requirements of
this chapter within a period of three years. This shall be accomplished by
means of the owner submitting preliminary and final plats for the site(s)
involved. Licenses shall not be issued after the three-year period without an
approved final plat.
§ 10.00 TRAVEL TRAILERS.
   Specific lots in a mobile home park may be approved as a use on review for
use by travel trailers; provided that the following provisions of this section
are met.
   (A)   A minimum of 1,000 square feet is required for each travel trailer,
exclusive of streets and off-site driveways but including one parking space.
   (B)   Each site shall have 50 ampere electric service and water and sewer
hookups. Each travel trailer lot shall be metered for water and electricity.
   (C)   Travel trailer sites shall be convenient to common facilities.
   (D)   All weather surfacing, as required in
Title D, Chapter 2, § 35.03(H), shall be provided for the portions of each site
used for entrance or egress of the travel trailer and parking for one car. The
pad for the travel trailer shall be not less than 12 feet wide and 30 feet
long.
   (E)   No travel trailer shall occupy a space in any mobile home park in the
city for more than 14 consecutive days nor more than 30 days in any calendar
year.
   (F)   Tents are prohibited.
§ 11.00 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARK OWNER.
   (A)   The owner shall place on file with the City Clerk copies of all
regulations in effect for the mobile home park.
   (B)   Mobile home park regulations shall provide for the health, safety and
well-being of park residents insofar as is possible and shall at a minimum
require that:
      (1)   No trash or unsightly items be allowed on any mobile home lot;
      (2)   Grass be regularly mowed and trees and shrubs be maintained; and
      (3)   The storage of boats, travel trailers and other equipment on mobile
home sites is prohibited.
   (C)   The owner shall enforce all rules in effect. Failure to do so shall be
a violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 6: AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ZONING
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Short title
   
3.00   Conflicting regulations
   
4.00   Definitions
   
5.00   Zones and height limitations
   
5.01   Airport hazard area
   
5.02   Map
   
5.03   Zones defined
   
5.04   Structures in more than one zone
   
5.05   Excepted height limitations
   
5.06   Water towers
   
6.00   Nonconforming uses
   
6.01   Alteration of existing structures not required
   
6.02   Construction or alteration
   
6.03   Markers and lights
   
6.04   Restorations
   
7.00   Applications and permits
   
7.01   Structures
   
7.02   Trees
   
8.00   Enforcement
   
9.00   Variances
   
10.00   Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment
   
10.01   Creation
   
10.02   Membership
   
10.03   Adoption of rules
   
10.04   Votes required
   
11.00   Penalty
   
11.01   Specific actions
   
11.02   Nuisance abatement
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by
Iowa Code Chapter 329, as the same may be amended from time to time. It is
hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives
and property of users of the Davenport Municipal Airport, and property or
occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and
future instrument approach minimums of the Davenport Municipal Airport; and
that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing,
takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the
utility of Davenport Municipal Airport and the public investment therein.
      (2)   Accordingly, it is declared:
         (a)   That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Davenport Municipal Airport;
         (b)   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health,
public safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
         (c)   That the prevention of these obstructions should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.
   (B)   It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation or the marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision
may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interest in land.
§ 2.00 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Airport Height Zoning
Ordinance of Eldridge, Iowa”.
§ 3.00 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   As established by Iowa Code Chapter 329, entitled “Airport Zoning”, as the
same may be amended from time to time, in the event of any conflict between
this chapter and any other regulation applicable to the same area, whether the
conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land
or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern
and prevail.
§ 4.00 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
chapter, have the meanings of this chapter. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive.
§ 4.01.   AIRPORT. The Davenport Municipal Airport, Davenport, Iowa, an area
set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft.
§ 4.02.   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of the Davenport Municipal
Airport’s usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea, which elevation
is established to be 753 feet.
§ 4.03.   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which exceeds
the limiting heights in this chapter.
§ 4.04.   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented by this chapter.
§ 4.05.   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree or use of land existing on the
effective date of this chapter which is inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 4.06.   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
§ 4.07.   PRIMARY SURFACE. An area longitudinally centered on a runway and
extending 200 feet beyond each end of each runway. The width of the primary
surface is 1,000 feet for Runway 15-33 and 500 feet for Runway 3-21. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the nearest point on the runway centerline. The runway shall mean the future
runway(s) as shown in the Davenport Airport Master Plan.
§ 4.08.   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed or installed by humans, including,
but without limitation, mobile objects, buildings, tower, smokestacks and
overhead transmission lines, including the poles or other structures supporting
the same.
§ 4.09.   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
§ 4.10.   ZONE. A portion of the airport hazard area.
§ 5.00 ZONES AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
§ 5.01 AIRPORT HAZARD AREA.
   There is hereby established an airport hazard area composed of the approach,
conical, horizontal and transitional zones, each having specific height
limitations for structures and trees.
§ 5.02 MAP.
   The boundaries of the airport hazard area and its zones are shown on the
Davenport Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map which is made a part of this
chapter. The map and all the notations, references and other information shown
thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the
map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were
all fully set forth or described in this chapter. The map shall be on file with
City Clerk.
§ 5.03 ZONES DEFINED.
   (A)   Horizontal zone. The land lying under a horizontal surface. The
horizontal surface is 147 feet above the established airport elevation and the
perimeter is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center
of each end of the primary surface of Runways 15, 33, 3 and 21 and connecting
the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. No structure or tree shall
exceed 147 feet above the established airport elevation in the horizontal zone,
as depicted on the Davenport Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
   (B)   Conical zone. The land lying under a conical surface. The conical
surface extends outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface
at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. No structure
or tree in the conical zone shall penetrate the conical surface, as depicted on
the Davenport Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
   (C)   Approach zone. The land lying under an approach surface. The approach
surface is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and
extends outward and upward from each end of the primary surface.
      (1)   The inner edge of the approach surface is:
         (a)   Five hundred feet wide for Runways 3 and 21; and
         (b)   One thousand feet wide for Runways 15 and 33.
      (2)   The outer edge of the approach surface is:
         (a)   Three thousand five hundred feet wide for Runways 3, 21 and 33;
and
         (b)   Sixteen thousand feet wide for Runway 15.
      (3)   The approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of:
         (a)   Ten thousand feet at a slope of 34:1 for Runways 3, 21 and 33;
and
         (b)   Ten thousand feet at a slope of 50:1 and then 40,000 feet at a
slope of 40:1 for Runway 15. No structure or tree in the approach zone shall
penetrate the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on the Davenport
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
   (D)   Transitional zone. The land lying under the transitional surface. The
transitional surface extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended, at a slope of 7:1 from the sides
of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces. The
transitional surface begins at the side of and at the same elevation as the
approach surfaces and extends upward and outward to the conical surface at a
slope of 7:1; or, if outside the conical surface, it extends upward and outward
a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at right angles to the runway centerline. No structure or tree in
the transitional zone shall penetrate the transitional surface, as depicted on
the Davenport Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
§ 5.04 STRUCTURES IN MORE THAN ONE ZONE.
   An existing or proposed structure or tree located in more than one of the
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation.
§ 5.05 EXCEPTED HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any tree to a height
up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.
§ 5.06 WATER TOWERS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city
or the City Electric and Water Utility Board from building, owning and
operating a municipal water tower not to exceed a height of 200 feet above
ground level.
§ 6.00 NONCONFORMING USES.
§ 6.01 ALTERATION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES NOT REQUIRED.
   This chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any existing structure or tree, or to interfere
with any existing use not conforming on the effective date of this chapter,
except that no nonconforming use shall be allowed to become a greater airport
hazard than it was on the effective date of this chapter.
§ 6.02 CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the
construction or alteration of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which was authorized by a permit dated prior to the effective date of this
chapter and is diligently prosecuted.
§ 6.03 MARKERS AND LIGHTS.
   The person owning any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
allow the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of markers and lights
at the expense of the City of Davenport to indicate to the operators of
aircraft the presence of airport hazards.
§ 6.04 RESTORATIONS.
   If a nonconforming structure has been torn down, damaged or has physically
deteriorated to the extent of more than 65% of its fair market value, as
determined by the Board of Adjustment at the time of such damage, no permit
shall be issued for its restoration except in conformity to this chapter.
§ 7.00 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
§ 7.01 STRUCTURES.
   (A)   An application for a building permit shall be made and a permit
granted prior to the construction or locating of a new structure or the
alteration of an existing structure within the airport hazard area.
Applications shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired and
have sufficient detail to determine if this chapter will be violated.
   (B)   No permit for a new structure or a change in an existing structure
which would be inconsistent with this chapter shall be granted unless a
variance has been obtained.
§ 7.02 TREES.
   A permit shall not be required for trees. The lack of requirement for a
permit for any trees shall not be construed as permitting or intending to
permit the tree to eventually grow to a height inconsistent with this chapter.
The owner of such a tree shall trim it as often as necessary in order to keep
the tree from being in violation of this chapter and the trimming shall be done
at the owner’s expense.
§ 8.00 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Zoning Administrator to administer and
enforce this chapter and to cooperate with the officials of neighboring
municipalities in the review of any application for a variance submitted to the
Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment. Applications for permits required by this
chapter shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by a written
decision.
§ 9.00 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or to permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use the property in violation
of this chapter, and having been aggrieved or affected by any written decision
of the City Zoning Administrator, may apply to the Airport Zoning Board of
Adjustment for a variance in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 329, as the same
may be amended from time to time. Applying for a variance shall be done by
filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The notice of appeal
shall be filed with the City Zoning Administrator within 30 calendar days after
receipt of the written decision. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City
Zoning Administrator shall immediately transmit to the Chairperson of the
Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. The Chairperson shall then set a
meeting date for the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment. The meeting date shall
be within 45 calendar days of the date of the notice of appeal. Determinations
from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Davenport Airport Manager, as
to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and
the safe, efficient use of air space should be obtained. If such determinations
are not available for the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment meeting, the
discussion of the appeal may be extended to a later date when the
determinations are available or a decision may be made without those
determinations.
   (B)   Any such variance granted may be subject to reasonable conditions,
including, but not limited to, the right of the City of Davenport to install,
operate and maintain at City of Davenport’s expense such markers and lights
thereon as may be necessary to indicate to the operators of aircraft the
presence of a hazard.
§ 10.00 AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 10.01 CREATION.
   There is hereby created an Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment with the
duties and powers, as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 329, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
§ 10.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven members:
two residents of the City of Davenport appointed by the Davenport City Council;
two residents of the City of Eldridge appointed by the Eldridge City Council;
two residents of the unincorporated area appointed by the County Board of
Supervisors; and one selected by the concurring vote of at least four members
of the members appointed to the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment, who shall
act as Chairperson.
   (B)   The terms of the members of the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be five years, except that when the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment is
first created, one of the members appointed by the City of Davenport, the City
of Eldridge and Scott County shall be appointed for a term of two years and one
for a term of four years. Members shall be removable for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes
vacant in the same manner in which said member was selected.
§ 10.03 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its
meetings. Such rules shall be in addition to, but not in conflict with, those
in Iowa Code Chapters 414.9 and 358.12, as the same may be amended from time to
time, and such rules shall not be in conflict with this chapter.
§ 10.04 VOTES REQUIRED.
   The concurring vote of four members of the Airport Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or to
modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from.
§ 11.00 PENALTY.
§ 11.01 SPECIFIC ACTIONS.
   (A)   Misdemeanor - single offense. Any person, firm or corporation who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each separate provision of this chapter violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   Misdemeanor - multiple offenses.
      (1)   Each day that the violation is permitted to exist after
notification in writing by the City Zoning Administrator and the expiration of
the time designated for correction in the aforesaid notification shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   No person shall be deemed guilty of multiple offenses of this
chapter until receipt of the aforesaid notice and expiration of the time
designated therein; however, receipt of such notice is not a prerequisite to
prosecution for single offenses as set forth above.
   (C)   Civil actions. In case any structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or tree grown in
violation of this chapter or any regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the City Zoning Administrator, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, including, but not limited to,
denying the occupancy of said structure and trimming or removing any tree.
§ 11.02 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Any structure erected, raised, converted or tree grown in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or the requirements thereof is declared to be
a common nuisance and such common nuisance may be abated in such manner as
nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under existing law.
CHAPTER 7: LECLAIRE ROAD URBAN RENEWAL AREA
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Division of taxes
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied
on the taxable property in the LeClaire Road Urban Renewal Area of the city,
each year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts
or other taxing districts after the effective date of this chapter in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the city
to finance projects in such area.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Eldridge, Iowa.
   COUNTY. The County of Scott, Iowa.
   URBAN RENEWAL AREA. The LeClaire Road Urban Renewal Area of the City of
Eldridge, Iowa, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having
been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the City Council by
resolution adopted on October 25, 1993: all property within the following
boundaries: beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 2, Lancer Park Seventh
Addition to the city; thence southerly along the easterly line of North First
Street and South First Street as now established; to a point on the south line
of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 14- 79-3; thence
easterly along the centerline of said Section 14, to the northwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 14; thence south
along the west line of said northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said
Section 14 137.10 feet; thence easterly parallel to the north line of said
northeast quarter of southeast quarter of said Section 14 723.60 feet to a
point which is on the east line of Rustic Ridge Estates 1st Addition as
extended southerly; thence northerly along said line extended and said easterly
line of Rustic Ridge Estates First Addition to the southwest Corner of Lot 1,
Anderson First Addition; thence easterly 425.00 feet to the southeast corner of
said Lot 1; thence northerly along the east line of said Anderson First
Addition to the northeast corner of said Anderson First Addition and the north
right-of-way line of East Iowa Street as now established; thence southeasterly
along said westerly right-of-way line to a point on the section line between
Sections 13 and 14, Township 79, Range 3 East; thence southerly along said
right-of-way and section line to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter
of the northwest quarter of said Section 13-79-3; thence easterly along the
north line of said southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13 to
a point on the easterly right-of-way line of Scott Park Road; thence southerly
along said easterly right-of-way line to a point on the south line of said
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 13; thence easterly
along the center line of said Section 13 to the westerly right-of-way line of
South Scott Park Road; thence northerly along the west right-of-way of South
Scott Park Road and North Scott Park Road to a point on the north line of the
northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 12-79-3; thence west
along the center lines of Section 12-79-3 and 11-79-3 to the point of
beginning.
(Ord. 2023-22, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 3.00 DIVISION OF TAXES.
   Provisions for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the urban
renewal area. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area
each year by and for the benefit of this state, the city, the county and any
school district or other taxing district in which the LeClaire Road Urban
Renewal Area is located shall be divided as follows.
   (A)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the
total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal
area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1992, shall be allocated
to and, when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing
district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property
taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing
district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but to which the
territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the
assessment roll as of January 1, 1992, shall be used in determining the
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area on the
effective date.
   (B)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and, when collected, be paid into a special fund of the city to
pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9(l), incurred by the city to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, except that
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be
collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without
limitation by the provisions of this chapter. Unless and until the total
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds
the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the
assessment roll referred to in division (A) above, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such,
loans, advances, indebtedness and bonds, if any, and interest thereon have been
paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the
urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
   (C)   The portion of taxes mentioned in division (B) above and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the
city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds
issued under the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9(l) or indebtedness incurred by
the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban
renewal area.
   (D)   As used in this section, the word TAXES includes, but is not limited
to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
CHAPTER 8: BLACKHAWK TRAIL URBAN RENEWAL AREA
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definitions
   
3.00   Division of taxes
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied
on the taxable property in the Blackhawk Trail Urban Renewal Area of the city,
each year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts
or other taxing districts after the effective date of this chapter in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the city
to finance projects in such area.
§ 2.00 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Eldridge, Iowa.
   COUNTY. The County of Scott, Iowa.
   URBAN RENEWAL AREA. The Blackhawk Trail Urban Renewal Area of the City of
Eldridge, Iowa, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having
been identified in the urban renewal plan amendments approved by the City
Council by resolution adopted on December 5, 1994: beginning at the northwest
corner of northeast quarter of Section 27, then north to the southwest corner
of northeast quarter of Section 22, then south along the center line of South
Scott Park Road to the south corporate limit to the southwest corner of the
east half of northeast quarter of Section 27, then north to the northwest
corner of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 27, then west to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2023-22, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 3.00 DIVISION OF TAXES.
   After the effective date of this chapter, the taxes levied on the taxable
property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of the
state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in
which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as follows.
   (A)   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the
total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993, shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district
which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective
date of this chapter, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise
included after the effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993,
shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area on the effective date.
   (B)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9(l), incurred by the city to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, except that
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be
collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without
limitation by the provisions of this chapter. Unless and until the total
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds
the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the
assessment roll referred to in division (A) above, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such
loans, advances, indebtedness and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have
been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property
in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
   (C)   The portion of taxes mentioned in division (B) above and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the
city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds
issued under the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9(l) or indebtedness incurred by
the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban
renewal area.
   (D)   As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited
to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
CHAPTER 9: RESERVED
[Reserved]
CHAPTER 10: POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Applicability
   
3.00   Storm water detention criteria
   
4.00   Exemptions
   
5.00   Storm water detention plan review
   
6.00   Storm water detention plan requirements
   
7.00   Common detention facilities
   
8.00   Completion of facilities
   
9.00   Responsibilities
   
10.00   Appeal
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to diminish threats to public health,
safety and welfare caused by runoff of excessive storm water from new
development and redevelopment. This excessive storm water could result in the
flooding of damageable properties. The cause of increase in storm water runoff
quantity is the development and improvement of land and as such this chapter
regulates these activities to reduce adverse impacts.
§ 2.00 APPLICABILITY.
   No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or
structural alteration of a building, and/or its parking area nor shall a
certificate of occupancy be granted for a use nor shall a preliminary plat,
final plat or site plan be approved without conformity with the provisions of
the storm water detention regulations.
§ 3.00 STORM WATER DETENTION CRITERIA.
   (A)   All storm water storage areas must be designed to contain and safely
pass storm water runoff. When platting, the land extending to the centerline of
any adjacent right-of-way shall be considered part of the development for
purposes of determining the runoff rate. Adequate spillway provisions shall be
provided to transport peak runoff from a 100-year storm assuming the outlet to
be plugged. All storm water facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
design standards established by the city.
   (B)   All areas within the city shall comply with these regulations.
      (1)   The required volume of storm water detention shall be that
necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for the critical
duration from the drainage area tributary to the storm water storage area based
on full development of said tributary area, less the volume discharged during
the same duration at the approved release rate.
      (2)   For sites less than 20 acres, the required detention storage (RDS)
will be that found to be the most critical resulting from the inflow from the
run-off of a fully developed tributary area from a 100-year storm and the
outflow of the five-year storm on a predevelopment basis with the same area.
This can be expressed by the following equation:
 
      Inflow rate from          Release rate from 5-   Duration of the critical
RDS = critical 100-year storm - year storm           X 100-year
      (cfs)                                            storm (sec)
 
      (3)   For sites greater than 20 acres, the method of sizing of the
detention storage volume must be approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Detention storage may be provided as a dry bottom or wet bottom
storage area.
      (1)   Dry bottom storm water storage areas may be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space parking or other types of uses
that will not be adversely affected by intermittent flooding.
         (a)   A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains to prevent soggy areas.
         (b)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as
possible and shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Each
storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow
in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year frequency storm occurs.
This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function without
attention and shall become part of the excess storm water passageway. Hydraulic
calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer to substantiate all design
features.
         (c)   Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities
shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety
and welfare. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and
turbulent conditions at an outlet control structure will not be permitted
without complete protection for the public safety. The use of fences shall be
kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort when no other method of
protection is feasible.
         (d)   Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage shall be
designed with permanent-type control outlets. Emergency overflow areas shall be
provided. The maximum storm water ponding depth in any paved area shall not
exceed six inches.
      (2)   (a)   Wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed with
all of the items required for dry bottom storm water storage areas, except that
the provisions of division (C)(1)(a) above shall not be required.
         (b)   However, the following additional conditions shall be complied
with:
            1.   Water surface areas shall not exceed one-fifteenth of the
tributary drainage area.
            2.   Facilities shall be provided to lower the pond elevation by
gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance. Shoreline
protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave action.
            3.   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to
be maintained, some portion of the pond area should be a minimum of nine feet
deep.
            4.   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed
to operate with only a minor increase in the water surface level when the
design storage capacity has been exceeded. Hydraulic calculations shall be
submitted to the City Engineer to substantiate all design features.
   (D)   The city may, in lieu of the detention requirements detailed in the
ordinance, accept infiltration practices designed in accordance with the Iowa
Storm Water Management Manual. Engineering calculation demonstrating
infiltration rates shall be included with the application.
(Ord. 2025-13, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 4.00 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from these regulations:
   (A)   Any final plat approved by January 1, 2003, and based upon a
preliminary plat that was approved prior to January 1, 2000, subject to the
development not being required to provide detention facilities by any other
ordinances of the city;
   (B)   A preliminary or final plat of single-family development consisting of
lots, all of which are one acre or larger; and
   (C)   Any single-family and two-family developed and undeveloped lots which
existed on January 1, 2000.
§ 5.00 STORM WATER DETENTION PLAN REVIEW.
   Storm water detention plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
review.
   (A)   For new or expanding commercial, industrial and multi-family
developments, a storm water detention plan shall be submitted as part of the
site plan review.
   (B)   For new single-family and two-family residential developments, a storm
water detention plan shall be submitted as part of the plat review.
   (C)   If no plat or site plan review is required, a storm water detention
plan must be approved by the City Engineer before a building permit is issued.
§ 6.00 STORM WATER DETENTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each applicant shall submit all calculations and other such
information as deemed necessary to demonstrate to the City Engineer the storm
water runoff rate and capacity of storm water storage facilities.
   (B)   Required information may vary according to the size of development,
but shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Map of the property and immediate vicinity showing elevation of
contours (based on city datum);
      (2)   Mapping and description of existing and proposed drainage system
features of the property and immediate vicinity;
      (3)   Physical features of the property and immediate vicinity,
including, but not limited to, the state and type of development in the area,
public infrastructure and other similar characteristics; and
      (4)   If the development is to be staged, a plan of how the storm water
detention requirement will be met for each stage.
§ 7.00 COMMON DETENTION FACILITIES.
   (A)   The city may, in lieu of on-site detention facilities, accept the
furnishing of off-site facilities which, when added to on-site detention
facilities, shall provide sufficient storage capacity to provide the storm
water detention required to meet this regulation. Until such time as the
permanent off-site storm water detention facilities are available, temporary
on-site detention shall be provided.
   (B)   An acceptable legal contract between the developer and the off-site
land owner shall be approved by the City Council.
§ 8.00 COMPLETION OF FACILITIES.
   The storm water detention facilities shall be constructed and in use
according to the following criteria.
   (A)   For commercial, industrial and multi-family developments, the
facilities shall be constructed concurrent with site grading. A certificate of
completion shall be furnished by the developer’s engineer certifying that they
have been constructed according to the approved plans before a certificate of
occupancy is issued by the city.
   (B)   For single-family and two-family residential building, the developer’s
engineer shall certify that the structural improvements have been substantially
complete and the detention facility rough graded before a building permit is
issued. A certificate of completion shall be furnished by the engineer
certifying that the facilities into which the lot(s) drain have been
constructed according to the approved plans before a certificate of occupancy
permit is issued by the city.
§ 9.00 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The developer shall be responsible for providing a plan of ownership
of the detention facilities involving a single owner, an association or another
plan of ownership approved by the city.
   (B)   The owner shall be responsible to ensure the continuing functioning of
the facility as originally designed and intended. All plans submitted for storm
water detention systems shall describe an adequate procedure for normal
maintenance for the detention system. Any failure of the storm water detention
system due to inadequate normal or capital maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which the detention system is
located. It shall also be the property owner’s responsibility to remedy any
negligence in maintenance that resulted in the failure of the system. The
submittal of plans for such a system or the purchase of property on which such
system is located shall be deemed as acceptance of responsibility for normal
and capital maintenance of the system.
   (C)   The developer shall dedicate an easement to the city reserving the
land for use as a storm water detention facility providing the city with the
right to inspect the facility, and the necessary easements for ingress and
egress.
   (D)   (1)   The detention basin owner shall be responsible for the following
items.
         (a)   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using a
checklist developed by the city, shall be submitted to the Director of Public
Works.
         (b)   At five year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a
professional engineer registered in the state, using a checklist developed by
the city. A report of this inspection shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works within 60 days of the inspection. An annual report is not required
the year when the five-year report is due.
         (c)   Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of his,
her or their maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance
records to the party with active maintenance responsibility.
      (2)   At any time, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee,
may provide inspection of the detention facilities as deemed appropriate. If
the Director finds any maintenance work is necessary, the Director shall serve
a written order to the owner of the facilities, specifying therein the work
necessary to be done and providing for a reasonable time for its completion.
Any property owner to whom an order is directed shall have the right, within
three days from service of the order, to appeal to the City Administrator who
shall review the order within five working days and file his or her decision.
If the City Administrator fails to respond within five working days, it shall
be assumed that the appeal is denied. Unless the order is revoked or modified,
it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner as directed within the
time established by the Director’s written order or at the time as modified by
the City Administrator’s decision. When an owner to whom an order has been
issued fails to comply within the time specified, the Director shall remedy the
condition, or contract with others for such purpose, and charge all costs,
including administration, to whom the order is directed. If the cost of
remedying a condition is not paid within 30 days after the mailing of a
statement from the Director of Public Works, the cost shall be assessed against
the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. In the event
the association, or property owner, fails or is unable to pay the costs
associated with detention facility maintenance, or an association does not
exist or the owner cannot be located, these costs shall be assessed equally
against all property owners in the subdivision(s) the detention facility
serves.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 10.00 APPEAL.
   (A)   The City Council may, in the resolution approving the preliminary plat
of any subdivision and upon appeal of the developer, or the recommendation of
the City Engineer, waive or change the requirements of this chapter for a
particular development whenever the developer demonstrates either:
      (1)   That, due to the location of the property, strict compliance would
provide no discernible benefit for reduction of flooding on any plat adjacent
or downstream property;
      (2)   That, due to the nature of the property, strict compliance would
create unusual hardship out of proportion to any foreseeable benefit and that
the requested change or reduction in requirements will not increase the risk of
flooding of any building or the buildable portion of any lot on any adjacent or
downstream property; or
      (3)   That the developer, in lieu of a detention facility, provide storm
water management sufficient to achieve the purpose of this chapter by keeping
storm water runoff from the property in accordance with §
3.00 of this chapter.
   (B)   Developers of new or expanding commercial, industrial and multi-family
developments shall make appeals as per the provisions of the site plan review
regulations in city code.
CHAPTER 11: ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Section
   
1   Findings
   
1.1   Permit program
   
1.2   Adopting an ordinance
   
1.3   Funding
   
1.4   Terms defined
   
2   Illicit discharges prohibited
   
2.1   Definitions
   
2.2   Obligation
   
2.3   Illicit discharge
   
2.4   Sediment pollution
   
3   Illicit connections prohibited
   
3.1   Illicit connection defined
   
3.2   Violations
   
3.3   Past illicit connections
   
4   Industrial discharges
   
4.1   Compliance
   
4.2   Proof of compliance
   
5   Illicit discharge detection and reporting; cost recovery
   
5.1   Enforcement officer
   
5.2   Responsibility
   
5.3   Duty to monitor conditions
   
5.4   Reporting to the city
   
5.5   Response to reports
   
5.6   Inspection
   
5.7   Administrative costs
   
6   Suspension of access to the city’s storm sewer system
   
6.1   Emergency suspension.
   
6.2   Non-emergency suspension
   
7   Watercourse protection
   
8   Enforcement
   
8.1   Civil enforcement action
   
8.2   Municipal infraction
   
8.3   Advice and consent of the City Attorney
   
9   Appeal
   
9.1   Rules for appeals
   
9.2   Decisions
§ 1 FINDINGS.
§ 1.1 PERMIT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The United States EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (“NPDES”) permit program (“program”) administered by the State
Department of Natural Resources (“IDNR”) requires that cities meeting certain
demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES
permit for the discharge of storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer
system (“MS4”) (“MS4 permit”).
   (B)   The City of Eldridge (“city”) is subject to the program and is
required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit; the city’s MS4 permit is
on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection
during regular office hours.
§ 1.2 ADOPTING AN ORDINANCE.
   As a condition of the city’s MS4 permit, the city is obliged to adopt and
enforce an illicit discharge to storm sewer system ordinance.
§ 1.3 FUNDING.
   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city in
administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city shall fund its
operations under this chapter entirely by charges imposed on the owners of
properties which are made subject to the program by virtue of state and federal
law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance.
§ 1.4 TERMS DEFINED.
   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the program.
§ 2 ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
§ 2.1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PROPERTY. Includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities
and premises of any kind located upon, under or above the real estate.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. One or more persons that control or are in possession of
or own property. RESPONSIBLE PARTIES shall be jointly and severally responsible
for compliance with this chapter and jointly and severally liable for any
illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or owned.
§ 2.2 OBLIGATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible party
subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or any other federal,
state or city permit, statute, ordinance or rule from any obligation imposed by
such permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any such obligation is greater than
any obligation imposed by this chapter.
§ 2.3 ILLICIT DISCHARGE.
   Any discharge into the city’s storm sewer system prohibited by the city’s
MS4 permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference, shall be
deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation of this chapter.
§ 2.4 SEDIMENT POLLUTION.
   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on a
construction site not otherwise subject to the city’s COSESCO ordinance or
sediment pollution entering a municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality
violation as determined by the DNR shall be deemed an illicit discharge in
violation of this chapter.
§ 3 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
§ 3.1 ILLICIT CONNECTION DEFINED.
   For purposes of this chapter, an ILLICIT CONNECTION to the city’s storm
sewer system is any physical connection or other topographical or other
condition, natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized by
ordinance or written rule of the city, which causes or facilitates, directly or
indirectly, an illicit discharge.
§ 3.2 VIOLATIONS.
   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illicit
connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 3.3 PAST ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
§ 4 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
§ 4.1 COMPLIANCE.
   Any responsible party subject an industrial NPDES discharge permit issued by
the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
§ 4.2 PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.
   Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Enforcement Officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer system
authorized by said permit.
§ 5 ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST RECOVERY.
§ 5.1 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be conducted by
the Public Works Director, or his or her designee, hereinbefore and after
referred to as the “Enforcement Officer”.
§ 5.2 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to
persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances which may cause
an illicit discharge, undetected by the city.
§ 5.3 DUTY TO MONITOR CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges and to
report to the Enforcement Officer illicit discharges which the responsible
party knows or should have known to have occurred.
   (B)   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is a violation of
this chapter.
   § 5.3.1. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge,
the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible party’s
sole cost.
   § 5.3.2. If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
   § 5.3.3. If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
   § 5.3.4. A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by
phone or facsimile or email to the Enforcement Officer immediately but in any
event within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to
the Enforcement Officer within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
§ 5.4 REPORTING TO THE CITY.
   Any person or entity shall also report to the city any illicit discharge or
circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose a risk of an
illicit discharge.
§ 5.5 RESPONSE TO REPORTS.
   (A)   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous sections, or
otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the Enforcement Officer shall conduct an inspection
of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide to the
responsible party, and any third-party reporter, a written report of the
conditions which may cause or which have already caused an illicit discharge.
   (B)   The responsible party shall immediately commence corrective action or
remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation within 24
hours.
§ 5.6 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to
determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party has security
measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its property
or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access by the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   By way of specification but not limitation:
   § 5.6.1. A responsible party shall allow the Enforcement Officer ready
access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual or imminent
illicit discharge and for the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law;
   § 5.6.2. The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to set up on any
property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Enforcement
Officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual or
imminent illicit discharge;
   § 5.6.3. The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to require any
responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the Enforcement Officer as
the Enforcement Officer directs. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense. All devices shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy;
   § 5.6.4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the Enforcement Officer and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party;
   § 5.6.5. An unreasonable delay in allowing the Enforcement Officer access to
a property is a violation of this chapter; and
   § 5.6.6. If the Enforcement Officer has been refused access to any part of
the property from an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge to a municipal
storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the Enforcement Officer may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 5.7 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred,
the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this
chapter shall be recovered from the responsible party. The Enforcement Officer
shall submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting the actual costs
and wages and expenses incurred by the city for the enforcement activities
undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced under this chapter within 30 days
of billing shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 6 SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 6.1 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   The Enforcement Officer may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer
system access to a property when such emergency suspension is necessary to stop
an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If the responsible party fails to
immediately comply with an emergency suspension order, the Enforcement Officer
shall take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the illicit
discharge. All costs of such action shall be recovered from the responsible
party for the property identified as the source of the illicit discharge.
§ 6.2 NON-EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   If the Enforcement Officer detects or is informed of circumstances which
could cause an illicit discharge but such illicit discharge is not ongoing or
imminent, and if the suspension of storm sewer system access would reasonably
be expected to prevent or reduce the potential illicit discharge, the
Enforcement Officer shall notify the responsible party of the proposed
suspension of storm sewer system access and the time and date of such
suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the property shall be
sufficient notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances shall avoid a
violation of this chapter provided that no illicit discharge occurs. In the
alternative, the responsible party may request a meeting with the Enforcement
Officer for the purpose of presenting information which the responsible party
believes will show that remediation is unnecessary, and if the Enforcement
Officer finds such information is satisfactory, the Enforcement Officer may
rescind or modify the notice of suspension. If the Enforcement Officer finds
such information unsatisfactory, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a final
written order of suspension, including the date and time of suspension and such
order may be appealed as provided hereinafter. Any physical action to reinstate
storm sewer system access to property subject to such order prior to obtaining
a court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. An order
of suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible party with a
municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any other enforcement
action permitted by statute or ordinance.
§ 7 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris,
grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately
owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the
watercourse.
§ 8 ENFORCEMENT.
§ 8.1 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action,
including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action,
administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its
attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
§ 8.2 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Iowa Code § 364.22, pursuant to the
city’s municipal infraction ordinance.
§ 8.3 ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the Enforcement
Officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
§ 9 APPEAL.
§ 9.1 RULES FOR APPEALS.
   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the
Enforcement Officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council
pursuant to the following rules.
   § 9.1.1. The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within five
business days of the decision or enforcement action.
   § 9.1.2. The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed
from, the errors allegedly made by the Enforcement Officer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing and the relief requested.
   § 9.1.3. The Enforcement Officer shall specify in writing the reasons for
the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the Enforcement Officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
   § 9.1.4. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the Enforcement
Officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice, in accordance with Iowa
Code Chapter 21, of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting
of the City Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than 20 days after
the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard
of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 17A.
The applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant’s expense. The
Enforcement Officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney
designated by the City Council at city expense.
§ 9.2 DECISIONS.
   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may be
appealed to the state District Court.
CHAPTER 12: LINCOLN-LECLAIRE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
Section
   
1.00   Purpose
   
2.00   Definition
   
3.00   Division of taxes
§ 1.00 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide that general property taxes levied
and collected each year on all property located within the Lincoln-LeClaire
Urban Renewal Area, by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, North
Scott Community School District and other taxing districts, be paid to a
special fund for the payment of principal and interest on loans, monies
advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred
by the city in connection with the Lincoln-LeClaire Urban Renewal Area (the
Lincoln-LeClaire Urban Renewal Plan).
(Ord. 2023-23, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 2.00 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LINCOLN-LECLAIRE URBAN RENEWAL AREA. Includes the lots and parcels located
within the area legally described as follows:
      (1)   Commencing as a point of beginning at the Southwest corner of Lot
1, Meinhardt’s Second Addition, along the East line of the US Highway 61 right-
of-way;
      (2)   Thence, North 00°24’58” West 1227.79 feet along the East line of
the US Highway 61 right-of-way;
      (3)   Thence, North 05°45’37” East 10.15 feet along the East line of the
US Highway 61 right-of-way;
      (4)   Thence, North 05°45’36” East 441.02 feet along the East line of the
US Highway 61 right-of-way;
      (5)   Thence, North 09°20’03” East 239.27 feet along the East line of the
US Highway 61 right-of-way;
      (6)   Thence, South 89°56’18” East 210.79 feet to a point on the West
line of the South Fourteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (7)   Thence, South 00°02’52” East 397.44 feet along the West line of the
South Fourteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (8)   Thence, Southeasterly 100.95 feet along the arc of a 65-foot radius
curve concave Northeasterly (chord bearing South 44°32’27” East 91.11 feet)
along the West and South line of the South Fourteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (9)   Thence, South 89°02’02” East 375.34 feet along the South line of
the South Fourteenth Avenue right-of-way to a point on the East line of the
South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (10)   Thence, North 00°01’17” East 51.58 feet along the East line of the
South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (11)   Thence, South 89°56’30” East 293.18 feet;
      (12)   Thence, North 00°03’42” East 460.55 feet;
      (13)   Thence, North 89°30’08” East 329.76 feet;
      (14)   Thence, North 89°36’58” East 330.00 feet;
      (15)   Thence, North 00°04’58” East 661.73 feet to a point on the South
line of the East LeClaire Road right-of-way;
      (16)   Thence, North 89°30’08” East 625.69 feet along the South line of
the East LeClaire Road right-of-way;
      (17)   Thence, North 89°22’30” East 1184.56 feet along the South line of
the East LeClaire Road right-of-way to a point on the West line of the South
Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (18)   Thence, South 14°31’51” East 61.38 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (19)   Thence, South 09°54’59” West 182.29 feet along the West line of
the South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (20)   Thence, South 09°55’01” West 12.82 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (21)   Thence, North 78°36’52” West 10.25 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (22)   Thence, South 11°23’08” West 641.33 feet along the West line of
the South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (23)   Thence, South 08°15’51” West 93.65 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (24)   Thence, South 10°57’04” West 313.24 feet along the West line of
the South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (25)   Thence, South 14°00’16” West 3.25 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (26)   Thence, South 16°56’36” West 96.25 feet along the West line of the
South Scott Park Road right-of-way;
      (27)   Thence, South 89°26’27” West 924.96 feet;
      (28)   Thence, South 89°25’31” West 1290.11 feet;
      (29)   Thence, South 89°35’42” West 343.02 feet to a point on the West
line of the South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (30)   Thence, South 00°01’18” West 500 feet along the West line of the
South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (31)   Thence, South 89°35’40” West 3.23 feet along the West line of the
South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (32)   Thence, South 00°03’42” West 735.14 feet along the West line of
the South Sixteenth Avenue right-of-way;
      (33)   Thence, South 89°21’28” West 671.24 feet to the point of
beginning;
      (34)   All bearings are based on the NAD83 Iowa State Planes South
coordinate system. For the purpose of this description, the West line of Lot 1
of Meinhardt’s Second Addition is assumed to bear North 00°24’58” West; and
      (35)   The land described in this description contains 91.154 acres, more
or less.
(Ord. 2023-23, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 3.00 DIVISION OF TAXES.
   (A)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area
legally described in §
2.00 of this chapter, by and for the benefit of this state, city, county, North
Scott Community School District and all other taxing districts from and after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be divided
as hereinafter in this section provided.
   (B)   The city intends to certify debt in the urban renewal area before
December 1, 2023. Therefore, that portion of the taxes which would be produced
by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area as shown on
the assessment roll as of January 1, 2022, being January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the County
Auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness or bonds payable from the
division of property tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and,
when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred to herein as the “base period
taxes” for such area.
   (C)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in division (B) above shall be allocated to and, when
collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city, hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to,
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
or obligations issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 or 403.12, as
amended, incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the
Urban Renewal Plan, except that:
      (1)   Taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and
equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2 and
taxes for the instructional support program of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code § 257.19, but in each case, only to the extent required
under Iowa Code § 403.19(2);
      (2)   Taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district;
      (3)   Taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related to joint county-
city buildings; and
      (4)   Any other exceptions under Iowa Code § 403.19 shall be collected
against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without any
limitation as hereinabove provided.
   (D)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property
in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to
in division (B) above, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
   (E)   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the city referred to in division (C) above have been paid, all
monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban
renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
(Ord. 2023-23, passed 9-18-2023)
CHAPTER 13: CITY DETAILS
Section
   
1.00   City details
§ 1.00 CITY DETAILS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5864.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5866.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5868.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5870.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5872.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5874.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5876.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5878.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5880.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5882.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5884.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5886.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5888.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5890.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5892.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5894.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5896.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5898.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5900.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5902.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5904.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5906.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5908.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5910.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5912.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5914.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5916.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5918.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5920.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5922.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5924.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5926.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/228e8e15a5ecbcd48c8d2fc65e1c8072835f56e0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5928.png]
 
(Ord. 2025-09, passed 4-21-2025)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Iowa Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE
Iowa Code Cite Code Section
Iowa Code Cite   Code Section
Chapter 17A      Title C, Chapter 18, § 7.1.4;
                 Title D, Chapter 11, § 9.1.4
Chapter 21       Title C, Chapter 18, § 7.1.4;
                 Title D, Chapter 11, § 9.1.4
Chapter 22       Title A, Chapter 15, § 8.00
24.6             Title B, Chapter 12, § 6.14
Chapter 29C      Title B, Chapter 12, § 6.01
Chapter 45.1(8a) Title A, Chapter 1, § 2.00
                 Title A, Chapter 12, §§
                 2.06,
                 13.00,
Chapter 123      17.00,
                 21.00,
                 23.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 7, § 3.03
123.3            Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.28           Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.30           Title A, Chapter 12, § 9.00
123.38           Title A, Chapter 12, § 17.00
123.46           Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.47           Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.47B          Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.49           Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.49(2)(a)     Title A, Chapter 12, § 26.02
123.49(2)(d)     Title A, Chapter 12, § 26.02
123.49(2)(e)     Title A, Chapter 12, § 26.02
123.50           Title B, Chapter 2, § 2.00
123.127(2)       Title A, Chapter 12, § 9.00
123.130(1)       Title A, Chapter 12, § 9.00
123.176(3)       Title A, Chapter 12, § 9.00
Chapter 124      Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00
                 Title D, Chapter 4, §§
Chapter 135D     4.01,
                 4.02
135D.26          Title D, Chapter 2, § 5.00
Chapter 137      Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00
Chapter 137F     Title A, Chapter 19, § 1.00
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.11;
Chapter 204      Title B, Chapter 7, § 2.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 13, § 2.03
257.19           Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
298.2            Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
                 Title B, Chapter 1, §§
Chapter 321      1.00, §
                 9.06
321.1(20B)       Title B, Chapter 1, § 11.02
321.1(73)        Title B, Chapter 6, § 11.11
321.1(74)        Title B, Chapter 6, § 11.11
321.234          Title B, Chapter 3, § 1.00
321.235A         Title B, Chapter 1, § 11.03
321.236          Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.03
321.247          Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.01
321.319          Title B, Chapter 1, § 2.05
321A.21          Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.12
321G.9(2)        Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.05
321I.11          Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.11
321I.19          Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.10
Chapter 321J     Title B, Chapter 1, § 9.08
                 Title D, Chapter 6, §§
                 1.00,
Chapter 329      3.00,
                 9.00,
                 10.01
346.27(22)       Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
                 Title D, Chapter 1, §§
Chapter 354      2.03,
                 14.00
354.3            Title D, Chapter 1, § 18.00
354.4            Title D, Chapter 1, § 18.00
                 Title D, Chapter 1, §§
354.6            13.01,
                 18.00
354.8            Title D, Chapter 1, § 13.01
354.9            Title D, Chapter 1, § 4.00
354.11           Title D, Chapter 1, § 13.01
Chapter 358.12   Title D, Chapter 6, § 10.03
362.4            Title A, Chapter 1, § 3.01;
                 Title A, Chapter 13, § 2.00
                 Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00;
364.22           Title C, Chapter 18, § 5.2;
                 Title D, Chapter 11, § 8.2
372.13(11)       Title A, Chapter 1, § 3.01
372.14(2)        Title B, Chapter 12, § 6.07
Chapter 376.6(2) Title A, Chapter 1, § 2.00
Chapter 380      Title A, Chapter 2, § 12.00
Chapter 380.8    Title A, Chapter 2, § 6.00
Chapter 384      Title C, Chapter 17, § 2.00
384.110          Title B, Chapter 12, § 6.14
403.9            Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
403.9(l)         Title D, Chapter 7, § 3.00;
                 Title D, Chapter 8, § 3.00
403.12           Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
403.19           Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
403.19(2)        Title D, Chapter 12, § 3.00
Chapter 414      Title D, Chapter 2, § 4.00;
                 Title D, Chapter 3, § 2.01
Chapter 414.9    Title D, Chapter 6, § 10.03
Chapter 423A     Title A, Chapter 16, § 4.00
427.1(8)         Title A, Chapter 16, § 1.00
Chapter 453A     Title D, Chapter 2, § 5.00
Chapter 455B     Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.02
Chapter 480A.6   Title A, Chapter 15, § 13.00
Chapter 499A     Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00
Chapter 499B     Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00
562A.21          Title C, Chapter 8, § 7.00
Chapters 690—73Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.02
701.01           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
701.8            Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.00
                 Title B, Chapter 4, §§
Chapter 702      12.00,
                 13.00,
                 18.00
702.18           Title B, Chapter 10, § 1.00
                 Title B, Chapter 4, §§
Chapter 704      12.00,
                 13.00,
                 18.00
                 Title B, Chapter 4, §§
Chapter 705      12.00,
                 13.00,
                 18.00
708.1            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 2.01
708.2            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
                 Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00; Title B, Chapter 6, §§
                 10.00,
                 10.01,
714.1            10.02,
                 10.03,
                 10.04,
                 10.05,
                 10.06
714.2(5)         Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
714.3            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
                 Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00; Title B, Chapter 6, §§
                 11.00,
                 11.01,
                 11.02,
                 11.03,
                 11.04,
714.8            11.05,
                 11.06,
                 11.07,
                 11.08,
                 11.09,
                 11.10,
                 11.11
714.13           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
714.14           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
716.1            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
716.2            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
716.6            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
716.7            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 5, § 1.00
716.8(1)         Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 5, § 2.00
716.8(2)         Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 5, § 3.00
717B             Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.12
717B.2           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 4.01
717B.8           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
717B.9           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718.4            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718.6            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.1           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.2           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.3           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.4           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.5           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
718A.6           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
719.1            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.08
719.2            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.15
                 Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00; Title B, Chapter 6, §§
723.2            2.05,
                 7.16
723.3            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.17
723.4            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 2.03
                 Title B, Chapter 4, §§
Chapter 724      12.00,
                 13.00,
                 18.00
727.1            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
727.2            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
727.3            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.05
727.4            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
727.5            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
727.6            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00;
                 Title B, Chapter 6, § 7.19
727.9            Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
727.11           Title B, Chapter 2, § 1.00
903.1(3)         Title B, Chapter 6, § 15.04
                 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     Title A, Chapter 18, § 2.00; Title C, Chapter 8, §§
                     15.05,
2014-03  7-7-2014    15.06,
                     15.07,
                     15.08
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2017-04  6-5-2017    3.00,
                     3.01,
                     3.02
                     Title B, Chapter 7, §§
2017-08  6-19-2017   6.00,
                     6.01
2017-10  9-18-2017   Title C, Chapter 8, § 15.09
2017-11  11-20-2017  Title B, Chapter 6, § 3.04
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2018-01  2-19-2018   3.00,
                     3.01,
                     3.02
2018-02  4-4-2018    Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2018-03  6-18-2018   Title B, Chapter 1, § 5.01
2018-05  9-17-2018   Title D, Chapter 2, § 17.02
2018-06  10-15-2018  Title B, Chapter 8, § 1.00
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2019-01  2-4-2019    3.00,
                     3.01,
                     3.02
2019-02  2-18-2019   Title A, Chapter 2, § 3.00
2019-04  7-15-2019   Title B, Chapter 10, § 6.00
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
                     3.00,
2020-01  2-3-2020    3.01,
                     3.02,
                     7.00
2020-02  3-30-2020   Title B, Chapter 1, § 5.03
2020-03  6-1-2020    Title B, Chapter 1, § 5.02
2020-04  6-1-2020    Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2020-05  6-15-2020   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2020-10  12-7-2020   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2020-11  12-7-2020   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.03
                     Title B, Chapter 1, §§
2020-12  12-7-2020   6.06,
                     6.09
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2021-02  3-1-2021    3.00,
                     3.01,
                     7.00
                     Title D, Chapter 3, §§
                     1.00,
                     2.01,
                     2.02,
                     2.03,
                     3.01,
                     3.03,
                     3.04,
                     3.05,
                     3.06,
                     3.07,
                     3.08,
                     4.01,
2021-03  3-15-2021   4.02,
                     5.00,
                     5.01,
                     6.01,
                     6.02,
                     7.01,
                     7.02,
                     7.03,
                     7.04,
                     7.05,
                     8.01,
                     8.02,
                     9.00,
                     10.00
                     Title A, Chapter 15, §§
                     1.00,
                     2.00,
                     3.00,
                     4.00,
                     5.00,
                     6.00,
                     7.00,
                     8.00,
2021-04  4-19-2021   9.00,
                     10.00,
                     11.00,
                     12.00,
                     13.00,
                     14.00,
                     15.00,
                     16.00,
                     17.00,
                     18.00
2021-07  8-2-2021    Title C, Chapter 18, § 2.10
2021-08  10-18-2021  Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2021-11  12-20-2021  Title B, Chapter 1, § 6.04
                     Title A, Chapter 1, §§
2021-12  12-20-2021  3.03,
                     3.04
2022-03  2-8-2022    Title B, Chapter 1, § 2.11
2022-04  2-8-2022    Title B, Chapter 1, § 2.12
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2022-05  2-8-2022    3.00,
                     3.01
2022-07  8-15-2022   Title B, Chapter 1, § 5.02
2022-08  10-3-2022   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2022-09  10-3-2022   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
2022-10  10-3-2022   Title B, Chapter 9, § 1.00
                     Title A, Chapter 19, §§
                     1.00,
                     2.00,
2023-01  1-9-2023    3.00,
                     4.00,
                     5.00,
                     6.00,
                     7.00
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2023-02  2-20-2023   3.00,
                     3.01
                     Title B, Chapter 1, §§
                     9.01,
                     9.02,
                     9.03,
                     9.04,
                     9.05,
2023-04  2-20-2023   9.06,
                     9.07,
                     9.08,
                     9.09,
                     9.10,
                     9.11,
                     9.12,
                     9.13
2023-05  2-20-2023   Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
                     Title C, Chapter 8, §§
2023-06  3-20-2023   8.00,
                     9.00,
                     10.00
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2023-07  3-20-2023   37.04,
                     37.06,
                     37.07
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2023-08  3-20-2023   28.01, 2
                     9.02
2023-09  3-20-2023   Title D, Chapter 2, § 35.03
2023-10  3-20-2023   Title D, Chapter 2, § 38.00
2023-14  7-17-2023   Title D, Chapter 2, § 5.00
2023-15  8-7-2023    Title D, Chapter 1, § 19.12
2023-16  8-21-2023   Title A, Chapter 20, § 1.00
2023-17  8-21-2023   Title A, Chapter 3, § 5.02
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2023-19  9-5-2023    28.01,
                     28.02,
                     28.06
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2023-20  9-5-2023    29.01,
                     29.02
2023-22  9-18-2023   Title D, Chapter 7, § 2.00;
                     Title D, Chapter 8, § 2.00
                     Title D, Chapter 12, §§
2023-23  9-18-2023   1.00,
                     2.00,
                     3.00
                     Title D, Chapter 3, §§
2024-01  2-5-2024    3.02,
                     6.02
2024-02  2-5-2024    Title B, Chapter 1, § 2.11
2024-03  2-5-2024    Title B, Chapter 1, § 4.07
                     Title A, Chapter 3, §§
2024-06  2-19-2024   8.00,
                     8.01
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2024-05  3-4-2024    3.00,
                     3.01
                     Title C, Chapter 20, §§
                     1.00,
                     2.00,
                     3.00,
                     4.00,
2024-07  4-1-2024    5.00,
                     6.00,
                     7.00,
                     8.00,
                     9.00,
                     10.00
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2024-08  4-1-2024    5.00,
                     28.01
                     Title B, Chapter 14, §§
                     1.00,
                     2.00,
2024-10  8-19-2024   3.00,
                     4.00,
                     5.00,
                     6.00
2024-11  8-19-2024   Title A, Chapter 2, §
                     3.02
2024-13  11-4-2024   Title C, Chapter 20, §
                     8.04
                     Title C, Chapter 8, §§
                     1.00,
                     4.01,
                     4.05,
                     5.00,
2024-14  11-18-2024  5.01,
                     6.00,
                     6.01,
                     13.00,
                     13.01,
                     14.00,
                     14.01
2025-01  2-3-2025    Title D, Chapter 10, §
                     9.00
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
                     19.01,
                     20.01,
                     21.01,
                     22A.01,
                     23A.01,
2025-03  2-3-2025    24.01,
                     25.01,
                     26.01,
                     27.01,
                     27A.01,
                     28.01,
                     29.01,
                     29.03
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
                     44.00,
2025-04  2-3-2025    44.01,
                     44.02,
                     44.03,
                     44.04
2025-06  3-3-2025    Title B, Chapter 7, §
                     6.00
                     Title C, Chapter 2, §§
2025-07  3-24-2025   3.00,
                     3.01
                     Title B, Chapter 1, §§
                     4.08,
                     6.08,
2025-05  4-7-2025    10.00,
                     10.01,
                     10.02,
                     10.03
2025-08  4-7-2025    Title C, Chapter 2, §
                     3.01
                     Title C, Chapter 10, §
2025-09  4-21-2025   8.00; Title D, Chapter 2, §
                     35.03, Title D, Chapter 13, §
                     1.00
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2025-10  5-19-2025   37.05,
                     37.07
                     Title C, Chapter 18, §§
2025-12  6-2-2025    2.4,
                     2.5
2025-13  6-2-2025    Title D, Chapter 10, §
                     3.00
2025-15  6-16-2025   Title B, Chapter 6, §
                     3.04
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2025-16  7-7-2025    5.00,
                     20.01
2025-18  8-4-2025    Title B, Chapter 1, §
                     5.02
                     Title D, Chapter 2, §§
2025-21  9-8-2025    15.05,
                     17.01,
                     18.07
2025-22  9-22-2025   Title D, Chapter 2, §
                     38.00
2025-23  9-22-2025   Title B, Chapter 1, §
                     2.11
                     Title B, Chapter 1, §§
                     11.00,
2025-24  9-22-2025   11.01,
                     11.02,
                     11.03,
                     11.04
2025-25  11-3-2025   Title C, Chapter 10, §
                     3.04
                    
 
 
