FORT MADISON, IOWA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. D-124, passed 7-1-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. D-125
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND REPLACING
TITLE 10, CHAPTER 10, SECTION 2: SPECIAL USES
OF THE CITY OF FORT MADISON, IOWA, ZONING CODE
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa:
SECTION 1. SECTION MODIFIED. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Madison, Iowa, is amended by deleting Title 10, Chapter 10, Section 2 of the
Fort Madison Zoning Code, entitled “Special Uses,” which is here by repealed in
its entirety and replaced with the following:
10-10-2: Special Uses:
Any special uses allowed in the R-4 Single Family Dwelling District as provided
by section 10-9-2 of this title.
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its
final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 16 th day of September, 2025.
/s/ Matt J. Mohrfeld, Mayor
City of Fort Madison, Iowa
 
ATTEST:
/s/ Justina M. Cullen, City Clerk
 
Published in the Daily Democrat on the _____ day of _________________, 2025.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. D-127
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 4: SIDEWALKS, OF THE FORT MADISON MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa:
SECTION 1. Chapter 4 of the Fort Madison City Code, currently titled
“SIDEWALKS”, is hereby amended to read as follows:
   CHAPTER 4: SIDEWALKS, MULTI-USE TRAILS & BICYCLE LANES
SECTION 2. SECTION MODIFIED. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Madison, Iowa, is amended by modifying 8-4-1 and adding the definition of
Bicycle Lanes with the following:
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS.
(A) SIDEWALKS. “Sidewalks” means the paved or otherwise improved portion of the
public right-of-way, located between the curb line (or lateral line of the
roadway) and the adjacent property line (or within a public easement), intended
primarily for pedestrian use.
(B) PERMANENT SIDEWALK . A sidewalk constructed or reconstructed on a street,
highway, avenue or public ground that is at grade, or has been ordered brought
to grade, and installed in accordance with the City's standards.
(C) TEMPORARY SIDEWALK. Any sidewalk other than a permanent sidewalk, including
a sidewalk constructed pending the bringing to grade of the street or the
completion of other required improvement work.
(D)  MULTI-USE TRAIL.  Meaning a way or place, the use of which is controlled
by the city as an owner of real property, designated by the multi-use
recreational trail maps, as approved by the City Council, and no multi-use
trail shall be considered as a street or highway.
(E) BICYCLE LANE. A portion of a street designed for exclusive or preferential
use by persons using bicycles, electric scooters or personal transportation
devices. Bicycle lanes are to be distinguished from the portion of the street
used for motor vehicle traffic by physical barrier, striping, marking, or other
similar device.
SECTION 3. SECTION MODIFIED. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Madison, Iowa, is amended by modifying 8-4-7 to add new multi-use trail
locations with the following:
8-4-7: LOCATION OF MULTI-USE TRAILS.
(A)   Along Bluff Road, from Crescent Lane to a point 980 feet West of 48 th
Street;
 
(B)   From Ivanhoe Park to Bluff Road;
 
(C)   From the intersection of 48 th Street and River Valley Road to the point
of intersection with Ivanhoe Park to Bluff Road trail;
 
(D)   From the intersection of Avenue L and 48 th Street, West to a point of
connection with the hospital pond trail;
 
(E)   From the intersection of Bluff Road and 21 st Street, East across the
Fort Madison High School property, along Avenue B from 18 th Street to 15 th
Street, North along 15 th Street from Avenue B to 302 nd Avenue, North along
302 nd Avenue into Rodeo Park;
 
(F)   Along Avenue H from 14 th Street to 18 th Street;
 
(G)   Along 48 th Street from Avenue L to River Valley Road;
 
(H)   Along Avenue L from 20 th Street to 30 th Street.
SECTION 4. SECTION ADDED. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Madison,
Iowa, is amended by adding Section 8-4-8: Location of Bicycle Lanes with the
following:
8-4-8: LOCATION OF BICYCLE LANES.
(A)   Along 24 th Street from Avenue A to Avenue L.
SECTION 5. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, or part of this
Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 7. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its
final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 2 nd day of December, 2025.
 
/s/ Matt J. Mohrfeld, Mayor
City of Fort Madison, Iowa
 
ATTEST:
/s/ Justina M. Cullen, City Clerk
 
Published in the Daily Democrat on the 12 th day of December, 2025.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. D-106
ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF FORT MADISON, REVISING, AMENDING,
RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF FORT MADISON DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Iowa empower and authorize
the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Fort Madison has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Fort
Madison of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in
book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT MADISON:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City of Fort Madison as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Madison,
Iowa".
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
Title 1: Administrative
Title 2: Boards and Commissions
Title 3: Building
Title 4: Business
Title 5: Fire
Title 6: Health and Sanitation
Title 7: Police
Title 8: Public Ways and Property
Title 9: Traffic
Title 10: Zoning
Title 11: Subdivisions
Appendix: Special Ordinances
Parallel References
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council of the City of Fort Madison and the City Clerk
of the City of Fort Madison is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of
such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Fort Madison on this
17th, day of October, 2023.
/s/Matt J. Mohrfeld, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Melinda L. Blind, City Clerk
Published in the Daily Democrat on _______________________, 2023
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATIVE
   Chapter
      
1.   City Code
      
2.   Saving Clause
      
3.   Definitions
      
4.   General Penalty
      
5.   City Charter
      
6.   City Council
      
7.   Mayor
      
8.   City Clerk
      
9.   City Manager
      
10.   City Attorney
      
11.   Salaries
      
12.   Bonds of Officers
      
13.   Employees; Benefits, Regulations and Residence Requirements
      
14.   Corporate Limits
      
15.   Fiscal Year; Seal
      
16.   Wards; Precincts
      
17.   Run-Off Election
CHAPTER 1: CITY CODE
Section
   
1-1-1   Title
   
1-1-2   Acceptance
   
1-1-3   Amendments
   
1-1-4   Construction of words
   
1-1-5   Interpretations
§ 1-1-1 TITLE.
   Upon adoption by the governing body, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the “Official City Code of the City of Fort
Madison”. Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto
as well as the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by
title in any legal document.
§ 1-1-2 ACCEPTANCE.
   The city code, as hereby presented in either its printed form or electronic
form, shall hereinafter be received without further proof in all courts and in
all administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of the city of
general and permanent effect.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-1-3 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amendment to this city code shall set forth in its text, the
title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended as
well as clearly delineate the specific text to be added or deleted. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to American
Legal Publishing Corporation, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared
for and inserted in its proper place in each copy of this city code and in the
electronic version maintained by American Legal Publishing Corporation. Each
such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in
each individual copy of the city code within 30 days from the date of its final
passage or as soon as practicable after said replacement pages are obtained
from American Legal Publishing Corporation.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-1-4 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever any work in any section of this city code importing the
plural number or the masculine gender is used in describing or referring to any
matters, parties or persons, any single and/or feminine matter, party or person
shall be deemed to be included although distributive words may not have been
used.
   (B)   When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city
code by words importing the singular number only, several matters, parties,
persons, firms, corporations, associations or any bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided that, these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this city code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto.
§ 1-1-5 INTERPRETATIONS.
   In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code, the
following rules shall be observed.
   (A)   Intent to defraud. Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability of employers and agents. When the provisions of any section
of this city code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth.
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
   
1-2-1   Repeal of general ordinances
   
1-2-2   Public utility ordinances
   
1-2-3   Court proceedings
§ 1-2-1 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; and all special ordinances.
§ 1-2-2 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code
or by virtue of §
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this city code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case the city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only.
§ 1-2-3 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code.
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1-3-1   Definitions; rules of construction
   
1-3-2   Headlines
   
1-3-3   Continuing provisions
§ 1-3-1 DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
   CITY or THIS CITY. The City of Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa.
   CODE. The Code of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa, and all amendments
thereto.
   COMPUTING TIME. In computing time, the first day shall be excluded and the
last included, unless the last falls on Sunday, in which case the time
prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following
Monday.
   COUNTY or THIS COUNTY. Lee County of the State of Iowa.
   GENDER. Whenever the masculine gender is used, female as well as males shall
be deemed to be included.
   IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY. All territory over which the city now has or
shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words giving a joint authority to three or more public
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of them, unless it shall be otherwise expressed in the ordinance or
resolution giving the authority.
   MISDEMEANOR. Wherever used in this city code, means a simple misdemeanor.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Whenever any words in any section of this Code import the plural
number, the singular shall be deemed to be included and whenever the singular
number shall be used it shall be deemed to include the plural.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation, and the word “sworn” shall be construed to
include the word “affirmed”.
   OCCUPANT or TENANT. Applied to a building or land, means any person who
holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
   OR, AND. The word “or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or”, if the
sense requires it.
   OWNER. Includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of any property, either
alone or with others.
   PERSON. A natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns or the agent of any of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real property
as defined by this section.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace
all chattels real.
   SHALL. The word “shall” is mandatory.
   STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Iowa.
   TENSE. Words in the present tense shall include the future.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but unless a facsimile signature is authorized when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public
writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person or in case he or she is unable to write, by his or her proper mark,
witnessed as required by law.
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
(Ord. B-254, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 1-3-2 HEADLINES.
   The headlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the headlines, are amended or re-enacted.
§ 1-3-3 CONTINUING PROVISIONS.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
of the 1953 Municipal Code of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa, and all
ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included herein, shall be considered
as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
1-4-1   Violation; penalty
   
1-4-2   Procedures and penalties for municipal infractions
§ 1-4-1 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty for violations. Whenever in this code an act is declared to be
a public offense, an unlawful act or a misdemeanor, any person violating the
same shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of at least
$65, but not to exceed $625. The court may order imprisonment not to exceed 30
days in lieu of the fine or in addition to the fine. Each day that the
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Violations. Violations of ordinances contained in Titles 3, 4, 5, 6,
8, 10 and 11 of this code may be prosecuted as municipal infractions and
violations of ordinances contained in Title 7, Chapters 3, 4 and 9 of this code
may be prosecuted as municipal infractions.
(Ord. C-198, passed 6-21-1994; Ord. C-525, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 1-4-2 PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES FOR MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable by a civil
penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation or
if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. Each day the illegal
condition continues shall be a separate offense subject to daily penalties of
$750. However, notwithstanding Iowa Code, section 364.3, a municipal infraction
arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement,
referred to in 40 CFR section 403.8, by an industrial user may be punishable by
a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day
a violation exists or continues. (Ord. C-312, 5-4-1999) In the case of
municipal infractions where the citing officer determines a fine alone is
appropriate, and where no court appearance is required if the fine is timely
paid, civil penalties may be set by schedule set by standing resolution of the
City Council. Any violation of these ordinances, including those termed
“misdemeanors” in their respective code sections, including but not limited to
criminal violations contained in various parts of Titles II-VII and IX, may be
cited under Section 1-4-2, at the citing officer’s sole option, and in such
cases the citing officer shall indicate on the citation “no court appearance
required if fine paid within thirty (30) days” and shall further indicate
“Section 1-4-2 (Scheduled Municipal Infraction)”.
      (2)   The city may classify a municipal infraction, other than a
violation arising from non-compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement, as an environmental violation if the infraction is a violation of
Iowa Code Chapter 455B or a violation of a standard established by the city in
consultation with the state’s Department of Natural Resources, or both. The
discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or
storing of grain by a person, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the
violation of which is classified as an environmental violation, unless the
person is engaged in industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.
The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying
or storing of grain by a person engaged in industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the
violation of which is classified as an environmental violation, if the
discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15. A municipal infraction which
is classified an environmental violation is punishable by a civil penalty of
not more than $1,000 for each occurrence. A person committing an environmental
violation is not subject to a civil penalty, if all of the following conditions
are satisfied:
         (a)   The violation results solely from the person conducting an
initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing
or conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation;
         (b)   The person notifies the city of the violation within 24 hours
from the time that the violation begins; and
         (c)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
      (3)   The city shall not enforce this section against a person committing
an environmental violation, until the city offers to participate in informal
negotiations with the person. If the person accepts the offer, the city and the
person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues alleged
to be the basis for the violation.
   (B)   Provided by ordinance. The city, by ordinance, may provide that a
violation of an ordinance is a municipal infraction.
   (C)   State law. The city shall not provide that a violation of an ordinance
is a municipal infraction if the violation is a felony, an aggravated
misdemeanor or a serious misdemeanor under state law or if the violation is a
simple misdemeanor under Iowa Code Chapters 687 through 747.
   (D)   Civil citation. An officer authorized by a city to enforce a city code
or regulation may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal
infraction. A copy of the citation may be served by
personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305; by certified
mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant’s last known mailing address,
return receipt requested; or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule
of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing
officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District
Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been
committed and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the defendant;
      (2)   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation;
      (3)   The location and time of the infraction;
      (4)   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternate relief
sought, or both;
      (5)   The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid;
      (6)   The time and place of court appearance; and
      (7)   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   (E)   In municipal infraction proceedings.
      (1)   The matter shall be tried before a magistrate, a district associate
judge or a district judge in District Court if the total amount of civil
penalties does not exceed $2,000 in the same manner as a small claim. The
matter shall only be tried before a judge in District Court if the total amount
of civil penalties assessed exceeds $2,000.
      (2)   The city has the burden of proof that the municipal infraction
occurred and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof shall be by
clear, satisfactory and convincing evidence.
      (3)   The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy of
the charges and that the defendant understands the charges. The defendant may
question all witnesses who appear for the city and produce evidence or
witnesses on the defendant’s behalf.
      (4)   The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant’s own
selection and at the defendant’s own expense.
      (5)   The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction.
      (6)   If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall enter a
judgment against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the court
shall dismiss it.
   (F)   Remitted. All penalties or forfeitures collected by the court for
municipal infractions shall be remitted to the city in the same manner as fines
and forfeitures are remitted for criminal violations under Iowa Code §
602.8106. If the person named in the citation is served as provided in this
section and fails without good cause to appear in response to the civil
citation, judgment shall be entered against the person cited.
   (G)   Court costs and fees. A person against whom judgment is entered, shall
pay court costs and fees as in small claims under Iowa Code Chapter 631. If the
action is dismissed, the city is liable for the court costs and court fees.
Where the action is disposed of without payment, or provision for assessment,
of court costs, the Clerk shall at once enter judgment for costs against the
city.
   (H)   Alternative relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the
court in the same action.
   (I)   Other actions.
      (1)   When judgment has been entered against a defendant, the court may
do any of the following:
         (a)   Impose a civil penalty by entry of a personal judgment against
the defendant;
         (b)   Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or
deferred under conditions imposed by the court;
         (c)   Grant appropriate alternative relief ordering the defendant to
abate or cease the violation;
         (d)   Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation; and/or
         (e)   Order that the city’s costs for abatement or correction of the
violation be entered as a personal judgment against the defendant or assessed
against the property where the violation occurred, or both.
      (2)   If a defendant wilfully violates the terms of an order imposed by
the court, the failure is contempt.
      (3)   A magistrate or district associate judge shall have jurisdiction to
assess or enter judgment for costs of abatement or correction in an amount not
to exceed the jurisdictional amount for a money judgment in a civil action
pursuant to Iowa Code § 631.1, subs. 1, for magistrates and Iowa Code §
602.6306, subs. 2, for district associate judges. If the city seeks abatement
or correction costs in excess of those amounts, and the matter is not before a
judge in District Court, the case shall be referred to the District Court for
hearing and entry of an appropriate order. The procedure for hearing in the
District Court shall be the same procedure as that for a small claims appeal
pursuant to Iowa Code § 631.13.
   (J)   Motion for new trial; appeal. The defendant or the city may file a
motion for a new trial or may appeal the decision of a magistrate, district
associate judge or a district judge to the District Court. The procedure on
appeal shall be the same as for a small claim pursuant to Iowa Code § 631.13. A
factual determination made by the trial court, supported by substantial
evidence as shown in the record, is binding for purposes of appeal relating to
the violation at issue, but shall not be admissible or binding as to any future
violation for the same or similar ordinance provision by the same defendant.
   (K)   Criminal citation. This section does not preclude a peace officer of
the city from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this code or
regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Each day
that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant, constitutes
a separate offense.
   (L)   Arrest, imprisonment and prosecution. The issuance of a civil citation
for a municipal infraction or the ensuing court proceedings do not provide an
action for false arrest, false imprisonment or malicious prosecution.
   (M)   Environmental violation. An action brought pursuant to this section
for a municipal infraction which is an environmental violation does not
preclude, and is in addition to, any other enforcement action which may be
brought pursuant to Iowa Code Chapters 455B, 455D or 455E.
(Ord. C-178, passed 11-16-1993; Ord. C-312, passed 5-4-1999; Ord. D-90, passed
8-16-2022; Ord. D-104, 9-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.22
CHAPTER 5: CITY CHARTER
Section
   
1-5-1   Purpose
   
1-5-2   Charter
   
1-5-3   Form of government
   
1-5-4   Powers and duties
   
1-5-5   Number and term of Council
   
1-5-6   Term of Mayor
   
1-5-7   Copies on file
§ 1-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a Charter embodying the form
of government existing on 7-3-1973.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
§ 1-5-2 CHARTER.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Charter of the City of Fort Madison,
Iowa”.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
§ 1-5-3 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the city is the Mayor- Council form of government.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
§ 1-5-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council and Mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
§ 1-5-5 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of two Council members elected at large and one Council
member from each of five wards as established by ordinance, elected for terms
of four years.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973; Ord. C-286, passed 8-19-1997)
§ 1-5-6 TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
§ 1-5-7 COPIES ON FILE.
   The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of this Charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
Secretary of State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the Charter available at
the City Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Ord. B-143, passed 7-3-1973)
CHAPTER 6: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
1-6-1   Composition
   
1-6-2   Term of office
   
1-6-3   Meetings
   
1-6-4   Quorum; attendance at meetings
   
1-6-5   Appointments
   
1-6-6   Removal of officers
   
1-6-7   Rules of order
   
1-6-8   Presentation and approval of claims
   
1-6-9   Procedure for assessment
   
1-6-10   Salary
§ 1-6-1 COMPOSITION.
   The Council shall be composed of seven members, one elected from each of the
five wards of the city and two elected from the city at large.
(Ord. A-7, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-6-2 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Terms of city officers shall begin and end at 12:00 noon on the first day in
January which is not a Sunday or legal holiday following a regular city
election.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-6-3 MEETINGS.
   The Council shall meet at the Council room in the City Hall on the first
Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m., and adjourned or recessed meetings may be
held at such times and places as the Council may direct. Special meetings shall
be held when called by the Mayor or any four or more members of the Council.
With the exception of meetings called in case of an emergency, notice of such
special meetings shall be given each member of the Council through Council’s
city email at least 24 hours before the meeting.
(Ord. D-40, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 1-6-4 QUORUM; ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   Four members shall constitute a quorum to transact business. A smaller
number, as well as a quorum, may adjourn from time to time. The Mayor may
compel the attendance of any absent member by sending a member of the Police
Department for him or her.
(Ord. A-7, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-6-5 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   At the first meeting in July following each biennial election, the
Council shall appoint a Clerk and an attorney to two-year terms.
   (B)   The attorney shall be a duly licensed and practicing attorney.
   (C)   The terms of the Clerk and attorney, who are in office on the
effective date hereof, will be extended to the first meeting in July following
the next biennial Council election.
(Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 1-6-6 REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Any person appointed to a city office may be removed by the officer or
body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order,
which shall give the reasons therefor and be filed with the Clerk. Any person
elected to a city office by the people may be removed from office by two-thirds
vote of the Council members elected, after hearing on written charges preferred
against said person by the Mayor or any Council member and filed with the
Clerk, for willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties of his
or her office, for wilful misconduct or maladministration of his or her office,
for corruption, for extortion, for intoxication, upon conviction of being
intoxicated, or upon conviction of a felony.
   (B)   (1)   Before such person can be removed from office, he or she shall
have at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of hearing and shall be
furnished with a copy of the charges preferred. At the hearing, the accused may
be present, may be represented by counsel, and may introduce evidence in his or
her own behalf. The proceedings at the hearing shall, so far as is practicable,
be in accordance with the rules of civil procedure followed by the district
courts of the state.
      (2)   Upon any question arising for decision, the question shall be by
ayes and nayes and, upon final issue, the question shall be “Shall the accused
be removed from office?”. If the Police Chief is a party to the proceedings,
the Council may deputize a person to act as such.
(Ord. A-7, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-6-7 RULES OF ORDER.
   Unless otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance, Robert’s Rules of
Order shall govern the meetings of the Council and its transaction of business.
The City Attorney shall act as parliamentarian at Council meetings.
(Ord. A-7, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-6-8 PRESENTATION AND APPROVAL OF CLAIMS.
   All bills and claims filed against the city and not for work or materials
furnished the city under written contract shall be dated, itemized and duly
verified by the person asserting the claim; and shall, if for goods or
materials or for services performed by a person other than a regular city
employee, be approved by the head of the department to which said work,
materials or services has been or will be furnished; and all such claims shall
be filed with and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. A-6, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-363, passed 1-2-1982; Ord. D-49, passed
11-5-2018)
§ 1-6-9 PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT.
   Whenever any work other than the construction or reconstruction of a public
improvement as the same are defined in Iowa Code Chapter 384 is performed or
done by the city or any employees or agents thereof under and by virtue of any
ordinance providing for the assessment of costs of the same against any person
or property, a special assessment shall be made and levied by the procedure set
out in Iowa Code §§ 384.41 through 384.54, as may be applicable in the given
circumstances.
(Ord. A-69, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-204, passed 10-21-1975)
Statutory reference:
   Assessment, when payable, see Iowa Code § 384.60
§ 1-6-10 SALARY.
   Each Council member shall receive as full compensation from the city as
services for all meetings, including regular and special meetings, the sum of
$3,000 annually, payable at the rate of $125 per regular meeting. The regular
meetings of Council are on the first and third Tuesday of every month.
(Ord. C-333, passed 1-16-2001)
CHAPTER 7: MAYOR
Section
   
1-7-1   Election
   
1-7-2   Working time
   
1-7-3   Chief executive officer
   
1-7-4   Conservator of the Peace
   
1-7-5   Office
   
1-7-6   Duties
   
1-7-7   Presiding officer
   
1-7-8   Report to Council
   
1-7-9   Salary
§ 1-7-1 ELECTION.
   The Mayor shall be elected by the electorate for a term of two years and
shall take office at 12:00 noon on the second secular day in January after the
biennial election.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-7-2 WORKING TIME.
   The Mayor shall devote sufficient working time to perform his or her duties
as Mayor.
(Ord. B-51, passed 3-3-1970; Ord. 263, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. B-288, passed 7-3-
1979; Ord. B-291, passed 8-28-1979; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-7-3 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-7-4 CONSERVATOR OF THE PEACE.
   The Mayor shall be a Conservator of the Peace, and, within the limits of the
city, shall have all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress
disorders. He or she may, upon view, arrest anyone deemed guilty of any crime
under the laws of the state.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. A-173, passed 12-4-1961)
§ 1-7-5 OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall maintain an office at some convenient place in the city to
be provided by the Council.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-7-6 DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits granted by the
authority of the Council and shall sign or certify to such other documents or
papers as may be required by law or this code, except to the extent the City
Council has passed a resolution directing some other city official to sign said
documents or papers. The Mayor shall also perform such other duties compatible
with the nature of his or her office as may be required by the provisions of
this code or direction of the Council.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-59, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 1-7-7 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-204, passed 10-21-1975)
§ 1-7-8 REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall, at the first regular meeting of the newly elected Council
in January, and at such other times as he may deem expedient, report to the
Council concerning the municipal affairs of the city and recommend such
measures as to him or her may seem advisable.
(Ord. A-28, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-7-9 SALARY.
   The salary of the Mayor shall be $5,500 annually, which amount shall cover
all work performed by the Mayor. The salary shall be paid in 26 equal
installments.
(Ord. C-333, passed 1-16-2001)
CHAPTER 8: CITY CLERK
Section
   
1-8-1   Attend meetings; records
   
1-8-2   Publications
   
1-8-3   Ordinance procedure
   
1-8-4   City seal
   
1-8-5   Detailed report of accounting officers
   
1-8-6   Powers and duties
   
1-8-7   [Reserved]
   
1-8-8   [Reserved]
   
1-8-9   Safe-keeping records; documents
   
1-8-10   License record
   
1-8-11   Countersign all conveyances
   
1-8-12   Countersign orders against County Treasurer
   
1-8-13   Attest bonds; interest coupons
   
1-8-14   Record of official bonds
   
1-8-15   Custody; bonds; official oaths
   
1-8-16   Administer oaths; affirmations
   
1-8-17   Assessments; taxes certifications
   
1-8-18   Elections; registration
   
1-8-19   Civil Service Commission
§ 1-8-1 ATTEND MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council, make a complete and
accurate record of all proceedings there had and maintain the same in such
manner that they shall at all times be open to the public.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-2 PUBLICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published any publications as required by law.
(Ord. B-204, passed 10-21-1975)
§ 1-8-3 ORDINANCE PROCEDURE.
   Immediately after the passage of an ordinance, the Clerk shall record the
same in a book kept by him or her for that purpose and, when the Mayor shall
have compared the same with the original and signed the same, the Clerk shall
attest the same and, if such ordinance is published in a newspaper, he or she
shall append a certificate thereto stating therein the time and manner of
publication thereof. If said ordinance establishes any restricted district,
business line or fire limit, he or she shall immediately certify the same to
the County Recorder.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-4 CITY SEAL.
   The city seal shall remain in the custody of the Clerk and shall be affixed
by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which must be
authenticated in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-8-5 DETAILED REPORT OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS.
   The Clerk shall see that all accounting officers of all boards, commissions,
departments and offices receiving or disbursing public funds shall file with
his or her office, within 30 days from the expiration of the fiscal year of the
city, a detailed report in writing showing the receipts and disbursements of
all funds in the respective department, board, commission or office for the
past fiscal year.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-6 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Clerk shall have such other powers and duties as may be provided by the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-8-7 [RESERVED].
§ 1-8-8 [RESERVED].
§ 1-8-9 SAFE-KEEPING RECORDS; DOCUMENTS.
   The Clerk shall have the custody and safe-keeping of all records, documents,
ordinances, resolutions, by-laws and orders of the Council and all other papers
delivered to him or her for safe keeping by the city authorities or officers.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-10 LICENSE RECORD.
   The Clerk shall keep an accurate record of all licenses issued by him or
her, which record shall show the name of the person or firm to whom such
license was issued and the fee collected by him or her therefor in each
instance.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-11 COUNTERSIGN ALL CONVEYANCES.
   The Clerk shall countersign all conveyances from the city and attach the
city seal thereto.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-12 COUNTERSIGN ORDERS AGAINST COUNTY TREASURER.
   The Clerk shall countersign the order in favor of the City Treasurer against
the County Treasurer for amounts collected each month by the county for the
City.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-13 ATTEST BONDS; INTEREST COUPONS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall attest the bonds of the city and affix the city seal
thereto.
   (B)   He or she shall also attest the interest coupons attached to said
bonds.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-14 RECORD OF OFFICIAL BONDS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall maintain a book to be known as the “Record of Official
Bonds”, in which shall be recorded in full the official bonds of all city
officials.
   (B)   Said record shall have an index which, under the title of each office,
shall show the name of each principal, his or her sureties, and the date of
filing the bond.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-15 CUSTODY; BONDS; OFFICIAL OATHS.
   The Clerk shall have custody of all bonds and official oaths of officers of
the city from whom both bond and oath are required, except for the bond and
oath of the Clerk, which shall be kept by the Mayor.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-16 ADMINISTER OATHS; AFFIRMATIONS.
   The Clerk shall administer oaths and take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of his or her office, position or appointment.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-17 ASSESSMENTS; TAXES CERTIFICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall certify to the County Auditor all assessments and taxes of
every kind and nature levied by the Council, except as provided by law.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-204, passed 10-21-1975)
§ 1-8-18 ELECTIONS; REGISTRATION.
   The Clerk shall perform such duties in connection with the holding of
elections, and registration therefor, as are prescribed by the laws of the
state.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-8-19 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Civil Service Commission.
(Ord. A-23, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 9: CITY MANAGER
Section
   
1-9-1   Position of City Manager
   
1-9-2   Duties of City Manager
   
1-9-3   Election and appoint Council member
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ord. B-350 is 7-1-1981.
§ 1-9-1 POSITION OF CITY MANAGER.
   The position of City Manager is hereby created as a position to be filled by
action of the Council by majority vote. The City Manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the city. The City Council shall have the power to
appoint or discharge the City Manager.
(Ord. B-350, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 1-9-2 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Supervise enforcement and execution of the city laws;
   (B)   Attend all meetings of the Council;
   (C)   Recommend to the Council any measures necessary or expedient for the
good government and welfare of the city;
   (D)   Supervise the official conduct of all officers of the city appointed
by the Manager, and take active control of the Police, Fire and Public Works
Departments of the city;
   (E)   Supervise the performance of all contract for work to be done for the
city, make all purchases of material and supplies, and see that such material
and supplies are received, and are of the quality and character called for by
the contract;
   (F)   Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all city property, capital improvements and undertakings of the
city, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements;
   (G)   Cooperate with any administrative agency;
   (H)   Be responsible for the cleaning, sprinkling and lighting of streets,
alleys and public places, and the collection and disposal of waste;
   (I)   Provide for and cause records to be kept of the issuance and
revocation of licenses and permits authorized by city law;
   (J)   Keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions
of the city, and of its future needs;
   (K)   Conduct the business affairs of the city and cause accurate records to
be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods;
   (L)   Prepare and submit to the Council annually the required budgets;
   (M)   Make to the Council, not later than the tenth day of each month, an
itemized financial report in writing, showing the receipts and disbursements
for the preceding month. Copies of financial reports must be available at the
Clerk’s office for public distribution;
   (N)   Appoint a Treasurer subject to the approval of the Council;
   (O)   Perform other duties at the Council’s direction;
   (P)   Appoint administrative assistants with the approval of the Council;
   (Q)   Employ, reclassify or discharge all employees, with Council approval
required for the positions of Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire and
Building Department, and fix their compensation subject to any applicable civil
service rules and Iowa Code, Chapter 400, except the City Clerk and City
Attorney;
   (R)   Make all appointments not otherwise provided for;
   (S)   Suspend or discharge summarily any officer, appointee or employee whom
the Manager has power to appoint or employ, subject to civil service provision
and Iowa Code, Chapter 400; and
   (T)   Summarily and without notice investigate the affairs and conduct of
any department, agency, officer or employee under the Manager’s supervision,
and compel the production of evidence and attendance of witnesses.
(Ord. B-350, passed 6-2-1981; Ord. C-042, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 1-9-3 ELECTION AND APPOINT COUNCIL MEMBER.
   The City Manager shall not take part in any election for Council members,
other than by casting a vote, and shall not appoint a Council member to city
office or employment, nor shall a Council member accept such appointment.
(Ord. B-350, passed 6-2-1981)
CHAPTER 10: CITY ATTORNEY
Section
   
1-10-1   [Reserved]
   
1-10-2   Attend meetings
   
1-10-3   Specific duties
   
1-10-4   Authority
   
1-10-5   Transmit records to successor
   
1-10-6   Other duties; powers
   
1-10-7   Assistant City Attorney
§ 1-10-1 [RESERVED].
§ 1-10-2 ATTEND MEETINGS.
   The Attorney shall attend all meetings of the City Council.
(Ord. A-27, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-10-3 SPECIFIC DUTIES.
   (A)   The Attorney shall give his or her legal opinion of all questions of
law arising out of any law, ordinance, suit, claim or demand pertaining to or
involving the city, and shall give such opinion in writing when requested to do
so.
   (B)   The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to all city officials, boards
and commissions as far as their or its official duties are concerned, when
requested to do so by said officials, boards and commissions.
   (C)   The Attorney shall report to the City Council any defects that he or
she may discover in any ordinance, and shall draw such ordinances as may be
requested by the Council.
   (D)   The Attorney shall, when directed to do so by any city official, board
or commission, draw all contracts between the city and other parties, prosecute
and defend all suits or other matters in which the city shall be a party,
including violations of city ordinances, take appeals in such cases as the
interest of the city requires and prosecute or defend the city’s interest in
all courts of the state and of the United States, all subject, however, to the
direction of the City Council.
(Ord. A-27, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-10-4 AUTHORITY.
   The Attorney is authorized to sign the name of the city to bonds or papers
of whatever kind necessary in legal proceedings for the prosecution of any suit
in court pertaining to or involving the city.
(Ord. A-27, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-10-5 TRANSMIT RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR.
   The Attorney shall transmit to his or her successor a docket of all cases
pending wherein the city is a party, as well as all books, papers and documents
in his or her possession belonging to the city.
(Ord. A-27, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-10-6 OTHER DUTIES; POWERS.
   The Attorney shall perform such other duties and be vested with such other
powers as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
(Ord. A-27, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-10-7 ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney may appoint an Assistant City Attorney subject to
the approval of the Council. The Assistant City Attorney may act when the City
Attorney is unable to do so.
   (B)   The Assistant will serve at the pleasure of the City Attorney and will
be paid by the City Attorney for the following services:
      (1)   Attending City Council meetings;
      (2)   Providing oral and/or written legal advice to the city; and
      (3)   Drafting and/or approving all city ordinances, and will be paid by
the City Attorney no more than the normal hourly rate of the City Attorney for
all work in excess of the above. The Assistant City Attorney will take the same
oath as the City Attorney and shall provide bond with sureties in an amount
determined sufficient by the City Manager.
(Ord. C-075, passed 2-5-1991)
CHAPTER 11: SALARIES
Section
   
1-11-1   Salaries of supervisory personnel
§ 1-11-1 SALARIES OF SUPERVISORY PERSONNEL.
   Salaries of supervisory personnel shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. Said salaries shall be reviewed at least once
on or before April 30 of each year by the Council or its designee.
(Ord. B-285, passed 6-5-1979)
CHAPTER 12: BONDS OF OFFICERS
Section
   
1-12-1   Official bonds
   
1-12-2   Surety
   
1-12-3   Approval; custody
§ 1-12-1 OFFICIAL BONDS.
   Each official named shall be bonded in the amount shown:
 
City Clerk               $100,000
City Manager             $100,000
Mayor                    $100,000
Mayor Pro Tem            $100,000
Treasurer                $350,000
All other city employees $25,000
 
(Ord. C-024, passed 3-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 64.2
§ 1-12-2 SURETY.
   Each of the above bonds shall be executed with an association or corporation
which does the business of insuring the fidelity of others and which has
authority by law to do business in this state as surety.
(Ord. A-32, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-12-3 APPROVAL; CUSTODY.
   All bonds shall be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. B-366, passed 2-16-1982; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
CHAPTER 13: EMPLOYEES; BENEFITS, REGULATIONS AND RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
1-13-1   Employee benefits and regulations
   
1-13-2   Legal holidays
   
1-13-3   Residence requirements
§ 1-13-1 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND REGULATIONS.
   An Employee Personnel Manual setting forth appropriate disclosure of
information relative to all city employees, including, but not limited to,
benefits, work rules and regulations shall be developed and reviewed at least
annually by the City Manager and changes must be approved by the City Council
by resolution. Said Personnel Manual shall apply to all city employees, except
to the extent the Personnel Manual is in conflict with collective bargaining
agreements negotiated under Iowa Code Chapter 20.
(Ord. B-373, passed 6-15-1982; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-13-2 LEGAL HOLIDAYS.
   Except as otherwise provided in employee agreements, the following together
with any other days which might be specifically proclaimed in writing by the
Mayor and Council are designated as legal holidays:
      New Year’s Day;
      Washington’s Birthday;
      Good Friday;
      Memorial Day;
      Independence Day;
      Labor Day;
      Veterans Day;
      Thanksgiving Day;
      Friday after Thanksgiving; and
      Christmas Day.
(Ord. B-358, passed 11-2-1981)
§ 1-13-3 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   City employees, except for employees under Civil Service pursuant to
Iowa Code 400.17(3)(a), must be residents of the State of Iowa at the time
employment with the City begins and shall remain Iowa residents during
employment. Civil Service employees shall be governed by this policy, following
the two-year period set forth in Iowa Code 400.17(3)(a).
   (B)   City employees must reside within the number of air miles of the city
limits as specified by the written policies of their department heads, as
approved by the city manager, but not to exceed twenty (20) air miles of the
city limits. For purposes of this section only, the annexed strip of land that
runs along the Burlington Northern-Santa Fe Railroad right of way to the
industrial area southwest of the city, where 2597 Henry Layden Drive and 2467
Highway 61 are currently located, shall not be considered as city limits, and
shall not be used to calculate the twenty (20) air mile limitation.
   (C)   The City Manager may grant temporary exceptions for new employees as
deemed appropriate and necessary. Permanent exceptions for employees may be
permitted with the approval of the employees’ supervisors and the City Manager,
if said exception is negotiated at the time of hire and if the employee is not
filling an essential services position where reporting to work quickly in an
emergency may be a necessity.
(Ord. C-330, passed 9-19-2000; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018; Ord. D-063, passed
8-4-2020; Ord. D-067, passed 9-1-2020; Ord. D-100, passed 7-5-2023)
CHAPTER 14: CORPORATE LIMITS
Section
   
1-14-1   Limits defined
   
1-14-2   Jurisdiction
   
1-14-3   Property divided by corporate limits
§ 1-14-1 LIMITS DEFINED.
   The city’s corporate boundaries are hereby adopted as if fully set out
herein and are viewable on the official city map on file in City Hall.
Annexations shall, following approval of the City Council, be included on the
official city map.
(Ord. B-69, passed 8-18-1970; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-14-2 JURISDICTION.
   The force and authority of all provisions of this code and the jurisdiction
of the officers shall be coextensive with the foregoing territory in all cases
to the extent provided by the laws of the state.
(Ord. A-2, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 1-14-3 PROPERTY DIVIDED BY CORPORATE LIMITS.
   In the event the corporate limits divide any tract of land, parcel,
individual lot or several contiguous lots and the property owner pays real
estate taxes at both the city and county tax rate, then the following
provisions apply.
   (A)   When a home, household or dwelling unit is divided by the corporate
limits of the city, the owner has the option of paying all the taxes associated
with said dwelling at the city tax rate or at the county rate. If the owner
pays taxes on said dwelling unit at the city rate, that property owner will
receive city services. If the owner pays said taxes at the county rate, the
county will be responsible to provide services.
   (B)   If the corporate limits divide a property so that the dwelling unit
exists wholly outside the city limits but a part of the property is within the
city limits the property owner may ask for voluntary annexation to obtain city
services.
(Ord. C-159, passed 5-18-1993)
CHAPTER 15: FISCAL YEAR; SEAL
Section
   
1-15-1   Fiscal year
   
1-15-2   Audit
   
1-15-3   City seal
§ 1-15-1 FISCAL YEAR.
   The municipal fiscal year shall begin on the first secular day of July of
each year and extend until the following June 30.
(Ord. B-199, passed 9-2-1975)
§ 1-15-2 AUDIT.
   Following the close of each municipal fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall
prepare for the annual audit.
(Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-15-3 CITY SEAL.
   The seal of the city is hereby established and declared to be a circular
impression having in its center a railroad locomotive, a bridge over the
Mississippi River, blockhouse from Old Fort Madison, a factory and around the
outer circle the words “Seal of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa”.
(Ord. D-012, passed 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 16: WARDS; PRECINCTS
Section
   
1-16-1   Definitions
   
1-16-2   Wards established
   
1-16-3   Precincts established
   
1-16-4   Correction of errors
   
1-16-5   Publication of changes
§ 1-16-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ANNEXED TERRITORY. Territory annexed to the city after census day.
   CENSUS DAY. The official date of the United States decennial census.
   CITY. All territory within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Madison
and all annexed territories.
   COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS. The County Auditor of Lee County.
   COMPASS POINTS. Points of the compass are approximate unless otherwise
stated.
   CORPORATE LIMITS. The corporate limits of the City of Fort Madison on census
day. The CORPORATE LIMITS do not embrace the territories annexed after census
day.
   NAMES, BOUNDARIES, LINES, FEATURES AND FIXTURES. All names, boundaries,
lines, features and fixtures are to be construed as they existed on census day.
   STREET. (or similar language) The centerline of the right-of-way, and a
straight extension of that center.
(Ord. C-348, passed 8-21-2001; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-16-2 WARDS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The First Ward shall consist of Precinct 1 in its entirety which shall
consist of that territory bounded by a line as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the Denmark Hilltop (a street) and Old Denmark Hill (a street),
thence southeasterly along Old Denmark Hill to the intersection of Old Denmark
Hill and Sunnyside Drive; thence southwesterly along Sunnyside Drive to the
intersection of 11th Street, Avenue C and Sunnyside Drive; thence southerly
along 11th Street to the intersection of 11th Street and Avenue D; then
easterly along Avenue D to the intersection of 10th Street and Avenue D; thence
southerly along 10th Street to the intersection of 10th Street and Avenue I;
thence southwesterly along Avenue I to the intersection of 11th Street and
Avenue I; thence westerly to the intersection of 12th Street and Avenue I;
thence southerly to the southernmost point of Census Tract 4902, Block 3006;
thence southeasterly to the east corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3036;
thence southwesterly along the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad tracks to
the southwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3038; thence southerly to the
southwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3049 and the Mississippi River;
thence easterly along the southern corporate limit line and the Mississippi
River to the eastern corporate limit line at the northeast corner of Census
Track 4902, Block 4024; thence northwesterly along the northern corporate limit
line to the northwest corner of Census Tract 4911, Block 2003; thence southerly
along the western corporate limit line to the northwest corner of Census Tract
4911, Block 3010; thence southerly to the intersection of Denmark Hilltop and
Old Denmark Hill and the place of beginning and includes Census Blocks
191114911003003, 191114911003005, 191114911003006, 191114902004027 in
Washington Township.
   (B)   The Second Ward shall consist of Precinct 2 in its entirety which
shall consist of that territory bounded by a line as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the Denmark Hilltop (a street) and Old Denmark Hill (a street),
thence southeasterly along Old Denmark Hill to the intersection of Old Denmark
Hill and Sunnyside Drive; thence southwesterly along Sunnyside Drive to the
intersection of 11th Street, Avenue C and Sunnyside Drive; thence southerly
along 11th Street to the intersection of 11th Street and Avenue D; then
easterly along Avenue D to the intersection of 10th Street and Avenue D; thence
southerly along 10th Street to the intersection of 10th Street and Avenue I;
thence southwesterly along Avenue I to the intersection of 11th Street and
Avenue I; thence westerly to the intersection of 12th Street and Avenue I;
thence southerly to the southernmost point of Census Tract 4902, Block 3006;
thence southeasterly to the east corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3036;
thence southwesterly along the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad tracks to
the southwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3047; thence northerly to the
northwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3047; thence westerly to the
southwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3034; thence northerly along 18th
Street to the intersection of 18th Street and the northern corporate limits;
thence easterly along the northern corporate limits to the intersection of Old
Denmark Road and Louis Street; thence southerly to the intersection of Denmark
Hilltop and Old Denmark Hill and the place of beginning.
   (C)   The 3rd Ward shall consist of Precinct 3 in its entirety which shall
consist of that territory bounded by a line as follows: beginning at the
intersection of northern corporate limits line and 18th Street; thence westerly
along the northern corporate limits to the northwest corner of Census Tract
4911, Block 2019; thence southerly to the intersection of 25th Street and
Avenue A; thence easterly to the intersection of 24th Street and Avenue A;
thence southerly to the intersection of 24th Street and Avenue G; thence
westerly to the intersection of 26th Street and Avenue G; thence southerly to
the intersection of 26th Street and Avenue J; thence easterly to the
intersection of 25th Street and Avenue J; thence southerly to the intersection
of 25th Street and Avenue L; thence westerly to the intersection of Avenue L
and Dry Creek; thence southerly along Dry Creek to the southwest corner of
Census Tract 4902, Block 3038; thence easterly along Burlington Northern Santa
Fe tracks to the southeast corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3046; thence
northerly to the northwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3047; thence
westerly to the southwest corner of Census Tract 4902, Block 3034; thence
northerly along 18th Street to the intersection of 18th Street and the northern
corporate limits and the place of beginning.
   (D)   (1)   The 4th Ward shall consist of Precinct 4 and 4A in their
entirety which shall consist of that territory bounded by a line as follows:
         (a)   Fort Madison Precinct 4a: beginning at the intersection of 25th
Street and the northern corporate limit line; thence southerly to the
intersection of 25th Street and Avenue A; thence easterly to the intersection
of 24th Street and Avenue A; thence southerly to the intersection of 24th
Street and Avenue G; thence westerly to the intersection of Oak Drive and
Avenue G; thence northerly to the intersection of Oak Drive and Avenue C;
thence westerly to the intersection of Avenue C and 28th Place; thence
northerly to the intersection of 28th Place and Avenue A; thence westerly to
the intersection of Avenue A and Chalk Ridge Road - which is the city limits;
thence easterly along the city limits to the place of beginning; and
         (b)   Fort Madison Precinct 4: beginning at the intersection of Chalk
Ridge Road and Avenue A; thence easterly to the intersection of Avenue A and
29th Place; thence southerly to the intersection of 28th Place and Avenue C;
thence easterly to the intersection of Avenue C and Oak Drive; thence southerly
to the intersection of Oak Drive and Avenue G; thence easterly on Avenue G to
the intersection of Avenue G and 26th Street; thence southerly to the
intersection of 26th Street and Avenue J; thence southerly to the intersection
of 25th Street and Avenue L; thence westerly to the intersection of Avenue L
and Dry Creek; thence southerly along Dry Creek to the southeast corner of
Census Tract 4902, Block 3027; thence westerly to the southwest corner of
Census Tract 4902, Block 2003; thence northerly to the intersection of 33rd
Street and Avenue N, thence easterly to the intersection of 32nd Street and
Avenue N; thence northerly to the intersection of 32nd Street and Avenue H;
thence easterly to the intersection of 30th Street and Avenue H; thence
northerly to the intersection of Crescent Lane and the northern city limit line
(Bluff Road); thence northeasterly along the city limits to the intersection of
city limits and 25th Street and the place of beginning.
   (2)   Then the return.
   (E)   The 5th Ward shall consist of Precinct 5 in its entirety which shall
consist of that territory bounded by a line as follows: all that property in
the corporate limits of the city, which is west of a line beginning at
intersection of Crescent Lane and the northern corporate limit line (Bluff
Road); thence southerly along Crescent Lane and 30th Street to the intersection
of 30th Street and Avenue H; thence westerly to the intersection of Avenue H
and 32nd Street; thence southerly to the intersection of 32nd Street and Avenue
N; thence westerly along Avenue N to the intersection of 33rd Street and Avenue
N; thence southerly along 33rd Street to the southwest comer of Census Tract
4902, Block 2003; thence easterly to the southeast comer of Census Tract 4902,
Block 3027; thence southernly to the south east comer of Census Tract 4902,
Block 2044 (southern corporate limit line) and the Mississippi River. Also
includes the following portions of Fort Madison Township, Census Blocks:
191114911002037, 191114901005009 and 191114901005014; and the following
portions of Jefferson Township, Census Blocks 191114902002072, 191114902002073
and 191114902002074.
(Ord. D-082, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. D-86, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 1-16-3 PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED.
   The city is hereby divided into six precincts as follows.
   (A)   The first ward shall consist of Precinct One.
   (B)   The second ward shall consist of Precinct Two.
   (C)   The third ward shall consist of Precinct Three.
   (D)   The fourth ward shall consist of Precincts Four and Four-a.
   (E)   The fifth ward shall consist of Precinct Five.
(Ord. D-082, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. D-86, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 1-16-4 CORRECTION OF ERRORS.
   If this chapter fails to place any part of the city within a precinct
established by this chapter, the Commissioner of Elections shall assign the
omitted area to an adjacent precinct within the same legislative district. If
this chapter places any part of the city in more than one precinct established
by this chapter, the Commissioner of Elections shall assign that territory to
an adjacent precinct within the proper legislative district. The Commissioner
of Elections may also correct any obvious errors in this chapter.
(Ord. C-348, passed 8-21-2001)
§ 1-16-5 PUBLICATION OF CHANGES.
   The Commissioner of Elections is hereby directed to publish notice of the
boundaries and polling places for the precincts and wards established by this
chapter, pursuant to law. The Commissioner of Elections shall also certify a
copy of this chapter, and map drawn to conformance thereto, to the Secretary of
State within ten days.
(Ord. C-348, passed 8-21-2001)
CHAPTER 17: RUN-OFF ELECTION
Section
   
1-17-1   Purpose
   
1-17-2   Run-off election adopted
   
1-17-3   Regular municipal election
   
1-17-4   When required
   
1-17-5   Publication of ballot
   
1-17-6   Run-off election
§ 1-17-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the alternative of using a run-off
election in lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for elective
municipal offices, and prescribing the procedures to be followed therein.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975)
§ 1-17-2 RUN-OFF ELECTION ADOPTED.
   The provisions of Iowa Code § 376.9 providing for a run-off election are
hereby adopted in lieu of the requirements for a primary in Iowa Code §§ 376.6
and 376.7.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975)
§ 1-17-3 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION.
   Within 24 hours following the forty-seventh day prior to the municipal
election, the Clerk shall forward the petitions of all candidates that have
been properly filed with the Clerk, to the County Commissioners of Elections
who shall then do all things necessary for conducting the municipal election.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1-17-4 WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each candidate at a municipal election receiving a majority of all
votes cast for the office sought shall be declared elected. A run-off election
shall be held only for positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient
number of candidates to receive a majority vote in the regular city election.
   (B)   Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for the
office for which they have filed as follows.
      (1)   If no candidate for a single office receives a majority of the
votes cast for that office, the two candidates receiving the largest number of
votes shall be placed upon the run-off ballot.
      (2)   If any of the top candidates, in an at-large contest, to the number
of positions to be filled receive less than a majority of the votes cast at the
election, those candidates receiving a majority of the votes shall be declared
elected and those candidates receiving the next highest number of votes, but
not having a majority, to the number of twice the number of unfilled positions,
shall be placed on the run-off ballot.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975)
§ 1-17-5 PUBLICATION OF BALLOT.
   If there must be a run-off election, the Commissioner of Elections shall
cause to be published once in a newspaper or newspapers published within the
municipal corporation and of general circulation therein, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city if there are none published therein, in proper
form, the names of persons as they are to appear on the municipal run-off
ballot in a typical precinct, said publication to be not less than four days
before the run-off election.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975)
§ 1-17-6 RUN-OFF ELECTION.
   Any such run-off election shall be held four weeks after the regular
municipal election. The run-off election shall be conducted in the same manner
as provided by law for conducting municipal elections; except that, there shall
be no added voter registrations accepted for said election, but transfers may
be accepted until ten days before the election, as now provided under law.
(Ord. B-197, passed 9-2-1975; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   Chapter
      
1.   General Provisions
      
2.   Board of Adjustment and Appeals
      
3.   Planning and Zoning Commission
      
4.   Civil Service Commission
      
5.   Library Trustees
      
6.   Airport Commission
      
7.   Parks Board
      
8.   [Reserved]
      
9.   Historic Preservation Commission
      
10.   [Reserved]
      
11.   Construction Board of Appeals
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
2-1-1   Members
§ 2-1-1 MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the City Council. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for certain expenses if the expense is approved in advance by the
City Manager. Original appointments may be for shorter periods of time to fill
a vacancy. All members, unless otherwise noted shall be at least 18 years old
and residents of the city.
   (B)   Terms and term limits.
      (1)   Terms shall begin as follows:
 Term Beginning
                                 Term Beginning
Airport Commission               October 1
Board of Adjustment and Appeals  October 1
Civil Service Commission         April 1
Construction Board of Appeals    October 1
Historic Preservation Commission January 1
Library Trustees                 July 1
Parks Board                      April 1
Planning and Zoning Commission   April 1
 
      (2)   Terms shall be staggered to ensure continued experience on boards
and commissions.
   (C)   Board or commission. The words “board” or “commission” are considered
to be interchangeable for the purpose and intent of this title.
   (D)   Alternate member.
      (1)   In addition to regular members, the City Council may appoint one
alternate member to each city board or commission, with the exception of the
Library Board, now in existence or hereafter established.
      (2)   The alternate member shall, like regular members, attend the
regular meetings and special meetings of the commission to which he or she is
appointed. The alternate member shall review staff reports and documents and
otherwise prepare for such meetings. At such meetings, the alternate member
shall be identified for the record. That alternate member shall publicly
announce any items on the agenda that he or she is disqualified from
participating in because of a conflict of interest. If, as a result of
absences, there is not a quorum at a regular or special meeting, the alternate
member shall move to any vacant seat and shall participate as a regular member
until the completion of the agenda. If the alternate member participates due to
a conflict of interest of a regular member, the alternate member shall
participate as a regular member only until the affected item is completed. In
the event an absent member arrives after the commencement of an agenda item,
the alternate member shall participate as a regular member until the completion
of the current item, at which time the alternate member shall move back to the
alternate member’s seat and shall stop participating as a regular member. In
the event an item on which the alternate member has participated as a regular
member is continued to a subsequent meeting, the alternate member shall
continue to participate as a regular member on the item at any and all such
subsequent meetings.
      (3)   The qualifications, appointment, term of office, attendance,
removal and other requirements applicable to the alternate shall be the same as
those for regular members of a commission.
   (E)   Appointment to fill vacancies. The alternate to a commission, if
willing to accept the position, shall automatically fill a vacancy of a
position on the commission when said vacancy is created by the resignation,
removal or expiration of the term of office of a commission member without
further recruitment, application, nomination or Council action unless such
action would be in violation of gender equity requirements or the vacancy has
special restrictions regarding members (Historic Preservation, Tourism
Commission). All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as appointments.
   (F)   Attendance. If any member fails to attend three out of five previous
regular meetings or three consecutive regular meetings they shall be considered
removed from the commission unless the commission has voted to excuse the
absences by an affirmative, recorded, majority vote. The appointment of any
removed member, whose absences are not excused, may only be extended or renewed
by action of the Mayor with approval of the City Council.
   (G)   Council and staff liaison. The Mayor may designate a Council member to
serve as a liaison to any commission. The liaison shall serve in such capacity
at the pleasure of the Council. The City Manager may also designate a staff
member to assist as time, staffing and work load allow.
   (H)   Officers. Each commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from the eligible members of their respective commission during a
regularly scheduled meeting.
   (I)   Removals. All members serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be
removed by a three-fifths’ vote of the full Council.
   (J)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of members serving at
such time as any meeting is scheduled or called. Vacant positions must be
included when calculating the number of members that must be present for a
quorum.
   (K)   Gender balance. The intent of this paragraph is to help attain and
assure gender balance on all appointed by the City Council and to be in
conformance with Iowa Code § 69.16A(2) regarding such appointments. It is the
policy of the city to not discriminate against any citizen or applicant to a
commission due to the sex of such citizen or applicant. Upon considering a
person’s interests, education, life experiences and willingness to serve, all
things being equal, preference for appointments to individual commissions shall
be made to balance such commission on the basis of equal numbers of male and
female appointees.
   (L)   All members of boards and commissions shall adhere to the latest
updated version of the Iowa City-County Management Association Code of Ethics
in all duties and obligations incumbent upon them.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020; Ord. D-100, passed
7-5-2023; Ord. D-113, passed 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS
Section
   
2-2-1   Creation
   
2-2-2   Members; terms
   
2-2-3   Organization
   
2-2-4   Appeals
   
2-2-5   Jurisdiction
   
2-2-6   Board authority
   
2-2-7   Reversal of order
   
2-2-8   Relief through courts
§ 2-2-1 CREATION.
   A Board of Adjustment and Appeals, to be hereinafter referred to as the
“Board”, is hereby established.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code Chapter 414
§ 2-2-2 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   The Board shall consist of five members who are residents of the city. Terms
of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be for five years. Members shall
be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and
after public hearing.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 414.8
§ 2-2-3 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with
this title or the state statutes, to enable it to perform its functions and
duties.
   (B)   The Board shall elect its own Chair, who shall serve for one year. The
Chair or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chair may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the
call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (C)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-2-4 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the city, affected by any decision of
the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
   (B)   (1)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
      (2)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative officer certifies to the Board, after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record on application or notice to the administrative officer
and on due cause shown.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-2-5 JURISDICTION.
   The Board shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative
officer in the enforcement of Title 10 of this code of ordinances;
   (B)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of Title 10 of this
code of ordinances upon which the Board is required to pass under the
provisions of Title 10 of this code of ordinances;
   (C)   Where the street or lot layout on the ground actually varies from the
street and lot lines as shown on the zoning map, the Board shall interpret the
map and the provisions of Title 10 of this code of ordinances in such a way as
to carry out the intent and purposes of Title 10 of this code of ordinances for
the particular district or section in question;
   (D)   To permit the reconstruction, within one year and use as before of a
non-conforming building destroyed or damaged to more than 65% of its value by
explosion, fire, act of God or public enemy or other calamity, where the Board
finds that the public needs require a continuance of the non-conforming use and
that such continuance would not primarily permit a continuation of a monopoly;
   (E)   To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises in
any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes which
is determined reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare; and
   (F)   To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the
terms of Title 10 of this code of ordinances as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions herein will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of Title 10 of this code of ordinances shall be observed and substantial
justice done. The Board shall be satisfied by the evidence heard before it that
the granting of such variance will alleviate a hardship approaching
confiscation as distinguished from a special privilege sought by the owner.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 414.12
§ 2-2-6 BOARD AUTHORITY.
   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may, in conformity with
the provisions of Title 10 of this code of ordinances, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 414.13
§ 2-2-7 REVERSAL OF ORDER.
   When the Board consists of five members the concurring vote of three members
of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the administrative office, or to decide in favor of the
application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under Title 10 of
this code or ordinances and to effect any variation in Title 10 of this code of
ordinances. It is not the intention to grant to the Board the power or
authority to alter or change the zoning provisions of Title 10 of this code of
ordinances or the zoning map, such power and authority rests solely with the
City Council, in the manner hereinafter provided in Title 10 of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 414.14
§ 2-2-8 RELIEF THROUGH COURTS.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of
the Board under the provisions of Title 10 of this code of ordinances, or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city may seek such
relief through the courts as provided by the statute.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
   
2-3-1   Creation
   
2-3-2   Members; terms
   
2-3-3   Organization
   
2-3-4   Duties; powers in city planning
   
2-3-5   Duties; powers in city zoning
§ 2-3-1 CREATION.
   Under and by virtue of Iowa Code Chapters 392, 404 and 414, as amended from
time to time, a City Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby continued.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-3-2 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five members.
   (B)   The term of office shall be three years.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-084, passed 2-1-2022)
§ 2-3-3 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall choose, annually, at its
first regular meeting, one of its members to act as Chair of the Commission,
and another of its members as Vice Chair, who shall perform all the duties of
the Chair during his or her absence or disability.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its
organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-3-4 DUTIES; POWERS IN CITY PLANNING.
   (A)   It shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made
such surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any portion of the
city or any land outside thereof, which in the opinion of the commission, bears
relation to a Comprehensive Plan and shall bring to the attention of the
Council and may publish its plans and recommendations.
   (B)   All plans, plats or re-plats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land
embraced in the city or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the
streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the
public shall first be submitted to the Commission and the latter shall have 30
days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
   (C)   For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical
development of the city, the Commission shall make careful and comprehensive
studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard
to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the
general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance
with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy
in the process of development.
   (D)   Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan as referred to in division (C)
above, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the Commission
shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which
shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city not less than ten, nor more than 20, days before the date of hearing. The
adoption of the plan or any part of it, or any amendment thereof, shall be by
resolution of the Commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than
two-thirds of the members of the Commission. After adoption of said plan by the
Commission, an attested copy thereof shall be certified to the City Council and
the Council or any modification or amendment may approve the same, and when
said plan thereof shall receive the approval of the City Council, the said plan
until subsequently modified or amended as hereinbefore authorized, shall
constitute the official City Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   When such Comprehensive Plan, as hereinbefore provided, has been
adopted no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without
such proposed change first being referred to the Commission, for its
recommendation. If the Commission disapproves the proposed change, it may be
adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths
of all membership of the Council.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-3-5 DUTIES; POWERS IN CITY ZONING.
   (A)   At the time of the creation of city zoning, the Commission prepared a
report with respect to regulating and restricting the height, number of stories
and size of buildings and other structures, including the percentage of lot
that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the
density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and
land for trade, industries, residences or other purposes. The purpose of the
report was to propose the division of the city into districts of such number,
shape and area as was best suited to carry out the purposes of city zoning, as
provided in Iowa Code Chapter 414. The Commission proposed regulations, and
restrictions on the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair
or use of buildings, structures or land. The regulations and restrictions were
for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district. Regulations in
one district may differ from those in other districts.
   (B)   (1)   Any proposed changes to regulations provided in §
2-3-4 of this chapter shall be made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan
and designed to lessen congestion in the street; to secure safety from fire,
panic and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
      (2)   Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, as to the character of the area for particular use, and with a
view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate
use of the land.
   (C)   The Commission may, from time to time, recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications. The Commission, after
preparation of a preliminary report, shall hold a public hearing thereon before
submitting its final report to the Council. The Council shall not hold its
public hearing or take action until it has received the final report of such
Commission.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 4: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
   
2-4-1   Members; terms
   
2-4-2   Duties; powers
   
2-4-3   Election of chairperson
   
2-4-4   Clerk
   
2-4-5   Records
   
2-4-6   Rooms and supplies
§ 2-4-1 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   The Civil Service Commission shall be composed of three members. Members
shall hold office for a term of four years and shall be appointed pursuant to
the requirements of Iowa Code § 400.1.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-4-2 DUTIES; POWERS.
   The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in
the Iowa Code Chapter 400, and amendments thereto and shall have, exercise and
perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-110, passed 4-2-2024)
§ 2-4-3 ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. (Iowa Code
§ 400.4)
(Ord. D-110, passed 4-2-2024)
§ 2-4-4 CLERK.
   The City Clerk or a designee of the City Clerk shall be Clerk of the
Commission. (Iowa Code § 400.4)
(Ord. D-110, passed 4-2-2024)
§ 2-4-5 RECORDS.
   The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and
also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date. (Iowa Code § 400.4)
(Ord. D-110, passed 4-2-2024)
§ 2-4-6 ROOMS AND SUPPLIES.
   The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may hold
its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and a
qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to enable
it to properly perform its duties. (Iowa Code § 400.5)
(Ord. D-110, passed 4-2-2024)
CHAPTER 5: LIBRARY TRUSTEES
Section
   
2-5-1   Purpose
   
2-5-2   Members; terms
   
2-5-3   Powers and duties
   
2-5-4   Power to contract with others for the use of the library
   
2-5-5   Non-resident use of the library
   
2-5-6   Library Account
   
2-5-7   Annual report
§ 2-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation and appointment
of a City Library Board of Trustees, and to specify the Board’s powers and
duties.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-5-2 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the Fort Madison Public Libraries hereinafter
referred to as the Board, shall consist of nine members. Eight of the members
of the Board shall be residents of the city, one shall be a non-resident
member.
   (B)   All appointments to the Board shall be for six years, except to fill
vacancies. Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total
number, to stagger the terms.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 336.5
§ 2-5-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary and such
other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as Board
Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board;
   (B)   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and room containing the same;
   (C)   To direct and control all the affairs of the library;
   (D)   To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that, prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting
in favor thereof;
   (E)   To remove by a two-thirds vote of the Board the librarian and provide
procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention of duty, subject, however, to the provisions of the
Code of Iowa;
   (F)   To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchase of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, audiovisual
materials, other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the Board;
   (G)   To authorize the use of the library by non- residents of the city and
to fix charges therefor;
   (H)   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations;
   (I)   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated
for library purposes by the Council, and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings, under the rules of the Board.
All other monies belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected
will be deposited in the General Fund of the city;
   (J)   To accept gifts or real property, personal property or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the
conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such
gifts for the improvement of the library;
   (K)   To keep a record of its proceedings; and
   (L)   To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises
and bequests that will benefit the library and have been accepted by action of
the City Council.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-5-4 POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR THE USE OF THE LIBRARY.
   (A)   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, any other city, school corporation, private or semi-
private organization, institution of higher learning, township or county, or
with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by
their respective residents.
   (B)   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than 5% in number
of the electors who voted for Governor in the territory of the party at the
last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not
less than 40 days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any
election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party who is
seeking to terminate the contract.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-5-5 NON-RESIDENT USE OF THE LIBRARY.
   The Board may authorize use of the library by non-residents in any one or
more of the following ways:
   (A)   By lending the books or other materials of the library to non-
residents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city, or upon
payment of a special, non-resident library fee;
   (B)   By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to non-residents;
   (C)   By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or
other library materials may be loaned to non-residents; and/or
   (D)   By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library
materials to non-residents.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-5-6 LIBRARY ACCOUNT.
   All money appropriated by the Council from the General Fund for the
operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for
the library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed
by its President and Secretary.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-5-7 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the City Council immediately after the
close of the city’s fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the
condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number
circulated, the amount of fines collected and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further
information as may be required by the Council. Reports shall also be made from
time to time as the Board deems advisable or upon Council request.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 6: AIRPORT COMMISSION
Section
   
2-6-1   Members; terms
   
2-6-2   Duties; powers
§ 2-6-1 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   The Airport Commission shall consist of five members. Two may be nonresident
members residing within the area reasonably served by the airport. The term of
office of said members shall be three years.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 330.20
§ 2-6-2 DUTIES; POWERS.
   The Airport Commission shall have such duties and powers as are provided by
Iowa Code Chapter 330 and all laws amendatory thereto and supplementary thereto
and shall have such other powers and duties as may be provided by law.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 7: PARKS BOARD
Section
   
2-7-1   Members; terms
   
2-7-2   Duties of the Board
   
2-7-3   Meetings
§ 2-7-1 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   The Board shall consist of seven members. Two may be non-resident members
residing within the county. Terms of all members shall be three years.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-7-2 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall make a plan for parks facilities. The Board shall have the
power to make rules and regulations for the use of park or other recreational
facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs, subject to the approval
of the rules by the Council. Such rules shall be either posted on the facility
or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using
public. The Board shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair every two years.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-7-3 MEETINGS.
   The Board shall meet every other month, the specific date to be determined
by the Board, and at such other times as may be deemed necessary.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 8: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 9: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Section
   
2-9-1   Members; terms
   
2-9-2   Powers; duties
   
2-9-3   Declaration of public policy and purpose
   
2-9-4   Definitions
   
2-9-5   Additional powers of the Historic Preservation Commission
   
2-9-6   Designation of historic landmarks and historic districts
   
2-9-7   Design review and building permits in historic districts
§ 2-9-1 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five members.
The terms of Commission members shall be for three years.
   (B)   (1)    The Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the City Council. The Commission shall be comprised of at least four residents
of the City of Fort Madison and the fifth member may be a Lee County resident.
      (2)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed with due regard to
proper representation of residents and their relevant fields of knowledge,
including, but not limited to, history, architecture, archaeology, urban
planning, law, sociology, historic preservation, architectural history, real
estate, education or the building trades.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-114, passed 5-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 303.34(3)
§ 2-9-2 POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission may conduct inventory studies for the identification
and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions
established by this chapter. The Commission may proceed at its own initiative
or upon a petition from any persons, group or association. The Commission shall
maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.
   (B)   The Commission may make a recommendation to the state’s Office of
Historic Preservation for the listing of a historical district or site in the
National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
   (C)   The Commission may investigate and recommend to the City Council the
adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if
they qualify, as defined herein.
   (D)   The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair yearly. Such Chair
or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chair shall preside over all commission
meetings. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its
business which are not inconsistent with the laws of the city and the state.
The Commission shall designate and appoint from its members various sub-
committees with powers and duties equivalent to and not inconsistent with the
powers and duties of the Commission.
   (E)   The Commission shall meet at least three times a year and shall
constitute the duly designated Historic Preservation Commission of the city,
pursuant to applicable state statute and federal law.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-9-3 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the
preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of buildings, structures, sites,
places and objects having a special historical, architectural, archaeological
or aesthetic interest or value, is a public necessity, and is required in the
interest of the health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Promote the education, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the preservation, protection and perpetuation, and use of
buildings, structures, sites, places and objects which reflect elements of the
city’s cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history;
      (2)   Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to residents, tourists
and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to economic development;
      (3)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest
of the city;
      (4)   Foster civic pride in the legacy of beauty and notable achievements
of the past;
      (5)   Stabilize and improve property values; and
      (6)   Promote the preservation and use of historic buildings, sites and
districts for the education and general welfare of the people of the city.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-9-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A discrete, geographically definable area containing
buildings, structures, sites, lands and areas linked historically through their
location, design, workmanship, setting or association with people or events
which have made an important contribution to the heritage of the Fort Madison
area.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. Any building, structure, site or object which has been
placed on the City Historic Landmarks Register, pursuant to §
2-9-6 of this chapter.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION. The Fort Madison Historic Preservation
Commission, as established by this chapter.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. Any building, structure, site, area or object which has
been identified and evaluated as significant because of its historical,
architectural, archaeological or aesthetic value, including, but not limited
to, old houses, commercial buildings, barns, outbuildings, archaeological
sites, cemeteries, landscapes and streets.
   SIGNIFICANCE. The sense of time and place in history that is conveyed by
historic properties, their educational and scientific value and their capacity
for enhancing the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the
city.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-9-5 ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties in addition to
those otherwise specified in this chapter:
   (A)   Conduct an ongoing survey to inventory buildings, structures, sites,
districts and objects which the Commission has reason to believe are or will be
eligible for registration in the National Register of Historic Places or the
City Historic Landmarks Register;
   (B)   Prepare a Comprehensive Historic Preservation Plan for the city;
   (C)   Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal
property, including money, with the approval of the City Council, for the
purpose of historic preservation;
   (D)   With the approval of the City Council, acquire by purchase, bequest or
donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties in the city,
including properties adjacent to or associated with historic preservation;
   (E)   Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties owned or
controlled by the city, with the exception of Old Fort Madison;
   (F)   Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties
subject to the rights of public access and other covenants, and in a manner
that will preserve the property;
   (G)   Contract with the state or the federal government or other
organization; cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation;
   (H)   Provide city officials with information relating to historic
preservation; and
   (I)   Provide educational and interpretive programs on historic properties
in the city, with the exception of Old Fort Madison.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-9-6 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city shall maintain a Historic Landmarks Register of individually
designated historic properties and multiple property historic districts.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council, upon request of the Historic Preservation
Commission, may, by ordinance, designate a historic landmark or historic
district. Prior to such designation, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
hold a public hearing, notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the date of
the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be mailed to all owners of the
property that is proposed to be designated.
      (2)   Voluntary designation of a single historic property would require
no notification or public hearing. Involuntary designation of a single historic
property would require notification to the property owners by certified mail
and a public hearing.
   (C)   In considering the designation of any historic landmark or historic
district, the Historic Preservation Commission shall apply the following
criteria with respect to eligibility:
      (1)   Its association with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of the history of Fort Madison, the State of
Iowa or the United States;
      (2)   Its association with the lives of historically significant persons;
      (3)   Its embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period
or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that
possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;
      (4)   Its research value, or potential research value, in the study of
pre-history or history; and
      (5)   Its unique location or singular physical appearance representing an
established and familiar visual feature of the city or one of its
neighborhoods.
   (D)   When the Historic Preservation Commission determines that a property
is eligible for listing in the City Historic Landmarks Register, it may issue a
finding of significance and eligibility, which the commission shall transmit to
the City Council.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall record with the County Recorder of Deeds the
legal description of all properties listed in the City Historic Landmarks
Register by the City Council, and shall transmit a copy of said legal
description to the City Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 2-9-7 DESIGN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMITS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Demolition and Construction Permit review. The Planning and Zoning
Director shall report demolition and construction permits sought on properties
within the purview of the Commission to the Commission Chair within seventy-two
(72) hours of receipt by the City of any demolition or construction permit
application. The Historic Preservation Commission shall, within ten (10)
business days of receipt of said notice, review and make recommendations for
the demolition or alternation of structures within a designated historic
preservation district or on the Local Historic Landmarks Register. If a
recommendation is not made within said ten (10) business days, the demolition
permit shall be issued, unless the Planning and Zoning Director has other
substantive objections arising under this section. Regardless of any
recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, the Planning and Zoning
Director shall make the final decision on any permit based upon the Planning
and Zoning Director’s best judgment concerning whether issuance or denial of
said permit is in the best interests of the City. In the case of a demolition
permit, the Planning and Zoning Director shall consider whether demolition of
the structure is in the public interest, whether safety issues exist, whether
the property is a nuisance, and whether funds exist to cause necessary repairs
to bring the structure to Code. The Planning and Zoning Director shall issue a
written order to the applicant, with a copy to the Historic Preservation
Commission on all final decisions made.
   (B)   Public safety. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the demolition of
any structure which the city’s Building Official shall certify is required for
public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
   (C)   Violations. The demolition of any structure within a designated
historic preservation district, or on the Local Historic Landmarks Register
without first making application to the Planning and Zoning Director, so that
review by the Historic Preservation Commission may take place and may be
prosecuted as a municipal infraction.
      (1)   Proposed alterations. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
review and make recommendations concerning proposed alterations to any historic
property owned or controlled by the city.
      (2)   Exterior alterations. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
review and make recommendations concerning proposed exterior alterations to any
historic property listed on the local landmarks registry or with a locally
designated historic district.
      (3)   Design review. In determining whether or not a project will
adversely affect a historic property, the decisions of the Historic
Preservation Commission shall be in accordance with the approved policies of
the city’s Comprehensive Historic Preservation Plan. The Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archeology and Historic Preservation
shall be the authoritative guide for design review decisions.
      (4)   Appeal. Any party aggrieved by a decision by the Planning and
Zoning Director may, within ten days of the final decision of the Planning and
Zoning Director, appeal such decision to the Construction Board of Appeals. The
Planning and Zoning Director shall advise the applicant of his or her right of
appeal at the time the Director makes the final decision concerning any design
review recommendation, demolition recommendation, or other recommendation of
the Commission. Any party aggrieved by the final decision of the Planning and
Zoning Director shall file with the Planning and Zoning Director a written
notice of appeal requesting Construction Board of Appeals review of the action
taken by the Planning and Zoning Director within seven (7) days of the final
decision. Failure to timely appeal said decision shall be waiver any further
appeal. Upon receipt of any timely notice of appeal, the Planning and Zoning
Director shall transmit one copy to the Chairperson of the Construction Board
of Appeals and one copy to the Chairperson of the Historic Preservation
Commission. Hearing on the appeal before the Construction Board of Appeals
shall take place within thirty (30) days of filed appeal, and the ruling of the
Construction Board of Appeals shall be issued within ten (10) business days of
the hearing. The written ruling shall be the final decision of the City on the
appeal.
      (5)   Preliminary plats, rezoning. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall review all applications for preliminary plats and rezonings within
historic districts and of historic properties, and shall forward its findings
and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission, to be considered by
the Planning and Zoning Commission in making its recommendation to the City
Council.
      (6)   Urban revitalization tax exemptions. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council on all
plans for creating urban revitalization tax exemption districts in the city.
      (7)   Time limitation. The Historic Preservation Commission shall make
all recommendations called for in this section, within ten (10) days of receipt
of notice of an application from the Planning and Zoning Director.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-114, passed 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 10: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 11: CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS
Section
   
2-11-1   Board created
   
2-11-2   Membership
   
2-11-3   Term
   
2-11-4   Vacancies
   
2-11-5   Legal counsel
   
2-11-6   Meetings and hearings
   
2-11-7   Compensation; expenses
   
2-11-8   Authority
   
2-11-9   Deadline for appeals
   
2-11-10   Secretary
   
2-11-11   Application
§ 2-11-1 BOARD CREATED.
   There is created a Construction Board of Appeals.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-2 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the Council, all members of
the Construction Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of five members who
are residents of the city and/or maintain their primary place of business
within the city, and shall include one general contractor or construction
manager, one master plumber, one master electrician, one other construction-
related contractor and one layperson from the general public at large.
Additionally, one alternate member, meeting any one of the qualifications
established for regular members, shall be appointed to the Board pursuant to §
2-1-1(D) of this code of ordinances. Three members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business or vote.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-3 TERM.
   The terms of membership shall be three years and shall be staggered so that
no more than the terms of two members expire in any one year.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-4 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Vacancies shall be filled by Mayoral appointment subject to approval
of the Council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
   (B)   Nominations of persons to fill vacancies may be submitted to the Mayor
by the Construction Board of Appeals or the Building Official or his or her
designee.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-5 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   The Board shall have the right to request legal counsel from the City
Attorney, or such other attorney as the Council may provide, when such legal
Council is desired.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-6 MEETINGS AND HEARINGS.
   All meetings and hearings of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be held
at the call of the Chairperson, or upon request by a quorum of the Board, as
necessary to properly transact its business. In no case, however, shall the
Board meet less frequently than once each calendar year. All meetings or
hearings conducted by the Board shall be open to the public and duly noticed.
Written determinations of the Board, supported by findings of fact, shall be
issued relative to each matter brought before it. The Board shall adopt its own
rules of procedure and policies not in conflict with this code of ordinances or
the Iowa Code, and may select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
The Council shall provide a suitable place in which the Board may conduct its
required business.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-7 COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.
   The Construction Board of Appeals shall serve without compensation except
for necessary incidental expenses that are incurred while carrying out the
Board’s business. In order for the Board to receive payment for expenses
incurred, the Board shall cause to have itemized the expense requests in
writing and submit same to the Council for review and recommendation, before
same is authorized and approved for payment.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-8 AUTHORITY.
   The Construction Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the
application and/or interpretation of the city’s Building Code, Plumbing Code,
Electrical Code, Housing Code, Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
and any other code adopted pursuant to Title 3 of this Code whether expressly
or by incorporation. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim the
true intent of these codes or rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of these codes do not apply, or an
equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The Board shall have
no authority relative to interpretation of administrative provisions of these
codes, nor is the Board empowered to wave requirements of these codes. The
provisions of this chapter and the rules of procedure adopted by the Board
hereunder shall supersede all provisions pertaining to appeals and boards of
appeals set forth in the codes adopted pursuant to Title 3 of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-9 DEADLINE FOR APPEALS.
   Appeals from orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building
Official shall be filed with the Board at the office of the Building Official
within 15 days from the date the order, decision or determination appealed from
was issued.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-10 SECRETARY.
   The Building Official or his or her designee shall act as Secretary to the
Board and shall keep full and correct detailed records of the official
proceedings of the Board and preserve all documents, books and papers relating
to hearings and business conducted by the Board. Minutes of the Board’s
proceedings shall include, without limitation, the vote of each member upon
each question or item of business or, if absent or failing to vote, such fact.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 2-11-11 APPLICATION.
   An application form shall be created by the city and include the following
required information and filing fee to be considered a completed and properly
submitted application:
   (A)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim of one of the
following:
      (1)   The true intent of these codes or rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted;
      (2)   The provisions of these codes do not apply; or
      (3)   An equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
   (B)   An application must state the code section the applicant is appealing,
or some other legal or constitutional basis upon which the city’s decision or
action is objectionable.
   (C)   A filing fee shall be required with an application. Fee shall be set
by resolution. If the applicant successfully wins the appeal, said fee shall be
reimbursed.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
TITLE 3: BUILDING
   Chapter
      
1.   Building Code
      
2.   Plumbing Code
      
3.   Excavations
      
4.   Underground Connections
      
5.   Housing Code
      
6.   Electrical Code
      
7.   Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
      
8.   Appeals
      
9.   Vacant Building Registration
      
10.   International Property Maintenance Code
CHAPTER 1: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
3-1-1   Title
   
3-1-2   Purpose
   
3-1-3   Adoption of Building Code
§ 3-1-1 TITLE.
   The rules and regulations adopted in this chapter shall be known as the
“Building Code”, cited as such and will be referred to as “this code” in this
chapter.
(Ord. C-391, passed 1-6-2004)
§ 3-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure and provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city.
(Ord. C-391, passed 1-6-2004)
§ 3-1-3 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Certain documents, copies of which are in the office of the Fire and
Building Department, being marked and designated as “International Building
Code” (IBC), including Appendix Chapter E, 2018 edition, and the “International
Residential Code” (IRC), including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, J, M, O,
P and Q, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures herein provided providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the city’s
Fire and Building Department are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of,
as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in this section.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   2018 IBC Section 101.1. Insert:
         [Fort Madison]
      (2)   2018 IBC Section 423 Storm Shelters: Delete section 423 in its
entirety and insert in lieu thereof the following new section:
423 Storm Shelters
423.1 General. All storm shelter or weather safe rooms voluntarily constructed
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ICC 500-2014.
423.2. Required Occupant Capacity. The required occupant capacity of the storm
shelter shall include all of the occupant loads of the buildings on site.
423.3. Location. Storm shelters shall be located within a building or a
separate building. The travel distance from all buildings to the storm shelter
entrance shall be not more than 1000 feet from at least one exit door of each
building on site.
      (3)   2018 IBC Section 1612.3. Insert:
         [Fort Madison]
      (4)   2018 IBC Section 1612.3. Insert:
         [January 1, 2022]
      (5)   2018 IRC Section R101.1. Insert:
         [Fort Madison]
      (6)   2018 IRC Table R301.2(1). Climatic And Geological Design Criteria:
 
Ground Snow Wind Design                                         Seismic Design
Load                                                            Category
            Speed   Topographical Special Wind Windborne debris
                    Effect        Region       zone
30 psf      115 mph NO            NO           NO               A
 
 
Subject to Damage from               Winter Design Temp
Weathering Frost Line Depth Termite
Severe     42 inches        Moderate -3 degrees Fahrenheit
 
 
Ice Barrier Underlayment Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp
Required
Yes                      06/02/2020    1250               53 degrees Fahrenheit
 
      (7)   Manual J design criteria for 2018 IRC removed.
      (8)   2012 IRC Section R313. Deleted.
      (9)   2012 IRC Section P2603.6.1. Insert (two separate locations):
         [42 inches]
      (10)   2012 IRC Section P3103.1. Insert (two separate locations):
         [42 inches]
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
CHAPTER 2: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
3-2-1   Plumbing Code
   
3-2-2   Purpose
   
3-2-3   Adoption of Plumbing Code
§ 3-2-1 PLUMBING CODE.
   The rules and regulations adopted in this chapter to safeguard public
health, safety and welfare shall be known as the “Plumbing Code”, and will be
referred to as “this code” in this chapter.
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 3-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt rules, regulations and minimum
standards to safeguard public health, safety and welfare as may apply to the
erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement,
maintenance and use of plumbing systems.
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 3-2-3 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   Certain documents, copies of which are in the office of the Fire and
Building Department, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing
Code (IPC), including Appendix Chapters C, D and E, 2018 edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building
Code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures herein provided providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code
on file in the office of the city’s Fire and Building Department are hereby
referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set out in this section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
this section.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   2018 IPC Section 101.1. Insert:
         [Fort Madison]
      (2)   2018 IPC Section 1.6.6.2. Insert:
         [Fees set by resolution]
      (3)   2018 IPC Section 106.6.3. Insert (two locations):
         [Zero (0) %]
      (4)   2018 IPC Section 108.4. Insert:
         [simple misdemeanor, $625.00, 30 days]
      (5)   2018 IPC Section 108.5. Insert:
         [$65, $625]
      (6)   2018 IPC Section 305.4.1. Insert (two locations):
         [42] (two locations)
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
CHAPTER 3: EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
3-3-1   Definitions
   
3-3-2   Permit required
   
3-3-3   Application for permit
   
3-3-4   Issuance of permits
   
3-3-5   Charges for cuts in street and pavement surfaces
   
3-3-6   Additional permits not required
   
3-3-7   Duties of permittee
   
3-3-8   Backfilling
   
3-3-9   Barricades
   
3-3-10   Violations
§ 3-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   PAVEMENT SURFACE. The term shall include all pavements, pavement surfaces,
sidewalks, curbs, curb and gutter slabs and all other appurtenances or
construction within the limits of streets, avenues and alleys of the city.
   STREET SURFACE. The term shall include all street surfaces within the limits
of streets, avenues or alleys within the city other than “pavement surface”, as
defined herein, whether of earth, gravel, cinders or other materials.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or dig (except to plant or
remove trees), to place building or other material, to erect barricades,
falsework, form work or to place other obstructions within the limits of any
street, avenue or other public place or way, or to cut into or through or
excavate along or under any pavement surface or street surface, without first
obtaining written permission from the City Engineer to do such work and without
doing such work in the time and manner as specified in such permit.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Before beginning any of the work specified in §
3-3-2 of this chapter the person desiring to do such work shall make
application to the City Engineer for a permit. Such application shall specify
the location and extent of the proposed work, the manner and method of doing
the same and the time during which the work will be in progress.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-4 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The City Engineer may, upon proper application, issue a permit for any of
the work specified in §
3-3-3 of this chapter, specifying therein such regulations and restrictions as
may be deemed necessary to ensure the safety and convenience of the public and
to restore the street surfaces damaged by such work in the most satisfactory
manner. Among other requirements, the applicant for a permit must file a bond
in the amount of $5,000 with sureties conditioned that the permittee shall hold
the city harmless from any claims, demands or liabilities growing out of or in
any way connected with said work. In lieu of such bond, the permittee may file
a public liability insurance policy, approved by the Clerk in accordance with
insurance requirements and other public improvement projects.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-5 CHARGES FOR CUTS IN STREET AND PAVEMENT SURFACES.
   Before issuing a permit for cutting into or through a pavement surface or
street surface, the City Engineer shall require the person making application
for such permit to make a cash payment to the city in the amount set out from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. It shall be the duty of the
City Engineer to determine the size of the cut at each location for billing.
Any person more than one month in arrears on any account for a previous surface
cut will not be entitled to any additional permit until the account is paid.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-6 ADDITIONAL PERMITS NOT REQUIRED.
   The issuance of a plumbing permit by the city for sewer and water
connections shall be construed as granting permission to a licensed master
plumber or journeyman to do such excavation within the limits of any street,
avenue and alley, other than cutting into or through or excavating under any
pavement surface, as may be necessary to properly execute the work included in
the plumbing permit. Such work shall, however, be done in a manner as specified
by the City Engineer. In the event that such excavation requires the cutting
into or through a pavement surface, then §§
3-3-2 through
3-3-5 of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-7 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   It shall be the duty of the permittee upon completion of work to backfill
with suitable material to subgrade elevation, and to then provide a temporary
riding surface by backfilling to the street surface with gravel or crushed
rock. Upon completion of all backfill requirements, the permittee shall
immediately notify the City Engineer.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-8 BACKFILLING.
   All backfilling shall be done with sand or else mechanically tamped.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-9 BARRICADES.
   All excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place and all
obstructions therein shall be barricaded and so marked during the daytime and
so lighted at night as to prevent injury to persons, animals or property.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-3-10 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person whether acting directly or through employees or agents, that
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or resists any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code; and each day that a violation of this chapter is permitted
to exist after notice by the city of such violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. B-410, passed 6-7-1983)
CHAPTER 4: UNDERGROUND CONNECTIONS
Section
   
3-4-1   When to be ordered
   
3-4-2   Notice
   
3-4-3   Failure to comply, costs assessed
   
3-4-4   Service pipes at ground level
   
3-4-5   Connection with public sewer
   
3-4-6   Issuance of permit
   
3-4-7   Violation
   
3-4-8   Removals
§ 3-4-1 WHEN TO BE ORDERED.
   Whenever the Council has ordered any street, avenue, alley or public place
permanently improved by paving, curbing, graveling, macadamizing or otherwise
it shall direct the engineer to prepare a plat and schedule and plans and
specifications for the necessary connections from the sewer, water and gas
mains, heat or underground electric wires, to the curb line of the abutting
property and, upon the filing of said plat and schedule and plans and
specifications, the Council shall by resolution require the respective owners
of the abutting property or adjacent lots or parcels of land to make such
connections from the sewer, water and gas mains, heat or underground electric
wires, to the curb line of said abutting or adjacent lots or parcels of land,
as set out in the plat and schedule and plans and specifications and as
provided in said resolution.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 3-4-2 NOTICE.
   A notice of such resolution shall be given as provided by law.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 3-4-3 FAILURE TO COMPLY, COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the owner of any such property shall fail to make said connections in
accordance with said plans and specifications, and in accordance with the
provisions of this code and the laws of the state relating thereto, by the
final date of completion as fixed in said resolution, or within such additional
time as may be granted by the Council, then the Council shall cause said
connections to be made and assess the costs and expense thereof against the
property for which they are made, in manner as provided by the provisions of
this code.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 3-4-4 SERVICE PIPES AT GROUND LEVEL.
   Any person using any public street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or other public
place for utility installations, shall place and maintain all service pipes,
service boxes or other devices at such height where the same come to the
surface as to correspond with the grade of the surrounding area and make a
smooth and level surface. If such pipes, boxes or other devices are not so
installed and maintained, the person owning or using same shall cause the same
to be so installed and maintained and if such person fails, neglects or refuses
to do so within ten days after receipt of written notice by the city, the same
shall be done by the Public Works Department and, upon completion of such work,
he or she shall file with the Clerk a certificate as provided by §
1-6-9 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 3-4-5 CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER.
   Any person desiring to make connection to any public sewer or desiring to
construct any private sewer in the city shall file with the Public Works
Director a written application for a permit so to connect or construct, said
application to contain the following:
   (A)   A legal description of the private property affected;
   (B)   The owner or owners and lessee or lessees, if any, of such private
property;
   (C)   A description of the material to be used and manner of construction;
   (D)   The line of such sewer and place of connection to a public sewer;
   (E)   The purpose for which the sewer is intended to be used; and
   (F)   The name and address of the person who will do the work.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-206, passed 10-21-1975)
§ 3-4-6 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If, upon examination of said application, the Engineer is satisfied that
said connection or construction will be done in a good workmanlike manner and
that said connection or construction will not become a nuisance or in any way
obstruct, interfere with or overload any public sewer, he or she shall issue a
written permit allowing such connection or construction.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-206, passed 10-21-1975)
§ 3-4-7 VIOLATION.
   Any person that connects to any public sewer or constructs any private
sewer, or causes the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit as
provided in §
3-4-6 of this chapter, or that connects to any public sewer or constructs any
private sewer, or causes the same to be done, otherwise than as specified in
the application referred to in §
3-4-5 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a
penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances; and each day a violation is permitted to
exist after notice by the city shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 3-4-8 REMOVALS.
   In addition to and notwithstanding the punishment provided in §
3-4-7 of this chapter, the city may remove or cause to be removed any
construction or connection not made as herein provided and the costs of such
work shall be specially assessed against the property of the person, that made
the connection or performed the construction, or caused the same to be done.
Said assessment shall be made as provided in §
1-6-9 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. A-51, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 5: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
3-5-1   Title
   
3-5-2   Intent; purpose
   
3-5-3   Definitions
   
3-5-4   Exemptions
   
3-5-5   Registration and fee required
   
3-5-6   Fees established
   
3-5-7   Local contact representative
   
3-5-8   Inspections required
   
3-5-9   Notice
   
3-5-10   Rescheduling an inspection
   
3-5-11   Entry
   
3-5-12   Non-compliance
   
3-5-13   Inspection results
   
3-5-14   Code compliance agreement
   
3-5-15   Non-exclusivity
   
3-5-16   Self-certification
   
3-5-17   Retention of completed self- certification forms
   
3-5-18   Minimum structure standards for all dwellings
   
3-5-19   Responsibilities of owners relating to the maintenance and occupancy
of premises
   
3-5-20   Responsibilities of occupants relating to the maintenance and
occupancy of premises
   
3-5-21   Penalties
   
3-5-22   Recovery of fees
§ 3-5-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Housing Code”.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-2 INTENT; PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is in the public interest that all rental housing properties comply
with minimum standards regarding the health and safety of the public. The most
effective way to ensure compliance with minimum standards is through routine
inspections of rental housing properties.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to establish a rental housing
inspection program aimed at securing city-wide compliance of rental housing
properties with minimum standards. City-wide compliance will prevent blight and
ensure that all persons who live in rental housing units are provided decent,
safe and sanitary housing.
   (C)   The preservation of existing rental housing in the city is important.
In the city, approximately one-fourth of all housing units are rental units.
   (D)   Over time rental housing can deteriorate because of both intentional
and unintentional neglect of property owners, managers and tenants.
Deterioration can result in substandard conditions that adversely affect the
economic values of neighboring structures and that are hazardous to the public
health and safety.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   FIRE AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT. The department of the city designated by the
City Manager to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. An employee of the city authorized by the City Manager to
supervise the Fire and Building Department, or his or her designee.
   CHANGE IN TENANCY. Every time a new person begins residing in a rental
housing unit.
   ENGAGE IN THE BUSINESS OF RENTAL HOUSING. Renting or offering to rent a
rental housing unit.
   INSPECTOR. Any employee of the city authorized by the City Manager to
conduct inspections in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   OWNER. The contract purchaser, if there is one of record, otherwise, the
recordholder of legal title.
   RENT. To grant the possession, use or enjoyment of, in exchange for money or
any other consideration.
   RENTAL HOUSING PROPERTY. A parcel of real property, as shown on the latest
equalized tax assessment roll as maintained by the Assessor, upon which a
rental housing unit is maintained.
   RENTAL HOUSING UNIT. A single unit of residence for a single housekeeping
unit of one or more persons, which is being rented, or is intended to be
rented. Examples of HOUSING UNITS covered by this chapter include apartment
units, condominiums, duplexes and single-family houses. RENTAL HOUSING UNIT
also includes other types of residential units that provide for sleeping
accommodations, but bathing or cooking facilities are shared by occupants of
more than one unit, such as residential or single-room occupancy hotels. This
does include all residential units registered and rented through online
websites like www.booking.com, www.airbnb.com and similar. This does not
include units used for lodging such as dormitories, group homes, rooming or
boarding houses, hotels, motels and bed and breakfast inns only if said lodging
units are already inspected by the Fire and Building Department for life safety
inspection.
   SUPPLIED FACILITIES. A rental unit in which the owner has provided
appliances, cabinetry, furniture or other material pieces which are not
required for the normal operation of the rental unit. This shall include, but
not be limited to, appliances such as dishwashers, clothes washing machines,
clothes dryers, stoves, ranges, refrigerators, cabinetry and shelving.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012; Ord. D-52, passed 4-16-2019)
§ 3-5-4 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the following rental
housing units shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter: permanent
rental housing units that are subject to routine periodic inspections by
another government agency, and the frequency and scope of the inspections are,
to the satisfaction of the Building Official, provided copies of the inspection
reports are submitted to the Building Official.
   (B)   A rental housing unit that is determined to be exempt, pursuant to
division (A) above, shall become subject to the requirements of this chapter if
a notice and order relating to the rental housing property is issued pursuant
to the provisions of this code.
   (C)   Any rental housing unit subject to the requirements of this chapter,
pursuant to division (B) above, shall become exempt from the requirements of
this chapter if all of the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   After the last inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter, the
Inspector determines that either no violations exist on the property or the
violations identified were abated within 30 days; and
      (2)   The property owner is not delinquent on any payment to the city of
fees, penalties, taxes or any other monies related to the property.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-5 REGISTRATION AND FEE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
rental housing, unless:
      (1)   Each rental housing unit is registered with the city; and/or
      (2)   The rental housing inspection program fee has been paid in annual
installments for each rental housing unit.
   (B)   A rental housing unit is registered with the city when the owner of
the rental housing unit submits the following to the Rental Housing Inspections
Division:
      (1)   A completed registration form, available at City Hall, that
contains the following information:
         (a)   Description of the rental housing property, including, but not
limited to, the street address;
         (b)   Number and description of all rental housing units on the rental
housing property;
         (c)   Name and current contact information for the owner of the rental
housing property;
         (d)   Name and current contact information for the local contact
representative as described in §
3-5-7 of this chapter; and
         (e)   Other information as may reasonably be required by the Building
Official.
      (2)   A completed “self-certification” form as provided by the city; and
      (3)   A signed “acknowledgment of tenant responsibilities” form as
provided by the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false statement of
fact or knowingly omit any information that is required to register a rental
housing unit pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Registration shall be valid for a period of three years or until one
of the following circumstances occurs, whichever is sooner:
      (1)   The owner fails to notify the Rental Housing Inspections Division
of any change in the information submitted, pursuant to division (B) above,
within 30 days of such change; or
      (2)   The owner fails to pay any annual installments of the Rental
Housing Inspection Program fees.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012; Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-5-6 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following fees are established and imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to finance the cost of the Rental Housing Inspection
Program:
      (1)   Rental housing inspection program fee. A fee is established for the
implementation and administration of the provisions of this chapter (i.e., the
Rental Housing Inspection Program) for a period of three years. The fees shall
pay for the costs of all inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter, except
those financed by the reinspection fee. The fee shall be imposed for each
rental housing unit on the date of registration. However, the total amount
shall be paid in equal annual installments as billed by the city.
      (2)   Rescheduling fee. A fee is established for the administrative costs
of rescheduling an inspection that is canceled in violation of §
3-5-10 of this chapter.
      (3)   Reinspection fee.
         (a)   Registration fee includes the initial inspection and one follow-
up inspection.
         (b)   A fee is established for any additional periodic inspections
required by the city pursuant to §
3-5-12 of this chapter.
      (4)   No show fee. A fee shall be imposed in the event that no
representative of the property is at the property to be inspected at the
scheduled time of inspection.
      (5)   Unregistered rental unit. Rental housing units which are not
properly registered as required by this chapter shall be subject to a penalty.
      (6)   Transfer to and from Vacant Building Registration Program.
         (a)   Properties registered with the city as a vacant building (Title
3, Chapter 9, of this code of ordinances) may be transferred to the Rental
Inspection Program without having to pay the fee for the Rental Inspection
Program for the same year already paid as a vacant property.
         (b)   Properties registered with the city as rental property may be
transferred to the Vacant Building Registration Program (Title 3, Chapter 9, of
this code of ordinances) without having to pay the fee for the Vacant Building
Registration Program for the same year already paid as a rental property.
   (B)   The City Council shall establish the amounts of any fees and/or
penalties for delinquent payment of such fees established in this chapter by
resolution.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012; Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-5-7 LOCAL CONTACT REPRESENTATIVE.
   (A)   All owners of rental housing properties shall designate a local
contact representative with full authority to act on behalf of the owner for
all purposes under this chapter, including the acceptance of service of all
notices from the city. The owner of the rental housing property may act as the
local contact representative.
   (B)   A local contact representative must be able to meet in person within a
48-hour period as requested by the Building Official.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-8 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Inspection of rental housing units. All rental housing units are
required to be inspected. The owner or local contact representative, or his,
her or their designee, shall be present at the rental housing property at the
time of the inspection. If the owner or local contact representative designated
another person to be present at the time of inspection, that person must
present an “inspection designee” form completed by the owner or local
representative to the inspector at the time of inspection. The time of the
inspection shall be the time indicated in the notice issued pursuant to §
3-5-9 of this chapter, or the time that the inspection was properly rescheduled
in accordance with §
3-5-10 of this chapter. Violation of this division (A) may result in the
imposition of a reschedule fee.
   (B)   Inspections of owner-occupied dwellings.
      (1)   Inspections of owner-occupied, single- family dwellings,
condominiums and cooperatives shall occur only upon request by the owner to the
Building Official and only the standards of §§
3-5-18(A) through (N),
3-5-19 and
3-5-20 of this chapter shall be applicable.
      (2)   Inspections of owner-occupied, single- family dwellings,
condominiums and cooperatives containing a family plus one or two roomers shall
occur only upon request or complaint to the Building Official and the standards
of §§
3-5-18 through
3-5-20 of this chapter shall be applicable.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-9 NOTICE.
   (A)   The city shall serve written notice of the date and time of any
inspection to be conducted pursuant to this chapter, by mailing such notice at
least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the inspection. Notice shall be
mailed to the owner and the local contact representative at his, her or their
last known address. In the case of multiple owners of the same property, notice
to any one of the property owners is sufficient notice.
   (B)   The city shall also mail a copy of the inspection notice to the rental
housing units on the property.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-10 RESCHEDULING AN INSPECTION.
   An inspection may be rescheduled once by the owner or local contact
representative by giving notice to the Fire and Building Department at least
five calendar days prior to the scheduled inspection date. An inspection may
only be rescheduled to a date within 14 calendar days of the previously
scheduled inspection date. Violation of this section may result in the
imposition of a rescheduling fee.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-11 ENTRY.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner and the local contact
representative to obtain the consent of the occupants to inspect the subject
rental housing units or otherwise obtain legal access to the units pursuant to
the terms of the applicable lease.
   (B)   If consent to enter onto any rental housing property or any rental
housing unit is refused or otherwise cannot be obtained, the Building Official
is authorized to seek an inspection warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-12 NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   If, during an inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter, an
inspector discovers that the property is in violation of this code or any other
applicable law relating to rental units, the owner shall have 30 days from the
date of the inspection to correct the identified violations. The 30-day period
of time may be shortened or extended as circumstances require, by the Building
Official of the city. The city may require an additional inspection(s) of the
property within one year in accordance with this chapter, to assure continued
compliance. A reinspection fee shall be imposed for the additional periodic
inspection required pursuant to this division (A).
   (B)   In addition to requiring an additional periodic inspection pursuant to
division (A) above, the city may commence enforcement action in accordance with
any provisions of this code including, but not limited to, Title 3, Chapter 7,
of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-13 INSPECTION RESULTS.
   (A)   Following an inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter by the
city, the Inspector shall provide the owner or local contact person with a copy
of the written results of the inspection within 72 hours by delivering in
person or by depositing the written results in a U.S. mail receptacle to be
sent by regular mail. If there is a tenant violation, the Inspector will
provide the tenant with the results at that time if tenant is present or by
regular mail if the tenant is not present.
   (B)   The owner or local contact person shall provide a copy of the results
to the occupants of the rental housing unit inspected.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-14 CODE COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   When repairs are required that cannot reasonably be completed within
the 30-day time frame, the Building Official and the owner of the property may
enter into a code compliance agreement. This agreement will allow an extended
time frame as determined by the Building Official to make appropriate repairs
to a property without penalty provided the owner or contact representative sign
an agreement in which the owner agrees to a penalty and lien if the repairs are
not completed within the extended time frame. The city shall certify the fee to
the property in the same manner as delinquent fees. The agreement shall remain
in effect with recurring penalty each 30-day time period after the completion
date until repairs are completed.
   (B)   Compliance agreements shall include the following information:
      (1)   Description of the rental housing property, including, but not
limited to, the street address;
      (2)   Number and description of all rental housing units on the rental
housing property;
      (3)   Name and current contact information for the owner of the rental
housing property;
      (4)   A list of repairs agreed upon that will be allowed an extended time
frame as allowed by this agreement;
      (5)   Date repairs must be completed by or forfeiture of deposit;
      (6)   Amount deposited as determined by the Building Official; and
      (7)   Signature of owner and Building Official.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-15 NON-EXCLUSIVITY.
   None of the inspection provisions contained in this chapter shall prohibit,
condition or otherwise limit any inspection conducted pursuant to any other
provision of this code or other applicable law.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-16 SELF-CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Owners of rental housing properties shall certify each rental housing
unit on each rental property at least once every calendar year and upon each
change in tenancy. Self-certification shall be accomplished in the manner set
forth below:
      (1)   Inspect each rental housing unit for compliance with the
requirements of the self- certification form provided by the city;
      (2)   Immediately make any repairs to the rental housing unit that are
necessary to achieve compliance with the requirements set forth in the self-
certification form;
      (3)   Complete the self-certification form;
      (4)   Provide a copy of the completed self- certification form to the
occupants of the corresponding rental housing unit; and
      (5)   Provide a copy to the city with annual registration and change in
tenancy.
   (B)   If any rental housing unit cannot be self- certified because necessary
repairs cannot or will not be made, the owner shall immediately notify the
city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to falsify any material information required on
the self-certification form.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-17 RETENTION OF COMPLETED SELF- CERTIFICATION FORMS.
   The city shall retain all completed self- certification forms for at least
ten years from the date the inspection was made.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-18 MINIMUM STRUCTURE STANDARDS FOR ALL DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Supplied facility. Every supplied facility shall be constructed and/or
installed so that it will function safely.
   (B)   Kitchens. Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen room or kitchenette
equipped with the following:
      (1)   An approved kitchen sink;
      (2)   Space capable of properly accommodating a refrigerator and a stove
or range;
      (3)   Proper access terminals to utilities necessary to properly operate
a refrigerator and stove or range; and
      (4)   Adequate space for the storage and preparation of food.
   (C)   Water closet required. Every dwelling unit shall contain an approved
water closet.
   (D)   Bath required. Every dwelling unit shall contain an approved bathtub
or shower.
   (E)   Lavatory basin required. Every dwelling shall contain an approved
lavatory basin within or adjacent to the room containing the toilet.
   (F)   Privacy in a room containing toilet and bath. Every toilet and every
bath shall be contained within a room or within separate rooms which afford
privacy for a person within said rooms.
   (G)   Water heating facilities required. Every kitchen sink, bath and
lavatory basin required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be properly connected with supplied water heating facilities. Every supplied
water heating facility shall be properly connected and shall be capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every kitchen sink and lavatory basin required under the provisions
of this chapter at a temperature of not less than 120°F (48°C). Such supplied
water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
section when the required space heating facilities are not in operation.
   (H)   Connection of sanitary facilities to water and sewer systems. Every
kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin and bath shall be properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system.
   (I)   Exits.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit shall have access
directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions
thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by
Chapter 3 of the International Residential Building Code.
      (2)   Every sleeping room below the fourth story shall have at least one
operable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The
units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without
the use of separate tools.
      (3)   All egress or rescue windows from sleeping rooms shall have a
minimum net clear opening of five square feet at grade level and 5.7 square
feet elsewhere. The minimum net clear opening height dimension shall be 24
inches. The minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be 20 inches. Where
windows are provided as means of egress or rescue they shall have finished sill
height not more than 44 inches above the floor. Exception: windows of lesser
dimensions which were installed in conformance with a previous Building Code
may be approved by the Building Official; provided, the window operates as
originally intended. This exception shall expire if said property is vacant for
a period of 12 months. Properties that are registered as new rental properties
after 11-1-2012 shall conform to all egress requirements.
      (4)   New dwelling units shall have exits as required by the Building
Code and Fire Code of the city.
      (5)   Every means of egress shall comply with the following requirements.
         (a)   Handrails. All stairways comprised of two or more risers shall
be provided with a substantial and safe handrail.
         (b)   Guardrails. All unenclosed floor and roof openings, open and
glazed sides of landings and ramps, balconies or porches which are more than 30
inches above grade or above the floor below, and any roof used for other than
service of the building, shall be protected by a substantial and safe
guardrail.
         (c)   Stairways. Every stairway shall have a uniform riser height and
uniform tread width, which shall be adequate for safe use.
         (d)   Doors and windows. Doors and windows readily accessible from
outside the unit shall be lockable from inside the unit.
         (e)   Basement unit. In basement units where one means of egress is a
window, such window shall have an unobstructed opening no less in area than
that required in the city’s Building Code and/or Fire Code.
         (f)   Fire escapes. No existing fire escape shall be deemed a
sufficient means of egress unless it is in compliance with the fire codes of
the state and the city.
      (6)   Every doorway providing ingress or egress from any dwelling unit,
rooming unit or habitable room shall be at least six feet high and 24 inches
wide. Exception: doors of lesser dimensions which were installed in conformance
with a previous Building Code shall be approved by the Building Official;
provided, the door operates as originally intended. This exception shall expire
if said property is vacant for a period of 12 months. Properties that are
registered as new rental properties after 11-1-2012 shall conform to all egress
requirements.
   (J)   Natural light. Every habitable room except a kitchen shall have at
least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total
window or skylight area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall
be at least 8% of the floor area of such room or that amount of window and/or
skylight area specified by the city’s Building Code. For the purpose of
determining natural light and natural ventilation requirements, any room may be
considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half of the area of the
common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than
one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet, whichever
is greater.
   (K)   Ventilation.
      (1)   Interior air quality. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be
free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sewer gas,
fuel gas, dust and other harmful air pollutants.
      (2)   Natural ventilation.
         (a)   Every window, door or other device with openings to the outdoor
space, used for ventilation, shall be supplied with screens of not less than 16
meshes per inch.
         (b)   The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area as required above.
         (c)   Every cellar window, soffit or roof vent, used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a cellar, crawl space or
interior roof area, which might provide an entry for rodents or birds shall be
supplied with a heavy wire screen of not larger than one-fourth inch mesh or
such device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
         (d)   For natural ventilation, every bathroom or toilet compartment
shall be provided with an opening or window with an area not less than one-
twentieth of the floor area of such room with a minimum of one and one-half
square feet and which shall be openable to the outside.
      (3)   Mechanical ventilation. In lieu of openable windows, doors or other
devices for natural ventilation, adequate ventilation may be a system of
mechanical ventilation which provides not less than two air changes per hour in
all habitable rooms and/or bathrooms or toilet compartments. No mechanical
exhaust system, exhausting vapors, gases or odors shall be discharged into an
interior roof area, crawl space or cellar unless such interior roof area, crawl
space or cellar is adequately vented to the outside. Any kitchen or kitchenette
lacking natural ventilation shall be equipped with a system of mechanical
ventilation which provides at least two air changes per hour in the room. The
system shall exhaust and discharge directly to outside air.
   (L)   Heating. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed and are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of
at least 68°F (20°C) and shall be capable of maintaining in all said locations
a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C), at a distance of three feet above the
floor level at all times. Such heating facilities shall be so designed and
equipped that heat, as herein specified, is available for all dwelling units
and rooming units.
   (M)   Electrical requirements. Every habitable room shall contain at least
two separate floor or wall type electrical double convenience outlets which
shall be situated a distance apart equivalent to at least 25% of the perimeter
of the room. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed. Every
habitable room, toilet room, laundry room, furnace room, basement and cellar
shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture
or switched outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed.
Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring.
Electrical systems which were installed in conformance with a previous
electrical code which have not been modified and are in working order may be
approved by the Building Official.
   (N)   Minimum space, use and location requirements.
      (1)   Floor area per occupant. Every dwelling shall contain at least 150
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100
additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof.
For the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy, the floor
area of that part of a room where the ceiling height is less than five feet
shall not be considered when computing the total floor area of the room.
      (2)   Sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms and
every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant
shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by two occupants shall contain at least 110 square feet
of floor space per sleeping room.
      (3)   Ceiling height. The ceiling height of every habitable room shall be
at least seven feet. In any habitable room where the ceiling is a part of a
sloping roof, at least one-half of the floor area shall have a ceiling height
of at least seven feet. FLOOR AREA, as used in this division (N)(3), means the
area of the floor where the vertical measurement from floor to ceiling is five
feet or more. Obstruction of space by such items as water and gas pipes,
cabinetry and the like shall be permitted when such obstructions are located
within two feet of a partition or wall, do not interfere with an emergency
ingress and egress, and are approved by the Building Official. Obstruction of a
ceiling space shall be permitted when such obstruction is located at a height
of not less than six feet, four inches from the floor and which does not occupy
more than 25% of the cubic area of the space within a room which is further
than six feet, four inches from the floor.
   (O)   Direct access. Access to each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not
require first entering any other dwelling unit or rooming unit (except that,
access to rooming units may be through a living room or kitchen of a unit
occupied by the owner-operator of the structure). No dwelling, dwelling unit,
or rooming unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room
arrangements that access to a bathroom water closet compartment intended for
use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room, nor shall room arrangements be such that access
to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room. A
bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as the only passageway
to any habitable room, hallway, basement, cellar or to the exterior of the
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   (P)   Lighting of public halls and stairways. Public passageways and
stairways in dwellings accommodating two to four dwelling units or rooming
units shall be provided with convenient wall mounted light switches which
activate an adequate lighting system. Public passageways and stairways in
buildings accommodating more than five dwelling units or rooming units shall be
lighted at all times with an adequate artificial lighting system; except that,
such artificial lighting may be omitted from sunrise to sunset where an
adequate natural lighting system is provided. Whenever the occupancy of a
building exceeds 100 persons, the artificial lighting system as required herein
shall be on an emergency circuit.
   (Q)   Fire extinguishers; minimum approved type. All rental dwelling units
and rooming houses shall have a two and one-half pound type “ABC” fire
extinguisher, or have access to a fire extinguisher within 75 feet of any unit,
which is approved by the Building Official. Fire extinguishers shall be
properly hung in an area of easy access. If a fire extinguisher is installed in
a cabinet or closet, the access door must be appropriately labeled.
   (R)   Early warning fire protection. All rental dwelling units and rooming
houses shall be provided with smoke detectors as approved by the Building
Official. The detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point
centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for
sleeping purposes. Smoke detectors hereafter installed in areas where sleeping
rooms are on an upper level shall be placed above the stairway. Smoke detectors
shall be placed in each room used for sleeping purposes. All detectors shall be
located according to manufacturer’s directions. Care shall be exercised to
ensure that the installation will not interfere with the operating
characteristics of the detector. When actuated, the detector shall provide an
alarm for the dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   (S)   Water closets and lavatory basins. At least one approved water closet
and one approved lavatory basin shall be supplied for each eight persons or
fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit or units,
including members of the operator’s family whenever they share the said
facilities; provided that, in a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the
required number of water closets.
   (T)   Baths. At least one approved bath shall be supplied for each eight
persons residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit or units,
including members of the operator’s family whenever they share the use of the
facilities.
   (U)   Location of communal toilets and baths. Communal toilets and baths
shall be located on the same floor or the floor immediately above or below the
rooming unit.
   (V)   Lead-based paint. Every owner or operator of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit being let for rent and/or occupancy shall eliminate any and all
peeling paint and coat surfaces with a fresh coat of primer and paint.
   (W)   Communal kitchens. If a communal kitchen is supplied, it shall comply
with the following requirements.
      (1)   The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen shall be 60 square
feet.
      (2)   The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen in which roomers are
permitted to prepare and eat meals shall be 100 square feet.
      (3)   The communal kitchen shall be equipped with the following:
         (a)   A refrigerator with an adequate food storage capacity;
         (b)   An approved kitchen sink;
         (c)   A stove or range;
         (d)   At least one cabinet of adequate size suitable for the storage
of food and eating and cooking utensils;
         (e)   At least six square feet of surface area, which is easily
cleanable and suitable for the preparation of food; and
         (f)   A table and adequate chairs for the normal use of the facilities
if a communal dining room is not supplied.
      (4)   Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to
the occupants of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen, without
going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or
rooming unit of another occupant.
   (X)   Communal dining room. Every dwelling or rooming house, within which
the occupant of any rooming unit is permitted to prepare meals or cook within a
communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area, as
provided in division (W) below, shall contain a communal dining room which
complies with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   Every communal dining room shall be located on the same floor of
the rooming house as the communal kitchen and such dining room shall be as
nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable.
      (2)   Every communal dining room shall be located within a room
accessible to the occupant of each rooming unit sharing such dining room,
without going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit
or rooming unit of another occupant.
      (3)   The communal dining room shall contain a table and adequate chairs
for the normal use of the facilities.
      (4)   Every communal dining room shall contain not less than 70 square
feet of floor area.
   (Y)   Shades, draperies and window coverings. Every window in rooms used for
sleeping rooms in rooming units and furnished dwelling units shall be supplied
with shades, draperies or other devices or materials which, when properly used,
will afford privacy to the occupants. Every window in rooms used for sleeping
purposes in unfurnished dwelling units shall be supplied with hardware
necessary to support shades, draperies or other devices or materials which,
when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupants.
   (Z)   Kitchens; stoves and refrigerators. Kitchens or kitchenettes in
multiple dwellings, rooming houses and duplexes shall be supplied with a stove
or range and a refrigerator by the owner, operator or tenant.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-19 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Maintenance of structure.
      (1)   Structure. Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair,
step, elevator, handrail, guardrail, porch, sidewalk and appurtenance thereto
shall be maintained in safe and sound condition and shall be capable of
supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
      (2)   Exterior. Every foundation, floor, exterior wall, exterior door,
window and roof shall be maintained in reasonably weather-tight, water-tight,
rodent-proof and insect-proof condition.
      (3)   Doors. Every door, door hinge, door latch and door lock shall be
maintained in good and functional condition and every door, when closed, shall
fit reasonably well within its frame.
      (4)   Windows. Every window, existing storm window, window latch, window
lock and other aperture covering, including its hardware, shall be maintained
in good and functional condition and shall fit reasonably well within its
frame.
      (5)   Interior surfaces. Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling
and other interior surface shall be maintained so as to permit it to be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition and, where appropriate, shall be capable of
affording privacy.
      (6)   Maintenance of accessory structures. Every foundation, exterior
wall, roof, window, exterior door, basement hatchway and appurtenance of every
accessory structure shall be so maintained as to prevent the structure from
becoming a harborage for rats or other vermin and shall be kept in a reasonably
good state of repair.
   (B)   Rain water drainage. All eaves, downspouts and other roof drainage
equipment on the premises shall be maintained in a good state of repair and so
installed as to direct rain water away from the structure.
   (C)   Grading, drainage and landscaping of premises. Every premises shall be
graded and drained so no stagnant water will accumulate or stand thereon. Every
premises shall be continuously maintained by suitable landscaping with grass,
trees, shrubs or other ground cover designed to reduce and control dust.
Exception: this chapter shall not affect the existence or maintenance of storm
water detention systems.
   (D)   Chimneys and smoke pipes. Every chimney and every supplied smoke pipe
shall be adequately supported, reasonably clean and maintained in a reasonably
good state of repair.
   (E)   Protection of exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces of a
dwelling and its accessory structures, fences, porches and similar
appurtenances shall be reasonably protected from the elements and against decay
by non-lead based paint or other approved protective coating. Exception: where
it can be demonstrated that the exterior wood surface is comprised of a type or
species of wood or has been treated in such a way as to cause it to be
especially resistant to decay or infestation, the wood surface in question, if
approved by the Inspector, shall be exempt from the requirements listed in this
division (E).
   (F)   Means of egress. Every means of egress shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be free of obstruction at all times.
   (G)   Hanging screens and storm windows. The owner or operator of the
premises shall be responsible for hanging all screens and storm windows except
when there is a written agreement between the owner and the occupant to the
contrary. Screens shall be provided no later than May 1 of each year and storm
windows shall be provided no later than November 1 of each year.
   (H)   Electrical system. The electrical system of every dwelling or
accessory structure shall not by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of
insulation, improper fusing or for any other cause expose the occupants to
hazards of electrical shock or fire, and every electrical outlet, switch and
fixture shall be maintained in good and safe working condition. The owner or
operator shall supply properly sized fuses or equivalent, at the beginning of
each tenant’s occupancy.
   (I)   Maintenance of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every supplied plumbing
fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in good and sanitary
working condition. All plumbing shall be so designed, installed or replaced so
as to prevent contamination of the water supply through backflow, back
siphonage or cross-connection. Water pressure shall be adequate to permit a
proper flow of water from all open outlets at all times.
   (J)   Maintenance of gas appliances and facilities. Every gas appliance
shall be connected to a gas line with rigid black iron piping; except that,
listed metal appliance connectors or semirigid tubing may be used if approved
by the Building Official. Every indoor gas appliance shall have an approved
shutoff valve, which shall be installed in the gas line outside of each
appliance and ahead of the union connection thereto, in addition to any valve
provided on the appliance. Said valve shall be within three feet of the
appliance it serves, except for gas ranges which shall have an approved
flexible connector not over six feet in length serving as a final connector.
Every gas pipe shall be sound and tightly put together and shall be free of
leaks, corrosion or obstruction so as to reduce gas pressure or volume. Gas
pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open gas
valves at all times.
   (K)   Maintenance of heating and supplied cooling equipment. The heating
equipment of each dwelling shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition and shall be capable of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms located therein to the minimum temperature required in this
chapter. However, heating and supplied cooling equipment shall not be required
to be maintained in operational condition during that time of the year when the
equipment is not normally used.
   (L)   Floors; kitchen and bathrooms. Every toilet room floor surface,
bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean, dry and
sanitary condition.
   (M)   Supplied facilities. Every facility, utility and piece of equipment
required by this chapter and/or present in the unit and/or designated for the
exclusive use by the occupants of the unit at the time that either the rental
agreement is signed or possession is given shall function safely and shall be
maintained in proper working condition. Maintenance of facilities, utilities
and equipment not required by this chapter shall be the owner’s responsibility
unless stated to the contrary in the rental agreement. No required supplied
facility shall be removed, shut off or disconnected from any occupied dwelling
unit or rooming unit except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs, replacements or alterations are being made.
   (N)   Refrigerators and stoves. All supplied refrigerators, stoves and
ranges shall be maintained in good and safe working condition.
   (O)   Toilets, baths and lavatory basins. All toilets, baths and lavatory
basins shall be maintained in good and sanitary working condition.
   (P)   Fire protection. All fire extinguishers and early warning fire
protection systems shall be maintained in good working condition at all times
and shall be provided at the beginning of each tenancy.
   (Q)   Covered cisterns. All cisterns or similar water storage facilities
shall be fenced, safely covered or filled in such a way as not to create a
hazard to life or limb.
   (R)   Sealed passages. All pipe passages, chutes, and similar openings
through walls or floors shall be adequately enclosed or sealed to prevent the
spread of fire or passage of vermin.
   (S)   Pest extermination. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units or rooming units of any dwelling, or in the shared or public
parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or more than one
rooming unit, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (T)   Owner to let clean units. No owner shall permit occupancy of the
vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for
human occupancy.
   (U)   Maintenance of public areas. Every owner or operator of a dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units or more than one rooming unit shall be
responsible for maintaining, in a safe and sanitary condition, the shared
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof, unless there is a written
agreement between the owner and occupant to the contrary.
   (V)   Maintenance of fencing. Every fence shall be kept in a reasonably good
state of repair or shall be removed.
   (W)   Garbage disposal. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied adequate
facilities for the disposal of garbage which are approved by the Building
Official and are in compliance with this code.
   (X)   Occupancy control. No owner or operator shall allow the occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to exceed the number of persons listed
on the rental permit.
   (Y)   Cooking and eating in rooming unit. No owner or operator shall
knowingly allow eating or the use of cooking equipment within any rooming unit.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-20 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND
OCCUPANCY OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Occupant responsible for controlled area. Every occupant of a dwelling
unit or rooming unit shall keep in a clean, safe and sanitary condition that
part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises thereof he or she
occupies and controls.
      (1)   Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and
sanitary.
      (2)   Every wall and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean and free of
dirt or greasy film.
      (3)   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage
or handling of refuse.
      (4)   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage
or handling of dangerous or hazardous materials.
   (B)   Plumbing fixtures. The occupants of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper
operation thereof.
   (C)   Extermination of pests. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling
shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other
pests therein or on the premises; every occupant of a dwelling containing more
than one dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for such
extermination within the unit occupied by him or her whenever said unit is the
only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section,
whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a reasonably rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (D)   Storage and disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling shall
dispose of rubbish, garbage and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in the supplied disposal facilities or storage containers
required by this chapter.
   (E)   Use and operation of supplied heating facilities. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care, proper use and proper operation of supplied heating
facilities.
   (F)   Electrical wiring. No temporary wiring or extension cords shall be
used except extension cords which run directly from portable electric fixtures
to convenience outlets and which do not lie beneath floor coverings or extend
through doorways, transoms or similar apertures and structural elements or
attached thereto. The occupant shall not knowingly overload the circuitry of
the dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   (G)   Supplied facilities. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper
operation thereof.
   (H)   Preparation or eating of meals in rooming units prohibited. No
occupant of a rooming unit shall prepare or eat meals or store cooking utensils
in his or her rooming unit unless an approved kitchen and/or dining room is
contained within the rooming unit. The cooking and eating of meals may take
place in dwellings containing a rooming unit or units if the provisions of § 3-
5-18(W) and (X) of this chapter are complied with.
   (I)   Occupancy control. No occupant shall allow the occupancy of any
dwelling unit or rooming unit within which he or she resides to exceed the
number of persons listed on the rental permit.
   (J)   Fire protection. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to
maintain operational early warning fire protection systems by means of
replacing batteries as needed. If these systems become inoperable by mechanical
failure, the occupant is required to notify the owner.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-21 PENALTIES.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 3-5-22 RECOVERY OF FEES.
   If any fees, or penalties, imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter have not been paid within 45 days of notice thereof, the city may
collect the fees and penalties in accordance with the provisions of this code
and any applicable provision of state law. The director may prepare and file
with the Clerk, a report specifying the fees and penalties owed, a description
of the real property upon which the rental housing unit or units subject to the
fee and penalty, if applicable, are located. The Clerk may certify the amounts
owing to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as real estate
taxes, all as provided by statutory law.
(Ord. C-519, passed 5-15-2012)
CHAPTER 6: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
3-6-1   Electrical Code
   
3-6-2   Purpose
   
3-6-3   Adoption of Electrical Code
§ 3-6-1 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The rules and regulations adopted in this chapter to safeguard public
health, safety and welfare shall be known as the “Electrical Code”.
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 3-6-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt rules, regulations and minimum
standards to safeguard public health, safety and welfare as may apply to the
erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement,
maintenance and use of electrical systems.
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 3-6-3 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The Electrical code hereby adopted shall be Chapter 34 of the 2018
International Residential Code.
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
CHAPTER 7: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
3-7-1   Purpose
   
3-7-2   Definitions
   
3-7-3   Enforcement
   
3-7-4   Abatement of dangerous buildings
   
3-7-5   Right of entry
   
3-7-6   Notices and orders; vacation and demolition
   
3-7-7   Appeals
   
3-7-8   Disposition of appeal
   
3-7-9   Appeal to District Court
   
3-7-10   Recovery of costs
§ 3-7-1 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practical
method whereby buildings or structures may be required to be repaired, removed,
vacated or demolished when the buildings or structures, from any cause,
endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general
public or the occupants of the buildings. The provisions of this chapter apply
to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence, or
which may hereafter become dangerous in the city.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any or
all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described is deemed to be a
DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE, provided that conditions or defects exist to
the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants
of the building or structure is endangered.
   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, corridor, stairway or other
means of egress in so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as it would
not provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic as
defined in the Fire Protection Code of the City Building Code;
   (B)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to an extent that the structural strength or
stability thereof is materially less than it was before the catastrophe;
   (C)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
   (D)   Whenever the building or structure or any portion thereof, because of:
      (1)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
      (2)   The removal, movement or instability or any portion of ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting the building;
      (3)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation beyond
repair; or
      (4)   Any other cause is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   (E)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle more than two degrees or to an extent that upon inspection it is
determined that it is beyond repair or creates an unsafe condition;
   (F)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to:
      (1)   Become an attractive nuisance;
      (2)   Become a place for vagrants or transients;
      (3)   Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing
unlawful or immoral acts; or
      (4)   Create a haven for rodents or snakes.
   (G)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities or otherwise, is determined by the Housing Inspector and, where
children are involved, the social services agencies, to be unsanitary, unfit
for human habitation or in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease;
   (H)   Whenever any building or structure is in a condition as to constitute
a public nuisance or hazard; or
   (I)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure constituting a
nuisance remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building
or structure or whenever any building or structure or portion thereof is
abandoned so as to constitute a public nuisance or hazard.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-3 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Code Official or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Housing Inspector, the Fire Marshal or any
other duly authorized representative is hereby authorized to make inspections
and take actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-4 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection to
be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal
in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. It is unlawful for
any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, convert, occupy
or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
Penalty, see §
1-4-2 (A)(1).
§ 3-7-5 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions
of this chapter, or whenever the Code Official or his or her duly authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous conditions, the
Code Official or his or her duly authorized representative may enter the
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform
any duty imposed upon the Code Official or his or her designee by this chapter,
provided that if the building or premises is occupied, the Code Official or his
or her designee shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and
if the building or premises are unoccupied, shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. Whenever the Code Official or his or
her designee has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy
provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons
having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit
entry therein by the Code Official or his or her designee for the purpose of
inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE includes the officers named in §
3-7-3 and their authorized inspection personnel.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
Penalty, §
1-4-2 (A)(1).
§ 3-7-6 NOTICES AND ORDERS; VACATION AND DEMOLITION.
   Whenever the Code Official or his or her designee has inspected or caused to
be inspected any building and found and determined that the building is a
dangerous building, the Code Official or his or her designee shall cause the
building to be vacated and secured. The Code Official or designee shall also
commence proceedings for the repair or demolition of the building by the
issuance of the appropriate notices and orders as provided in this section.
   (A)   Posting of inspection notice. At the time a complaint is received on a
substandard building and a viewing of the property indicates a demolition
inspection is warranted, a notice as set forth in division (B) below should be
sent to the owner of the property scheduling an inspection. The notice should
advise the owner that a notice of inspection will be placed on the structure
stating that it is scheduled for inspection to determine if it should be
scheduled for demolition. The notice shall also advise the owner that occupancy
of the premises is prohibited until the inspection is completed and demolition
is not recommended. A notice of inspection should be affixed to the structure
near its front door stating it is scheduled for inspection as a result of a
complaint and the inspection will determine if demolition will be recommended.
Upon the completion of the inspection, the notice of inspection should be
removed. If the Inspectors are recommending demolition, a notice as set forth
in division (D) below stating that the structure has been inspected and is
being recommended for demolition should be affixed to the structure near the
front door. If the Inspectors are not recommending demolition, there will be no
notice present on the structure. The notices should contain the name of the
department, contact person, address and phone number to call to answer any
questions raised by the notices.
   (B)   Code Official. The Code Official shall issue a notice and order
directed to the owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
      (1)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
      (2)   A statement that the building was found to be dangerous along with
a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building
dangerous under the provisions of §
3-7-2 of this chapter, or any other applicable provisions of this code of
ordinances;
      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken:
         (a)   If the building or structure is determined to be repairable, the
order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work
physically commenced within the time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of
order) and completed within the time as the Code Official or his or her
designee determines is reasonable under the circumstances;
         (b)   If the Code Official or his or her designee has determined that
the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the
building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of
order as determined by the Code Official or his or her designee to be
reasonable; and
         (c)   If the Code Official or his or her designee has determined that
the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the
building be demolished within the time as the Code Official or his or her
designee determines is reasonable provided that the reasonable time for the
completion of demolition shall be within 90 days from the date of order.
      (4)   Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work
is not commenced within the time specified, the Code Official or his or her
designee will:
         (a)   Order the building vacated and posted to prevent further
occupancy until the work is completed; and
         (b)   Report to the Construction Board of Appeals that proceedings to
demolish the building should commence and that demolition of the building
should be done and the cost thereof charged against the property or its owner.
      (5)   Statements advising each owner of record, jointly and individually,
that:
         (a)   The owner may appeal from the notice and order or any action of
the Code Official or his or her designee to the Construction Board of Appeals,
provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed
with the Code Official or his or her designee within ten days from the date of
service of the notice and order;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the filing of a request, a hearing will be
held before the Construction Board of Appeals at which time the owners and/or
the owner’s counsel may be present and participate; and
         (c)   Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   (C)   Vacation and demolition. The following standards shall be followed by
the Code Official or his or her designee in ordering the vacation or demolition
of any dangerous buildings or structures.
      (1)   Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter shall
either be repaired or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner.
      (2)   If the building or structure is in a condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or
its occupants, it shall be ordered vacated. If the building or structure, after
it is vacated and secured, is still an immediate danger to the life, limb,
property or safety of the public and an emergency exists, the city may perform
any action which may be required to eliminate the immediate danger without
prior notice, and assess the costs, pursuant to Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h).
      (3)   After a demolition permit has been obtained from the City, the
dangerous building shall be removed and placed in the county landfill.
      (4)   If the demolition is not completed within the time determined by
the Code Official or his or her designee, the City shall advertise for bids for
the demolition of the building, award a contract for the demolition to the
lowest responsible bidder and assess the cost thereof against the property as
provided by law. The Council may advertise for bids for the demolition of more
than one building and may award a single contract for the demolition of more
than one building.
   (D)   Notice to vacate. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being
served as provided in division (B) above, be posted at or upon each exit of the
building and shall be substantially in the following form:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a municipal infraction to occupy this building
or to remove or deface this notice.
Code Official
City of Fort Madison, Iowa
   (E)   Compliance. Whenever the notice is posted, the Code Official or his or
her designee shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order
issued by the Code Official, reciting the emergency and specifying the
conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter
any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair,
demolish or remove the building under permit. No person shall remove or deface
any notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal
have been completed.
   (F)   Extensions of time to perform work. Upon receipt of any application in
writing from the person required to conform to the order, an agreement by the
person that he or she will comply with the order if allowed additional time,
the Code Official or his or her designee may, at that person’s discretion,
grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 90 days, within which
to complete the repairs, rehabilitation or demolition, if the Code Official or
his or her designee determines that an extension of time will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Code
Official or his or her designee’s authority to extend time is limited to the
physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in
any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.
   (G)   Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere
with any officer, employee, contractor or duly authorized representative of
this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest
in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under
the provisions of this chapter; or with any person to whom the building has
been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whenever the
officer, employee, contractor or duly authorized representative of this
jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in the building or structure,
or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating or demolishing any
building, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any
necessary act preliminary to or incidental to the work or authorized or
directed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
Penalty, see §
1-4-2 (A)(1).
§ 3-7-7 APPEALS.
   Any person entitled to service under §
3-7-6 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the Code Official
or his or her designee under this chapter by filing a notice of appeal at the
office of the Code Official or his or her designee on the form supplied for the
filing purposes. The appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of
service of the order or action of the Code Official or his or her designee.
Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the Code Official or
his or her designee shall present it at the next meeting of the Construction
Board of Appeals.
   (A)   Scheduling appeal. As soon as practicable after receiving the written
appeal, the Construction Board of Appeals shall fix a date, time and place for
the hearing of the appeal. The date shall be within 30 days from the date the
appeal was filed or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Construction
Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of
rights to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or
any portion thereof.
   (C)   Scope of hearing. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by
the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-8 DISPOSITION OF APPEAL.
   After hearing all testimony concerning the appeal, the Construction Board of
Appeals shall have 20 days to issue a decision. The decision shall be in
writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues
presented and the requirements to be complied with. The decision shall be
mailed to the person appealing by regular mail. The decision of the
Construction Board of Appeals shall be the final decision of the city for
purposes of any appeal to the District Court.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-9 APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.
   Any person may appeal the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals to
the Iowa District Court for Lee County within 30 days after the postmark on the
decision, to file an appeal with the District Court.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-7-10 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   Any and all costs incurred pursuant to this chapter, for the removal, repair
or dismantling of a dangerous building or structure from private property shall
be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer and assessed against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
CHAPTER 8: APPEALS
Section
   
3-8-1   Appeals
§ 3-8-1 APPEALS.
   All appeals of orders, decisions or determination made by the Building
Official relative to the application and/or interpretation of the city’s
Building Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Housing Code, Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and any other code adopted pursuant to Title 3
of this code of ordinances, whether expressly or by incorporation, shall be
made to the Construction Board of Appeals as provided in
Title 2, Chapter 8, of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. D-065, passed 8-4-2020)
CHAPTER 9: VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION
Section
   
3-9-1   Purpose
   
3-9-2   Other ordinances
   
3-9-3   Definitions
   
3-9-4   Unlawful to occupy
   
3-9-5   Registration required
   
3-9-6   Fees
   
3-9-7   Registration requirements
   
3-9-8   Owner’s responsibilities
   
3-9-9   Inspections
   
3-9-10   Consent to emergency inspections and emergency repairs
   
3-9-11   Time restrictions
   
3-9-12   Unsafe/public nuisance
   
3-9-13   Penalties
   
3-9-14   Appeals
§ 3-9-1 PURPOSE.
   Registering of vacant buildings, including, but not limited to, vacant or
partially vacant buildings occupied or in business for manufacturing,
industrial, storage, commercial or residential uses is essential for the proper
enforcement of the city’s building, fire and zoning code and to safeguard
persons, property and general welfare.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-2 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein. When a provision of this chapter
conflicts with any other provision of the code regulating the same subject
matter, the more stringent or restrictive provision shall apply.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. A previously occupiable residential unit that includes these spaces,
shall be considered HABITABLE SPACE in its entirety for the purpose of
calculating total habitable space of a building.
   OWNER. The person(s) or entity of record at the County Recorder’s office as
both the deed holder and the contract holder.
   SECURED. A building that has all permanent doors and windows in each
appropriate building opening that are secured to prevent unauthorized entry,
and has all its door and window components intact and unbroken.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the estimated cost
of repair.
   UNSECURED. Any building that does not meet the definition of “secured”.
   VACANT BUILDING. A building or 50% or more of a building as measured by
total square footage of all floors above grade and including previously
habitable below grade spaces that are unoccupied and meets one or more of the
following conditions:
      (1)   Records of the Lee County Recorder show the property is in lien
foreclosure;
      (2)   Windows or entrances to the building are boarded up or closed off,
or one or more doors or windows are broken and unrepaired;
      (3)   Doors to the building are damaged, smashed through, caved in,
broken off, unhinged or continuously unlocked;
      (4)   The building is without gas, electric or water service;
      (5)   Trash service has been discontinued;
      (6)   Water service fails to use a minimum of 100 gallons per month;
      (7)   Rubbish, trash, putrescible materials or debris has accumulated on
the property;
      (8)   Law enforcement agencies have received at least two reports of
trespass, vandalism or other illegal acts being committed on the property
within 12 months;
      (9)   The yards on the property exhibit grass, lawn, weeds and other
vegetation which are not maintained to a minimum as required by code or to the
standards prevailing in the neighborhood; and
      (10)   The structure meets any or all of the criteria which would support
an action by the city under Iowa Code § 657A.10B to obtain title to the
property.
   VIOLATION. A lawful order has been issued by the city, or a department
thereof, and the conditions forming the basis for the order have not been fully
abated.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-4 UNLAWFUL TO OCCUPY.
   It is unlawful for any person to occupy any building or structure which has
not had water or electric utility service connected for a period of 30
consecutive days. The city may declare any such building as “condemned and
unsafe to occupy”, and shall placard the building as such. Persons refusing to
vacate said building within three days of said order are guilty of a municipal
infraction and may be removed through District Court order, and shall be
subject to appropriate daily fines for non-compliance, as well as other
injunctive relief as may be appropriate.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-5 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any building that has become vacant shall, within
90 days after the building becomes vacant or within 30 days after assuming
ownership of a building that has already been vacant for 60 days, whichever is
later, file a registration statement for each such building on forms provided
by the city’s Fire and Building Department. The registration and provisions of
this section shall remain in effect for that period the building remains
vacant.
      (2)   Properties in foreclosure shall further be required to file
registration paperwork within 30 days of filing a “notice of default” or
“intent to foreclose” with the District Court.
   (B)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Property that is undergoing an active renovation or rehabilitation,
and where a permit for same has been secured from the city’s Fire and Building
Department and has not expired;
      (2)   Properties that are part of an estate that is in probate and are
not subject to bankruptcy shall be exempt from registration for a period of 12
months;
      (3)   Properties that are publicly and in good faith being actively
marketed as “for sale” for a reasonable price shall not be required to be
registered as a vacant building for the first six months of listing. After the
property has been listed for the first six months, the property must be
registered as a vacant building until sold. A property which is listed with MLS
(Multiple Listing Service) is presumptively being actively marketed. An asking
price not greater than 150% of the Total Assessed Value, as determined by the
county property tax records, is presumptively a “reasonable price”;
      (4)   A building owned and occupied by persons who travel seasonally
shall not be considered a vacant building. Any such building may be voluntarily
registered as a “seasonal” property at no cost to the owner to assist city
staff and the property owner with any concerns regarding said property during
the owner’s absence;
      (5)   Properties constructed solely for the use of commercial warehouse/
storage and located in a zoning district that allows such use shall be exempt
from the fees required provided that utilities as designed and connected to the
structures remain intact and active (service is on), and inspections as
required by this code are completed and passed with needed corrections
completed within 60 days of finding non-compliance. In the event items found
during inspections by the owner or city are not repaired as required, fees will
become active and remain fully required for a period of not less than two full
registration cycles;
      (6)   A building which has suffered substantial damage shall be exempt
from registration for a period of 90 days from the date of substantial damage.
After 90 days, the structure must be registered as vacant;
      (7)   Properties which have active insurance policies on all structures
equaling the actual cash value of the property but not be less than the cost of
demolition/debris removal and that have active and in use utilities shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter provided the city is added as a
certificate holder on the insurance policy. To qualify for exemption, the owner
must submit a form titled “Vacant Building Registration - Insurance/Utility
Exemption” as well as proof of active utilities and have their insurance agent
submit a certificate of insurance showing the city as a certificate holder. In
the event code violations are found by the city and are not repaired as
required by notice given, the property will be deemed non-compliant for vacant
building registration - insurance/utility exemption and shall be required to be
registered in the vacant building registration program for a period of not less
than two full registration cycles; and
      (8)   Property owned by the city.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-6 FEES.
   (A)   The fee for registering a vacant structure shall be set by resolution
of the City Council, and may be adjusted from time to time. Registration fees
collected on or after July 1 shall be prorated to one-half the yearly
registration fee, but for calculating subsequent yearly fees shall be
considered the full fee as set forth by resolution.
   (B)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
residential rental buildings consisting of partially occupied rentals and
partially vacant portions of buildings may be allowed to register the vacant
units by paying the fee associated with additional rental units. Inspections
for vacant portions of said units shall be inspected as required by this code
section.
   (C)   The fee for renewing the vacant building registration shall be
consistent for the first two years a structure remains vacant and shall run
with the property and not ownership. Any change of ownership shall not be
considered newly vacant, but shall continue to accrue vacancy time for the
purposes of calculating registration fees.
   (D)   Upon the third year of vacancy, the registration fee will double from
the original full-year registration fee and not the prorated fee. Upon the
fourth year of registration, the registration fee will double from the third-
year registration fee and all subsequent fees will remain consistent with the
fourth-year fee.
   (E)   If the property is transferred to new ownership and remains vacant,
the new owner shall file an amended registration form within 30 days of
transfer of ownership. If the building is already registered as vacant the new
owner shall not be required to submit the registration fee for the year already
paid. The new owner shall submit the previous owner’s inspection log as
required in the inspections section of this code. If an inspection log is not
obtained from the previous owner, the owner shall schedule an inspection with
the Building Official within 30 days of registration.
   (F)   Properties registered with the city as a vacant building may be
transferred to the Rental Inspection Program (
Title 3, Chapter 5, of this code of ordinances) without having to pay the fee
for the Rental Inspection Program for the same year already paid as a vacant
property.
   (G)   Properties registered with the city as rental property (
Title 3, Chapter 5, of this code of ordinances) may be transferred to the
Vacant Building Registration Program without having to pay the fee for the
Vacant Building Registration Program for the same year already paid as a rental
property.
   (H)   Payment of the applicable registration fee does not relieve or exempt
the owner or other persons from paying any and all fines, penalties, costs or
other such charges assessed for non-compliance with the property maintenance
standards of this section or other code provisions in this section or elsewhere
in the city ordinances.
   (I)   Payment of any and all fines, penalties, costs or other such charges
assessed for non-compliance with the property maintenance standards of this
section or other code provisions in this section or elsewhere in city
ordinances does not relieve or exempt the owner from paying applicable
registration fees of this section.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-7 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The registration form shall include the following information:
      (1)   A description of the premises; address, including legal description
or parcel number;
      (2)   The names, addresses and contact phone number(s) for all the owner
(s), owner’s authorized agent(s) and mortgage lender’s account service
representative(s);
      (3)   The names, addresses and contact phone number(s) of all known
lienholders and all other interested parties;
      (4)   If the owner and authorized agent does not reside in Lee County,
Des Moines County, Henry County, Van Buren County in Iowa, Hancock, Henderson
County in Illinois, or Clark County Missouri, the name, address and contact
phone number of a person designated to act on behalf of an out-of-town owner(s)
shall be submitted, to accept legal process and notices, and to authorize
repairs as required (a letter/emailed form from the legal owner(s) is required
to assign a designee). Said designee shall reside in Lee County;
      (5)   A list of all other persons allowed to be on the property; and
      (6)   The owner shall execute an authorization appointing the city’s
Police Department an Agent of the owner for the purpose of making a demand to
depart therefrom pursuant to §
7-2-11 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-8 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The owner of any building that has become vacant shall:
      (1)   Notify the office of the Building Official of any changes to the
information provided in the registration or to the plan of action if one exists
within 30 days after making the changes (examples: change of address, change of
local contact designee or deciding to make repairs for occupancy rather than
leave vacant or other changes as specified in the plan of action is one is
submitted);
      (2)   Secure all buildings on the premises;
      (3)   Maintain all buildings in a secure and closed condition until the
building is again occupied or legally razed; and
      (4)   Minimum requirements for vacant buildings.
   (B)   (1)   After filing a registration statement, the building owner shall
provide access to the city, at the city’s request, to conduct an exterior and
interior inspection of the building to determine compliance with this section.
      (2)   A vacant building shall be considered adequately maintained if:
         (a)   Doors, windows and other openings are weather-tight and secured
against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers. Broken or missing doors and
windows shall be replaced with like materials. Boarding up of doors and windows
shall not be considered an appropriately secured;
         (b)   The roof, gutters and flashing are sound and tight, will not
admit moisture, vermin or birds into the structure, and properly drain to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior and in a manner that
does not create a public nuisance;
         (c)   The interior and exterior shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound, free from debris, rubbish, yard waste, garbage and sanitary
so as not to threaten public health or safety;
         (d)   The structural members are free of deterioration and capable of
safely bearing imposed dead and live loads;
         (e)   The foundation walls are free from open cracks and breaks, and
vermin-proof;
         (f)   The exterior walls are free of holes, breaks and loose or
rotting materials, and exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint;
         (g)   All balconies, decks, stairways, cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features are
safe, anchored, and in good repair, and exposed metal and wood surfaces are
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint;
         (h)   Any plumbing fixtures, including those used for operation of
lawn sprinkling system, shall be maintained with no leaking pipes, and all
pipes for water shall either be completely drained, winterized or heated to
resist freezing;
         (i)   All existing fire detection and suppression systems in
commercial and industrial buildings must remain intact and fully operational
unless modification and/or decommissioning is authorized by the Building
Official;
         (j)   Sidewalks, stairways and driveways are free from hazardous
conditions and safe for pedestrian travel, including, but not limited to,
removal of snow and ice within 12 hours of a precipitation event;
         (k)   Accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds and
fences are free from safety, health and fire hazards and are secured;
         (l)   The property on which a structure is located must be safe and
clean from junk, debris, trash, rodents, weeds and tall grass. It shall be kept
sanitary so that it does not threaten the public’s health or safety in any way;
         (m)   Every owner shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents and other vermin in or about the premises; and
         (n)   Graffiti shall be removed as soon as possible and within seven
days of notification of the defacement.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-9 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All buildings registered in the Vacant Building Registration Program
shall be inspected by the Building Official within 12 months of registration in
the program. Yearly inspections by the city shall be made to ensure continued
compliance. If in the event the property passes inspections without violations
on two successive yearly initial inspections, the property would be allowed a
grace period of two years with the follow up city inspection on year three from
the most recent initial inspection. Subsequent passed third year inspections
would allow for continued city inspections every third year. If at any
inspection the building(s) fail(s) to pass minimum maintenance standards,
yearly inspections will be required until the building(s) pass(es) inspections
for two successive years. Any year, a city inspection is not required the owner
must submit a self-performed inspection log.
   (B)   Monthly inspections shall be performed by the owner or the owner’s
designee to ensure the required minimum maintenance standards are being met and
said person shall keep a detailed log of findings upon inspection and repairs
completed post inspection. If inspection logs are submitted as checked monthly
and maintained but do not match the Building Official’s records of hazards or
failure to maintain, the owner shall accrue a fee for failure to secure and
maintain.
   (C)   Copies of monthly logs shall be submitted to the office of the
building official annually at the time of registration. If a property is sold,
the new owner must acquire the log of previous inspections from the seller and
submit them with registration.
   (D)   If a building is found to be maintaining a violation of the minimum
maintenance standards by the Building Official, the owner shall be given 30
days to correct the violations. The Building Official may grant an extension
based on the severity of work to be completed; provided, the structure will not
continue to deteriorate during the time allotted. If the owner fails to make
adequate repairs within the time allotted, the procedure for failure to secure
and maintain shall be followed.
   (E)   The Building Official is authorized and directed to inspect any
buildings and premises located within the city for the purpose of enforcing and
assuring compliance with this chapter, with the inspection to include only
those items which can be inspected by lawful means. In the event the Building
Official has reason to believe that a code violation may exist within a
building, he or she is authorized and directed to inspect the remainder of the
building and premises. The owner of every building may, upon request of the
Building Official, give the Building Official complete access to the building
and premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. In the event
access to the premises is refused, the Building Official with the assistance of
the City Attorney may obtain an administrative search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction in order to gain access to the premises.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-10 CONSENT TO EMERGENCY INSPECTIONS AND EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   All applicants and owners registered in the vacant property registration
program consent to the entry of duly authorized officials of the city if such
official has reason to believe than an emergency situation exists with respect
to the building or structure that tends to create an imminent hazard to health,
welfare or safety of the general public, in the discretion of such official,
then such official may enter the building to inspect the premises, without
notifying the responsible party or obtaining a warrant. If such official finds
an emergency situation exists, which presents an imminent hazard to the health,
welfare or safety of the general public, then such official may cause any
reasonable action, including the employment of necessary labor and materials,
to perform emergency repairs to alleviate the hazard. Costs incurred in the
performance of emergency repairs may be paid by the city and if so paid, the
city shall charge the cost thereof to the owner and failure to pay the city any
costs shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer, and assessed to
the property owner of record, and collected in the same manner as general
property taxes.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-11 TIME RESTRICTIONS.
   With respect to any structure that has been vacant for a period of over 24
months, the Building Official may require that the property owner submit a plan
of action, which shall include, without limitation, identifying an estimated
date the property will be habitable, occupied, razed or offered up for rent or
sale as well as any other terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the
Building Official.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-12 UNSAFE/PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city shall retain the
right afforded under relevant state or local law to declare a vacant structure
unsafe and/or a public nuisance. The city may pursue whatever legal recourse
afforded to it by law, including, but not limited to, action to abate a public
nuisance or an action seeking the demolition of a dangerous and/or unsafe
building.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-13 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Failure to register. Any property owner who fails to register a vacant
building shall be assessed a penalty as set by resolution of the City Council,
the amount of said penalty may be adjusted from time to time. Each additional
month of violation after notification shall be considered a continuing
violation and said penalty shall be assessed for each month of non-compliance.
   (B)   Failure to secure and maintain. If any property owner or any entity
functioning as a trustee of an owner, or identified as a responsible trustee or
building manager by the owner, having a duty to register a vacant building is
found to be in violation with any portion of this chapter the owner shall
accrue a penalty for failure to secure and maintain the building, the penalty
of which shall be set by resolution of the City Council, the amount of said
penalty may be adjusted from time to time. The Building Official shall send by
first class mail a written notice of the violation and penalty to the person
responsible for day-to-day supervision and management of the building or to the
authorized agent for service and process and to the owner of record. Within 30
days, or an amount of time deemed appropriate by the Building Official, of the
mailing of the notice of violation, the owner shall be required to restore the
building in compliance with this section. Failure to secure and maintain the
property as required in this section shall result in revocation of
registration, causing fees for failure to comply to be issued. Nothing in this
section shall deny or abrogate the prerogative of the city to correct any
violation of this chapter and to assess and/or recover by judgment, liens, or
other means all costs of the same from the owner or agent.
   (C)   Failure to comply. Any property owner or entity functioning as a
trustee of an owner or entity that fails to comply with any provisions of this
section shall, after 45 days from notification by the Building Official, be
charged a penalty as set by resolution of the City Council, the amount of which
may be adjusted from time to time, for each month the property is not in
compliance with this section. The city shall charge the costs for failure to
secure and maintain and costs for failure to comply to the owner and failure to
pay the city any costs shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer,
and assessed to the property of record, and collected in the same manner as
general property taxes. However, the city may, in its complete discretion,
elect to seek other remedies apart from the assessment of liens.
   (D)   Municipal infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
§ 3-9-14 APPEALS.
   Any owner directly affected by a decision of the Building Official or the
Building Official’s designee regarding this chapter may file with the Building
Official, an appeal in writing to the Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals in accordance with Title 2 of this code of ordinances. The basis of any
appeal shall be limited to a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or applied,
or that the requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other
means. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days of the decision of the
Building Official. Appeals filed after ten days of said decision shall be
deemed waived and shall be dismissed by the Building Official.
(Ord. D-87, passed 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 10:
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTANENCE CODE
Section
   
3-10-1   Purpose
   
3-10-2   Applicability; authority for enforcement
   
3-10-3   Complaints; sufficiency of complaints
   
3-10-4   Interference with code officials
   
3-10-5   International Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
3-10-6   Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code
   
3-10-7   Violations deemed nuisances; incorporation by reference
   
3-10-8   Notice to abate
   
3-10-9   Emergency abatement measures
   
3-10-10   Code on file
   
3-10-99   Penalty
§ 3-10-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to designate the responsibilities of persons
for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property within the city,
to define nuisances as a result of the failure to perform such maintenance and
to provide for the abatement of such nuisances in order to provide for the
safety and preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-2 APPLICABILITY; AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The requirements and standards set forth in this chapter are applicable to
all properties, residential, commercial or otherwise, situated within the city
limits of Fort Madison, Iowa. The code officials of the City of Fort Madison
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and shall have all the
necessary authority to carry out such enforcement, including the right to
request entry and inspect any property within city limits against which a
sufficient complaint has been made and which is substantiated by the Code
Official, including single-family owner-occupied dwellings. Any person
designated by the City Administrator to enforce this chapter, shall be known
and referred to throughout this chapter as the Code Official.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-3 COMPLAINTS; SUFFICIENCY OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   A code official may request entry and conduct an inspection for a
violation of this chapter upon receipt and substantiation of a complaint lodged
against a single-family owner-occupied property. The Code Official must provide
the owner with a written request for entry into the home and such written
request must include a notice to the owner of their right to deny the entry
request. The written request must also contain a statement informing the owner
that denial of the entry request may result in the Code Official applying for
an administrative warrant and court order authorizing entry by the Code
Official regardless of the owner’s objection so long as the warrant procedure
and subsequent entry are performed according to state and federal
constitutional standards.
   (B)   Complaints are deemed sufficient to trigger this authority if they
meet the following criteria for substantiation, as applicable:
      (1)   Exterior complaints. If a complaint is made about any condition
visible from the exterior of the single-family owner-occupied dwelling (for
example, smoke/carbon monoxide detectors, mold, etc.), a complaint will be
deemed sufficient if the complaint states in detail the violation alleged and
is subsequently verified by an authorized code official.
      (2)   Interior complaints. If a complaint is made about any condition
visible only from the interior of the single-family owner-occupied dwelling
(for example, smoke/carbon monoxide detectors, mold, etc.), a complaint will be
deemed sufficient if the complaint states in detail the violation alleged and
is accompanied by photographs of the violation alleged for review by the Code
Official.
   (C)   Complaints about any portion of a rental property as defined in
Chapter 5, Housing Code, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-4 INTERFERENCE WITH CODE OFFICIALS.
    No person shall interfere with any code official while he or she is engaged
in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
Penalty, see §
3-10-99
§ 3-10-5 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Fort Madison
that certain code known as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
Edition, First Printing, including Appendix A, (hereinafter referred to
collectively as the IPMC (2018)) as prepared and edited by the International
Code Council, Inc., and the provisions of said Property Maintenance Code shall
be controlling in maintaining minimum requirements and standards of structures
and properties within the corporate limits of the city and shall be known as
the Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-6 AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   Certain sections and portions of sections of the IPMC (2018), are hereby
amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth below.
   (A)   § 101.1, insert: “City of Fort Madison, Iowa”;
   (B)   § 103.5, insert: “fee schedule as set by Council resolution”;
   (C)   § 112.4, insert: “fine schedule as set by Council resolution”;
   (D)   § 302.4, insert: “8 inches” (from 52.02 #13 Weeds);
   (E)   § 304.14, insert: “April 1, September 30";
   (F)   § 602.3, insert: “October 1, April 30";
   (G)   § 602.4, insert: “October 1, April 30".
   (H)   Unsafe structures and equipment. The Fort Madison Property Maintenance
Code is hereby amended by repealing § 108.1 of the IPMC (2018), and by
replacing said section with a new section, as follows:
      § 108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code
Official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy,
or is found unlawful, the Code Official shall commence proceedings to cause the
repair, vacation or demolition of the structure and the structure may be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   (I)   Request for hearing. The Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended by repealing § 111 of the IPMC (2018) in its entirety, and by
replacing said section with a new section, as follows:
      § 111 Request for hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or
other Code violation, or any person interested therein may have a hearing with
the Construction Board of Appeals as to whether a Code violation exists or on a
request for an extension of time in which to abate a nuisance or other Code
violation. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the
Construction Board of Appeals either: within the time stated in the order to
abate or twenty (20) calendar days after the date of postmark of notice or
proof of service, whichever comes first; or it will be conclusively presumed
that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. An additional ten (10)
days to file a request for appeal will be granted upon showing of exigent and/
or unforeseeable circumstances making it impracticable to have filed the appeal
request within the twenty (20) day period provided above. The Construction
Board of Appeals shall set a hearing date as soon as practicable after
receiving a written appeal. The applicant shall be advised in writing of the
time and place of such meeting at least (4) days prior to the date of the
meeting. At such meeting, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and show just cause why a nuisance or other Code violation does not exist
or why an extension of time is needed. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Construction Board of Appeals shall render a written decision as to whether or
not a nuisance or other Code violation exists. If the Construction Board of
Appeals finds that a nuisance or other Code violation exists, it shall order
the violation to be abated within an additional time which is reasonable under
the circumstances. The findings of the Construction Board of Appeals shall
constitute the city’s final action on the matter. Enforcement of any notice or
order issued under this code shall be stayed during the duration of an appeal
of the order, which is properly and timely filed.
   (J)   Overcrowding. The Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended by adding a new exception to § 404.5 of the IPMC (2018), as follows:
      Exception: The actual number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall
not create conditions that, in the opinion of the Code Official, endanger the
life, health, safety, or welfare of the occupants.
   (K)   Receptacles. The Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended by adding a new § 605.2.1 to the IPMC (2018), reading as follows:
      § 605.2.1 Ground fault circuit requirements. Receptacles which are within
six feet of a source of water shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.
   (L)   Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors. The Fort Madison
Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing §§ 704 and 705 of the
IPMC (2018), and by replacing said sections with new sections, as follows:
      Smoke detection and notification. Smoke alarms shall be listed and
labeled in accordance with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances and the household fire warning
equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
      § 704.1 Smoke detection systems. Household fire alarm systems installed
in accordance with NFPA 72 that include smoke alarms, or a combination of smoke
detector and audible notification devices installed as required by this section
for smoke alarms, shall be permitted.
      § 704.2 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following
locations:
         1.   In each sleeping room;
         2.   Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms;
         3.   On each story of the dwelling including basements.
      § 704.3.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. When alterations, repairs
or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are
added or created in existing dwellings, the dwelling unit shall be equipped
with smoke alarms in locations as required in § R314.3 for new dwellings.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the
replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or replacement of windows or
doors, or the addition of an open porch or deck, are exempt from the
requirements of this section;
         2.   Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical
systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
      § 704.4 Power source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from
the building wiring, and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power
from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch
other than those required for overcurrent protection.
      § 704.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to
be installed within an individual dwelling unit in accordance with § R314.3,
the alarm devices shall be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation
of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical
interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless
alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of any one alarm.
      § 705.1 Carbon monoxide alarms and detection [F]. Carbon monoxide alarms
shall be installed in dwellings in accordance Chapter 2 of this
Code of Ordinances and § 1103.9 of the International Fire Code, except that
alarms in dwellings covered by the International Residential Code shall be
installed in accordance with § R315 of that code.
      § 705.2 Carbon monoxide alarms and detectors. Carbon monoxide alarms and
carbon monoxide detection systems shall be maintained in accordance with
Chapter 2 of this Code of Ordinances and NFPA 720. Carbon monoxide alarms and
carbon monoxide detectors that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-life
signals shall be replaced.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-7 VIOLATIONS DEEMED NUISANCES; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Violations deemed nuisances. A failure to satisfy any of the
provisions of the Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code shall constitute a
nuisance as defined in Chapter 4.
   (B)   Incorporation by reference.
      (1)   The requirements of this chapter are hereby incorporated by
reference into Chapter 4.
      (2)   The requirements of this chapter are hereby incorporated by
reference into all requirements set forth in Chapter 5.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-8 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any violation of this chapter, the city shall within five
days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 4, beginning with a
formal written notice to abate the offending condition.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-9 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT MEASURES.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever in the
judgment of the Code Official any nuisance is an immediate and imminent threat
to life and property, the Code Official may, with or without prior notice as
required herein, order the nuisance abated and costs assessed against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. However, prior to
such assessment, the city shall give the property owner notice as provided by
state law and this Code.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-10 CODE ON FILE.
   An official copy of the Fort Madison Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted, including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the
effective date thereof, shall be on file in the office of the Clerk in City
Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available for public
inspection. A copy of this Chapter shall be available in the office of the
Building Inspector.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 3-10-99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a municipal infraction, and upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set
forth in Title 1, Section 1 of this Code. The penalties provided for in this
section shall be in addition to any other applicable criminal, civil or
administrative penalties imposed by local, state or federal law.
(Ord. D-108, passed 11-21-2023)
TITLE 4: BUSINESS
   Chapter
      
1.   Beer and Liquor
      
2.   Licenses
      
3.   Soliciting Funds
      
4.   Peddlers
      
5.   Taxicabs
      
6.   Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers, Itinerant Dealers, and Scrap Metal
Dealers
      
7.   Hotel and Motel Tax
      
8.   Sexually-Oriented Businesses
CHAPTER 1: BEER AND LIQUOR
Section
   
4-1-1   Compliance with state law
§ 4-1-1 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   Regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale and consumption of
beer and liquor shall be in full compliance with the state’s Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code §§ 123.1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2: LICENSES
Section
   
4-2-1   License required
   
4-2-2   Limitation
   
4-2-3   Fees
   
4-2-4   Non-transferability
   
4-2-5   Issuance of license
   
4-2-6   Parades; performances on public places
   
4-2-7   Vulgar shows
   
4-2-8   Exits
   
4-2-9   Fire hazards
   
4-2-10   Duty of owners; lessees
   
4-2-11   Revocation of license or permit
   
4-2-12   Appeal procedure
   
4-2-13   Violation
§ 4-2-1 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or engage in any of the
following businesses or activities without first having obtained a license as
hereinafter provided:
      Auctioneering;
      Billiard or pool hall;
      Bowling alley;
      Carnival;
      Circus;
      Clairvoyant;
      Fortune telling;
      House moving;
      Massage parlor;
      Menagerie;
      Motion picture show or exhibition;
      Palm reading;
      Pawn shop;
      Public exhibitions of any kind;
      Show;
      Skating rink; and
      Tattoo parlors.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-2 LIMITATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if no admission fee is
charged for or in connection with the business or activity and nothing is sold
by or in connection with the business or activity, nor shall the provisions of
this chapter apply to any lecture on any scientific, historical, religious or
literary subject or to any activity conducted by a school, church or local non-
profit organization for the sole profit of such school, church or organization.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-3 FEES.
   The license fee shall be as follows:
                                    $3 per month or $25 per year for a
                                    resident of Lee County; $10 per day for
                                    others
                                    A non-resident of Lee County, who is
Auctioneer                          maintaining and operating a permanent
                                    auction house business in the city, on
                                    Council approval may be granted a
                                    license for the same charge as a
                                    resident
Billiard or pool hall               $10 per year for the first table and $5
                                    per year for each additional table
Bowling alley, shooting gallery,    $80 per year
skating rink or pawn shop
                                    $10 each day the building or house is on
                                    the public streets, avenues or alleys;
Building or house moving            provided, no fee shall be charged for a
                                    building or house under eight feet in
                                    width
Carnival, show, menagerie           $25 per day or $100 per week
                                    $100 per day for a circus with five or
Circus                              more rings; $50 per day for a circus
                                    with less than five rings
Drive-in theater                    $75 per year
Fortune teller, palm reader,        $15 per day or $100 per week
clairvoyant or similar activities
                                    $25 for the first performance or showing
Motion picture show or exhibition,  and $10 for each additional performance
theatrical exhibition or any public or showing; provided that, no fee shall
exhibition of any kind              be charged if the show or exhibition is
                                    put on, in or at a theater duly licensed
                                    as provided in subsections A and B above
Public dance hall                   $100 per year or $5 per dance
                                    $100 per year if the seating capacity is
Theater                             800 or more; $50 per year if the seating
                                    capacity is under 800
Any type of performance not         License fee to be set by the Mayor
specifically provided for above
 
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. A-172, passed 11-20-1961)
§ 4-2-4 NON-TRANSFERABILlTY.
   No license shall be transferred, sold or assigned.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-5 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The Clerk shall issue the license applied for, upon forms furnished by the
city, upon proper application being made therefor and compliance by applicant
with the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Payment of the fee provided for in §
4-2-3 of this chapter;
   (B)   Showing that the business or activity is not immoral, vulgar or
illegal;
   (C)   In case of fortune tellers, palm reader, clairvoyants or related
activities, the furnishing to the Clerk of a certificate of health from a duly
licensed and practicing physician in the city;
   (D)   Execution and filing with the Clerk by any person, engaged in any
business or activity referred to in this chapter and not a resident or having a
permanent place of business or resident agent in Iowa of an instrument
containing the following:
      (1)   An agreement that said person shall be subject to the jurisdiction
of the District Court of the state in and for Lee County, at Fort Madison, over
all civil actions or proceedings against such person, for damages to any person
or property growing out of or in any way connected with the operation of such
business, firm or corporation in the city or within the police jurisdiction
thereof;
      (2)   An appointment irrevocable for six months after said person, leaves
the city, the Clerk, as lawful attorney upon whom may be served all original
notices of suit pertaining to such actions and proceedings;
      (3)   An agreement by said person, that any original notice so served
shall be of the same legal force and validity as if personally served in the
state; and
      (4)   An agreement by said person to assume full liability for any damage
to person or property occasioned by the negligence of any person, animal,
equipment or other thing employed or used by or in connection with the business
or activity mentioned in this chapter whether the same be employed or used by
such person, or by an independent contractor associated, with, performing with
or in any way connected with said person.
   (E)   In the case of a circus, carnival, show, menagerie, shooting gallery
or house moving, the execution and filing with the Clerk of a good and
sufficient bond or liability insurance policy, in the respective amounts
specified below, the bond to be with surety or sureties to be approved by the
Clerk and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to
person or property caused by the negligence of any person, animal, equipment,
or other thing employed or used by or in connection with any of the businesses
or activities mentioned in this division (E), whether the same be employed or
used by the person conducting such activity or business or by an independent
contractor associated with, performing with or in any way connected with said
person, said bond to be in force six months after its execution and until any
action, suit, or proceeding commenced within said six-month period is disposed
of:
 
Circus           $25,000
Carnival         $25,000
Show             $10,000
Menagerie        $10,000
Shooting Gallery $10,000
House Moving     $1,000
 
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-6 PARADES; PERFORMANCES ON PUBLIC PLACES.
   No business or activity specified or described in this chapter shall parade,
march, perform or exhibit on the streets, avenues, alleys or public places of
the city without first having obtained from the Mayor, in addition to the
license specified in §
4-2-4 of this chapter, a permit which shall be issued without charge, and which
shall specify the line of march or performance and the time, manner, and
conditions of such march, parade, exhibition or performance. No riotous or
disorderly march, parade, exhibition or performance shall be permitted.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-7 VULGAR SHOWS.
   No obscene, vulgar, immoral, illegal or disorderly show, exhibition or
entertainment shall be licensed or permitted, and no person receiving,
conducting or taking part in any show, exhibition, or entertainment shall
conduct, permit to take part in any obscene, vulgar, immoral, illegal or
disorderly show, exhibition or entertainment under such license or at the place
licensed.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-8 EXITS.
   All theaters, opera houses, halls and other buildings where substantial
numbers of people assemble shall be provided with exits sufficient in size and
number to enable all persons therein to escape in case of fire. All exit doors
shall, at all times when an audience is in such building, be unobstructed and
said doors shall not be locked, hooked or bolted, except by use of panic bars.
All exit doors and doors which a person must pass through to reach the exit
shall open outward. The aisles and other approaches to the exits shall, at all
times when an audience is present, be completely free from obstruction by
persons standing, seats, chairs or other equipment. It shall be unlawful to
permit the assembling of persons in the lobbies of such theaters, opera houses,
halls and other buildings where substantial numbers of people assemble or to
permit the entrance into same of a larger number of persons than can be seated
therein.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-9 FIRE HAZARDS.
   No combustible or flammable material shall be permitted to collect in any
part of a theater, opera house, hall or other building where substantial
numbers of people assemble.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-10 DUTY OF OWNERS; LESSEES.
   It shall be the duty of all persons owning any theater, opera house, hall or
other building where substantial numbers of people assemble, all persons
leasing the same or in charge thereof, and all agents or employees of such
owner, lessees or person in charge thereof, to see that the provisions of this
chapter are enforced.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 4-2-11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the city during
the life of such license or permit upon a violation by the licensee or
permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the subject of
the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in
addition to a fine imposed. The city, or its designee, is authorized to
summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the
suspension of any business license or permit for a period not to exceed 15
days.
   (A)   Hearing. Within ten days after the city has so acted, the City Manager
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be permanently revoked.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee at his or her last known address at least five days prior
to the date for the hearing.
   (C)   Hearing procedures. At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The City Manager shall preside and shall render the decision.
   (D)   Causes for revocation. Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the city, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the city
and its Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city; and
      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in the city code.
§ 4-2-12 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to issue a license
or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall have the right to
appeal the city’s decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be requested
by submitting a written request to the Mayor within five days of the action of
the city which is appealed.
   (B)   The City Council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to present his
or her appeal orally or in writing. The Council shall act on the appeal within
seven days of the hearing and shall either uphold the action of the city or
shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which the city had denied or
the reissuance of a license or permit which the city has revoked.
§ 4-2-13 VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances and, in addition, the Mayor may suspend or
revoke the license, if any, held by such violator.
(Ord. A-48, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 3: SOLICITING FUNDS
Section
   
4-3-1   Definitions
   
4-3-2   License
   
4-3-3   Application for license
   
4-3-4   Issuance of license
   
4-3-5   Duration of license
   
4-3-6   License fee; bond
   
4-3-7   Solicitation for religious purposes
   
4-3-8   Soliciting; vehicles and booths
   
4-3-9   Minors
   
4-3-10   Streets and vehicles; public property
   
4-3-11   Private property
   
4-3-12   Time of day
   
4-3-13   Revocation
§ 4-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any person or organization excepting those hereinafter listed who
shall solicit contributions of funds personally or through an authorized
employee, agent or representative by the direct solicitation of money or by the
sale of tags, buttons or tokens of nominal value, intending that all or a
substantial portion of such funds be used for the procurement of necessities
for one or more individuals, or for medical, educational, religious or other
purposes toward the benefit of the community or a needful segment thereof,
shall be deemed a solicitor of funds.
   (B)   Except as they pertain to activities governed by §§
4-3-8 through
4-3-12 of this chapter, the terms SOLICITOR OF FUNDS, SOLICIT FUNDS and
SOLICITATION OF FUNDS shall not pertain to or include:
      (1)   A person holding a valid state solicitation license;
      (2)   Any organization soliciting contributions from among its membership
or employees;
      (3)   Any organization soliciting contributions while the solicitor and
the person solicited are located upon property owned by that organization;
      (4)   Solicitation of contributions by mail;
      (5)   Solicitation of contributions by a person located outside the
corporate limits of this city who is there initiating solicitation of residents
of this city, so long as such solicitation does not take the form of telephone
or other direct personal solicitation by such person or his or her
representatives of individuals in this city.
      (6)   Solicitation for contributions of funds for a political party or
candidate; or
      (7)   Any permanent local organization or person.
   (C)   The word PERSON, when used in this chapter in reference to licensing
and solicitation shall be synonymous with the word ORGANIZATION, except where
the context clearly shows another meaning.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-2 LICENSE.
   No person or organization shall conduct a solicitation of funds as defined
in this chapter, excepting a solicitation of funds for a religious cause or
purpose, without having first obtained a license as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-3 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person applying for a license to conduct a solicitation of funds,
excepting solicitation of funds for a religious cause or purposes, shall make
written application therefor to the City Clerk.
   (B)   No license shall be issued unless authorized by the Clerk upon an
application which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant and the organization he or she represents;
      (2)   Purposes of the solicitation or purposes of the organization;
      (3)   Location and address of the general headquarters of the
organization and of any headquarters or person through which the organization
locally operates;
      (4)   Names and addresses of the officers of the organization;
      (5)   Names of the persons having charge of the solicitation and the
estimated number of persons who will be directly soliciting funds;
      (6)   Proposed amount of funds to be raised by the solicitation, and the
methods of soliciting or raising the funds proposed; if the organization
proposes an on-going solicitation, then only the methods of soliciting funds
need be listed;
      (7)   Percentage of gross collections in the city which will be used to
pay solicitors of funds, other solicitation costs and expenses of the local
organization, and the amount of percentage of such gross collections which will
be paid to the local organization or to the national organization, where
applicable, and not directly applied to the purposes of the solicitation. If
solicitors are paid a salary or percentage of gross collections, then the
number and amount of such salary or percentage shall also be listed. If a set
percentage or dollar amount of the amount to be collected will be disbursed or
distributed elsewhere than in the city, such percentage or amount shall be
estimated and set forth;
      (8)   The method by which funds raised in the city will be distributed;
      (9)   The name and address of the local person or officer to whom action
on the application by the Clerk and other city correspondence with the
organization may be sent; and change in such name or address after issuance of
a license shall be filed with the City Clerk, to permit that information to
remain as current as practicable; and
      (10)   Such other and further information as may be required by the Clerk
to aid the Clerk in determining whether or not the application shall be
approved.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-4 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon the Clerk determining that a person applying for a license has complied
with the terms of §
4-3-3 of this chapter, that the solicitation so described is in the best
interests of the residents of the city, and that the other sections of this
chapter and ordinances of the city will be obeyed in the conduct of the
solicitations so described, the Clerk shall issue a license to solicit funds.
Failure to so make one or more of the above findings shall be grounds for the
Clerk to deny such license. The methods of solicitation and of expenditure and
distribution of funds and the period of solicitation set forth in the
application, as varied by the Clerk, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
and shall become a part of the license for that person.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-5 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   The license issued by the Clerk shall be issued in the name of the
organization, shall embody the particular information contained in the
application therefor, and shall be valid until revoked by the Clerk,
invalidated as described in this section, or turned in by the licensee,
whichever event shall occur first in time. Such license shall permit the
licensee to solicit for contributions of funds in the city so long as the name
and makeup of the organization, the goals and purposes thereof, the manner and
method of solicitation and the proposed distribution of the gross collections
remain the same as stated in the application; if any of those particulars
change, the license shall become and remain invalid until the applicant has
submitted the pertinent corrective information to the City Clerk for approval
by the Clerk, which approval shall again validate the current license.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-6 LICENSE FEE; BOND.
   The applicant shall pay a license fee in the amount of $10 to the City Clerk
at the time of filing application, and again at any time thereafter when
corrective information such as that described in §
4-3-5 of this chapter is thereafter provided to the City Clerk. In the event
the initial application, or the application with such corrective information is
disapproved by the Clerk, such fee shall be retained by the city. The applicant
shall be required to file bond only in those instances when the Clerk, upon
investigation, determines that insufficient information of local operations by
the person or organization conducting the solicitation has been given to the
Clerk to permit a determination of the propriety of the manner of solicitation
of funds by the organization, or of the adherence of the organization
conducting such solicitation to this chapter or to other ordinances or laws, or
of the proper distribution of funds so raised. In such event, before
authorizing issuance of a license, the Clerk may require a corporate bond to be
executed and delivered to the city in the penal sum of $5,000, conditioned upon
the faithful handling and distribution of the funds so raised, and upon the
funds being solicited in the manner specified in the application and not
contrary to this chapter or other city ordinances or state law. After a period
of operation under a license, but no sooner than six months after its issuance,
the licensee may request that the Clerk relieve it of the requirement of bond,
and in the discretion of the Clerk, it may be so relieved or the period of bond
may be continued until a later date.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-7 SOLICITATION FOR RELIGIOUS PURPOSES.
   (A)   Persons or organizations who propose to solicit contributions of funds
as described in §
4-3-1(A) of the city for a religious cause or a religious purpose or for the
perpetuation of religious views or systems may do so only after registering
with the City Clerk, on a form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose, the
name of the organization, if any, the address of its local and if applicable,
its national headquarters, and the name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons who shall be in charge of the local solicitation efforts. If
any one or more of those items of information shall change during the period of
solicitation in the city, such change shall be registered with the City Clerk
by a person acting for and on behalf of the organization.
   (B)   Each person soliciting other persons for contribution of funds for a
purpose described in division (A) above must carry identification, issued by
the registering person or organization, in possession at the time of such
solicitation and must identify to the person solicited, the name of the
organization, if any, under which the solicitation effort is registered with
the City Clerk.
   (C)   Failure of compliance with divisions (A) and (B) above shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and, in addition to other legal remedy, failure of
compliance with division (A) above shall be cause for prohibition of further
solicitation by the person or organization in the city until the terms of that
division (A) above are met.
   (D)   Persons who propose to solicit funds for purposes described in this
section, within or directly adjacent to city-owned buildings may do so in such
locations and in such manner as will permit the orderly conduct of public
business.
   (E)   Persons who propose to solicit funds, for purposes described in this
section, or other city-owned property, exclusive of that described in §
4-3-10 of this chapter, may do so in such locations and in such manner as will
permit the lawful and peaceful enjoyment thereof by the general public.
   (F)   No person shall commence solicitation as described in divisions (D)
and (E) above without obtaining approval from the City Manager or his or her
representative of the proposed locations, the number of solicitors and the
timing and the manner of such solicitation.
   (G)   The provisions of §§
4-3-9 through
4-3-12 of this chapter shall apply to the persons and organizations described
in this section.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-8 SOLICITING; VEHICLES AND BOOTHS.
   No person shall solicit funds from a person situate in a motor vehicle, on
public or private property. The erection, maintenance and use of any stand,
booth or similar structure in connection with any solicitation in a public
street, alley or other public property is prohibited, unless specifically
authorized by the City Council as to location, size of structure and the period
within which such structure will be so located and operated. Such authorization
may be granted by the City Council in the event the applicant agrees to hold
the city harmless from any claim or liability for damages or injury resulting
from the erection, maintenance, operation or removal of such structure.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-9 MINORS.
   Persons under 18 years of age may solicit funds under a license issued
pursuant to this chapter only when such solicitation is conducted under the
guidance and supervision of an adult.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-10 STREETS AND VEHICLES; PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall solicit funds upon or immediately adjacent to that
portion of any street, alley, driveway access or public way in the city which
is available for or normally used for vehicular travel.
   (B)   No person shall solicit funds in the locations as described in §
4-3-7(E) and (F) of this chapter without obtaining approval from the City
Manager or his or her representative of the proposed locations, the number of
solicitors and the timing and the manner of such solicitation.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-11 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall solicit funds on private property where the owner or person
in possession has posted a sign or signs which prohibit solicitation of funds
or has otherwise specifically forbidden such solicitation generally or by the
organization attempting the same.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-12 TIME OF DAY.
   No person shall solicit funds on public property or private property from 8:
00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m., the following day, except in connection with, during
and as a part of attendance at a public or private social, civic or religious
event.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
§ 4-3-13 REVOCATION.
   In the event the City Council is advised of circumstances indicating that
the terms of its license or the terms of this chapter have been violated by the
holder of a license granted under the terms of this chapter, the City Council
may cause notice to be mailed to the person whose name and address are shown by
the organization’s most recent filing to be the proper person, demanding that
such person or other representative of the license holder appear for hearing at
a set time, date and place to show cause why the license should not be revoked.
After such hearing, if the City Council shall conclude that a violation has
occurred and that the license should be revoked, it may revoke the license and
no further solicitation of funds shall be conducted in the city by or on behalf
of that organization for a period of at least one year. For purposes of this
section, the actions of authorized employees, agents or representatives of a
licensed organization in conducting solicitation of funds shall be deemed the
actions of the organization. The actions available to the City Council pursuant
to this section are in addition to such other actions as are available for
violation of city ordinances.
(Ord. B-395, passed 1-18-1983)
CHAPTER 4: PEDDLERS
Section
   
4-4-1   Definitions; exemption
   
4-4-2   License required
   
4-4-3   Exemptions
   
4-4-4   Prohibited peddling
   
4-4-5   Application for license
   
4-4-6   Fee schedule; exemption
   
4-4-7   Expiration of license
   
4-4-8   Display of license
   
4-4-9   Number of licenses required
   
4-4-10   Insurance required
   
4-4-11   Revocation of license
   
4-4-12   Restrictions
   
4-4-13   Public ways to be kept open
   
4-4-14   Transient merchant plaza standards
§ 4-4-1 DEFINITIONS; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates of requires a
different meaning.
      PEDDLER. Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for
sale such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public streets
or public ways. A PEDDLER does not conduct business from a fixed location.
      TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm or corporation who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such
business hires, leases or occupies any land, lot or structure whatsoever.
Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or
conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the
name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer shall not exempt any
person, firm or corporation from being considered a TRANSIENT MERCHANT and
obtaining a license.
      TRANSIENT MERCHANT PLAZA. Any lot or combination of contiguous lots on
which two or more transient merchants conduct business.
   (B)   Exemption. If a peddler or transient merchant conducts business solely
within the confines of a city park or parks, and if he or she has paid a fee
established by the Parks Board, he or she will be exempt from the fee schedule
established in § 4-4-6(A) of this chapter. If the peddler or transient merchant
conducts business both within the parks system and throughout the city, he or
she will be required to pay the fee established in § 4-4-6(A) of this chapter
in addition to whatever fee may be established by the Parks Board. Nothing in
this subsection shall be interpreted to mean that a peddler or transient
merchant conducting business in a city park or parks shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain a peddler’s license.
(Ord. C-121, passed 5-19-1992; Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. Any peddler or any person in the business of a
transient merchant in the city without first obtaining a license as herein
provided shall be in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing transient merchants and peddlers. All peddlers having a
current license upon the effective date hereof will be permitted to continue to
conduct business under such license until the expiration thereof. All transient
merchants conducting business in the city as of the effective date hereof, will
be required to purchase a license under the terms of this chapter. Any such
transient merchant, who is in violation of this chapter, will be allowed to
continue in business until 12-31-1991. In order to obtain a license thereafter,
the transient merchant must meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 4-4-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   The license provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Persons selling fresh fruits or vegetables of their own growing;
   (B)   Non-profit organizations (non-profit organizations will, however, be
required to file an application);
   (C)   Newspaper vendors;
   (D)   Sidewalks sales conducted adjacent to a retail outlet; provided that,
such sales are limited to no longer than one week;
   (E)   Garage sales;
   (F)   Special events, as so designated by the City Council and maintained on
a list by the City Clerk, will be exempt from this chapter as well as any
peddler or transient merchant formally sanctioned by the event sponsor. The
event sponsor will be required to file a list with the City Clerk of formally
sanctioned peddlers and transient merchants at least one day prior to the
event;
   (G)   Persons who sell goods at wholesale or discounts and only sell to
businesses; and
   (H)   Transient merchants operating within a transient merchant plaza;
provided that, the sponsor of the plaza shall have obtained a license.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991; Ord. C-100, passed 11-19-1991; Ord. C-160, passed
6-1-1993; Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-4 PROHIBITED PEDDLING.
   No peddler or transient merchant shall engage in business to any person in a
motor vehicle upon any public street, alley, driveway access or public way in
the city.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 4-4-5 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Prior to any license application, all food peddlers and transient
merchants must meet the requirements of the Health Department. An application
fee of $15 will be charged to every applicant.
   (B)   If the application is approved, the fee will be deducted from the
price of the license. If a license is not granted the fee is non-refundable. An
application in writing shall be filed with the City Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, Social
Security number, permanent and local address, business address, if any, the
last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered
by the license. Peddlers, transient merchants and transient merchant plaza
sponsors must provide proof of liability insurance as provided in §
4-4-10 of this chapter and a state sales tax ID number.
   (C)   Upon application, the City Clerk has at least 24 hours in which to
verify the information given on the said application. The city has the right to
deny any permit based on the result of the verification.
(Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-6 FEE SCHEDULE; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Fee schedule. If the City Clerk finds the application is made out in
conformance with §
4-4-5 of this chapter and the facts stated therein are correct, a license shall
be issued upon the payment of the license fee in advance. The following fees
are subject to the provisions of §
4-4-7 of this chapter.
 
Fee Schedule
One-year license   $200
180-day license    $100
90-day license     $60
30-day license     $40
3 consecutive days $15
 
   (B)   Exemption. If a peddler or transient merchant conducts business within
the confines of a city park or parks, and if he or she has paid a fee
established by the Parks Board, he or she will be exempt from the fee schedule
established in division (A) above. If the peddler or transient merchant
conducts business both within the parks system and throughout the city, and if
he or she has paid a fee established by the Parks Board, that fee can be
applied to the fee schedule established in division (A) above; provided, the
time period in which the person is going to peddle throughout the city meets or
exceeds the length of time covered by the Parks Board contract. Nothing in this
division (B) shall be interpreted to mean that a peddler or transient merchant
conducting business in a city park or parks shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain a peddler’s license.
   (C)   Transient merchant plaza. In the case of a transient merchant plaza,
the fee set out in division (A) above shall be paid by the sponsor of the
plaza. Individual transient merchants operating in a transient merchant plaza
shall not be required to pay a fee provided that the plaza sponsor has paid the
required fee.
(Ord. C-126, passed 7-21-1992; Ord. C-164, passed 7-20-1993; Ord. C-202, passed
6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-7 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire no later than December
31 of the year of their issuance.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 4-4-8 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each peddler shall at all times while doing business in the city display on
his or her person, the license provided for in §
4-4-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 4-4-9 NUMBER OF LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. Individual peddler licenses will be required for
each peddler doing business in the city. Transient merchants will be required
to purchase a license for each stand or location of sale. Individual peddler’s
licenses are not transferable to any other individual. Transient merchants will
be required to purchase extra copies of their license to accommodate the number
of people working in a stand or unit. A copy of the license must be kept on the
person of each individual while working in a stand or unit. The fee for such
extra copies is to be determined by the City Council.
   (B)   Transient merchant plaza. The sponsor of a transient merchant plaza
will be required to purchase extra copies of his or her license to accommodate
the number of people working in the various stands or units which will be
operating within the plaza.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991; Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-10 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   The city will require peddlers and transient merchants, or the sponsor of
transient merchant plazas, to show proof of liability insurance. The city
requires insurance of $300,000 per occurrence, $600,000 annual aggregate
coverage and $300,000 per occurrence products liability coverage. Transient
merchants, operating solely within a transient merchant plaza, will not be
required to provide liability insurance; provided that, the sponsor of the
transient merchant plaza must provide such insurance.
(Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any peddler, transient merchant or transient merchant plaza sponsor
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall sell goods, wares
or merchandise by fraud or trick shall forfeit all rights as a peddler under
the license issued to him or her after notice and hearing before the City
Council. No person whose license has been forfeited under the provisions of
this section shall be entitled to a new license without the consent of the City
Council.
   (B)   If any complaints are received by the city or if city officials have
reason to believe that a peddler, transient merchant or the sponsor of a
transient merchant plaza is violating this chapter, the Police Department, upon
inspection, shall have the right to temporarily suspend a license.
(Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 4-4-12 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   If a peddler or transient merchant wishes to conduct business in a
city-owned park, he or she must first have the written permission of the Parks
and Recreation Department.
   (B)   Transient merchants will not be allowed to conduct business on the
sidewalks, streets or other public ways on Avenue G from 5th to 10th Street, or
on 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th or 10th Streets from the alley north of Avenue G to
the alley south of Avenue G.
   (C)   All use requirements of the city’s Zoning Ordinance apply to transient
merchants.
   (D)   Transient merchants and peddlers can conduct business between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (E)   Transient merchants will be limited to a maximum of a three-day
license for each specific location, within each 30-day period in a
residentially zoned district.
   (F)   Transient merchants can establish a stand on the sidewalk along Avenue
H from 6th to 10th Streets; provided, they leave a passageway of at least four
feet wide.
   (G)   Transient merchants are prohibited from setting up a stand in a city-
owned parking lot.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991; Ord. C-100, passed 11-19-1991; Ord. C-126, passed
7-21-1992; Ord. C-156, passed 4-20-1993)
§ 4-4-13 PUBLIC WAYS TO BE KEPT OPEN.
   No peddler or transient merchant shall obstruct, impede, encumber or hinder
the public’s use of any public way.
(Ord. C-086, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 4-4-14 TRANSIENT MERCHANT PLAZA STANDARDS.
   The transient merchant plaza must be configured so that walkways of at least
five feet in width are established to provide access to the entire plaza area.
This is to prevent overcrowding and allow for the safety of the general public.
No drop cords or extension cords can be allowed to run through the required
open spaces of the plaza.
(Ord. C-202, passed 6-21-1994)
CHAPTER 5: TAXICABS
Section
   
4-5-1   License; permit
   
4-5-2   License requirements
   
4-5-3   Care of cab stands
   
4-5-4   Cab parking
   
4-5-5   Outside telephone service
   
4-5-6   Rate schedules
   
4-5-7   Drivers requirements
   
4-5-8   Exception
   
4-5-9   Violation
   
4-5-10   Inspection
   
4-5-11   Insurance
   
4-5-12   Name of business on vehicle
   
4-5-13   Inspection by owners or operators
§ 4-5-1 LICENSE; PERMIT.
   No person shall engage in the business of carrying, hauling or transporting
passengers within the city limits for hire, without having first paid an annual
license fee of $25 per vehicle and procuring a permit therefor from the office
of the Clerk.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-2 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   Before any license or permit shall be granted or issued, the applicant
shall:
   (A)   Pay to the Clerk the annual license fee above specified;
   (B)   Have designated by the Chief of Police and approved by the Council a
fixed and suitable cab stand or location; and
   (C)   Submit to the Clerk a signed statement acknowledging that the
inspection performed by the city as provided in § 4-5-10 of this chapter is
limited to the enumerated items and does not relieve the owner of the duty to
maintain such vehicle in a state of good repair at all times.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969; Ord. B-377, passed 7-20-1982; Ord. C-066, passed
9-4-1990)
§ 4-5-3 CARE OF CAB STANDS.
   (A)   All cab stands which have been approved by the Council must be kept
clean and neat.
   (B)   This includes the removal of grease, oil and other foreign substances
which might drop from cabs.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-4 CAB PARKING.
   Cab parking is to be restricted to allotted stands only.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-5 OUTSIDE TELEPHONE SERVICE.
   Where a cab company plans on using outside telephone service as a means of
contracting operators, prior approval must be obtained from the Council before
installation.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-6 RATE SCHEDULES.
   Rate schedules shall be displayed at all times within the cab and within
view of the passengers.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-7 DRIVERS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All drivers of vehicles hauling persons for hire shall have a city
taxicab operator’s license secured by application to the Chief of Police. Each
applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Police Department
prior to the issuance of a license. Any person convicted of a “crime of
violence” or “sex offense” shall be prohibited from obtaining a license.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall cause a license to be issued to a person not
prohibited by this chapter for a period of one year, for a fee of $25. This
license shall be renewable each year thereafter upon the taking of a new
photograph and with no change in the criminal status of the operator upon the
payment of a $10 fee.
   (C)   All drivers of taxicabs shall prominently display the latest official
police photograph at all times within view of the passengers.
   (D)   All fees collected for the services performed by the Police Department
shall be deposited with the Clerk.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969; Ord. B-152, passed 10-30-1973; Ord. B-204, passed
10-21-1975; Ord. B-377, passed 7-20-1982)
§ 4-5-8 EXCEPTION.
   This chapter shall not apply to railway companies, companies operating under
a street railway franchise or jitney bus license, or any vehicle only
delivering a passenger from outside the city and not otherwise engaging in the
business of the city.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-9 VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances. In addition, upon conviction, the city may,
at its option, revoke any or all licenses issued to such person hereunder.
(Ord. B-25, passed 4-1-1969)
§ 4-5-10 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person owning, operating or controlling any taxicab within the
city shall not operate, or cause to be operated such vehicle as a taxicab
unless the vehicle is a four-door model, is equipped on top with a plainly
visible and lighted “Taxi” sign, and has been inspected and issued a
certificate to the effect that the vehicle passes said inspection. The
inspection shall be renewed every six months.
   (B)   The inspection shall not be limited to, but shall include the
following areas in particular:
      (1)   Foot brakes and hand or parking brakes;
      (2)   Front and rear bumpers;
      (3)   Spare tire inflation;
      (4)   Sufficient heating and air conditioning for the interior of the
cab;
      (5)   Driver’s rear view mirror;
      (6)   Speedometer operation;
      (7)   Dual windshield wipers;
      (8)   Lights, as approved by the Motor Vehicle Department, and a
passenger compartment light with accessible switch; and
      (9)   No broken or cracked glass.
(Ord. C-066, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 4-5-11 INSURANCE.
   The licensee shall have on deposit with the Clerk an insurance policy,
policies or certificate of insurance of a company doing business in Iowa,
together with a certificate from the insurance company to the effect that said
policy will not be cancelled or terminated except after ten days’ notice to the
city.
(Ord. B-475, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 4-5-12 NAME OF BUSINESS ON VEHICLE.
   The vehicle shall have the name under which the taxi business is being
conducted painted or otherwise imprinted on both front doors of the vehicle in
letters at least four inches in height and in a color or colors contrasting
with the vehicle.
(Ord. B-162, passed 5-21-1974)
§ 4-5-13 INSPECTION BY OWNERS OR OPERATORS.
   Every taxicab owner or operator shall make an inspection at least once each
week of all taxicabs owned or operated, and shall keep all taxicabs in proper
repair and sanitary condition at all times. Any taxicab found by the owner or
operator to be unsafe or unsanitary shall have such repairs and alterations
made as may be necessary. The owner or operator shall not operate or permit to
be operated any taxicab that is unsafe or unsanitary.
(Ord. C-066, passed 9-4-1990)
CHAPTER 6: PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, ITINERANT DEALERS, AND SCRAP METAL
DEALERS
Section
   
4-6-1   Applicability and exemptions
   
4-6-2   Definitions
   
4-6-3   License required
   
4-6-4   Dealer’s license
   
4-6-5   Records of property received
   
4-6-6   Retention of items
   
4-6-7   Inspection of premises
   
4-6-8   Prohibitions
   
4-6-9   Penalty
§ 4-6-1 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. This Chapter shall only apply to those persons or
entities engaged in or conducting business in the transfer of tangible personal
property as described herein and subject to state sales tax.
   (B)    Exemptions. The following activities are not applicable to the
requirements of this Chapter:
      (1)   Any transaction of goods at a garage sale, yard sale, or estate
sale, which shall be construed as the infrequent, periodic sale of
miscellaneous household or personal articles on the premises of a private
residence.
      (2)   Businesses conducting only consignment sales of secondhand goods,
or the sale of secondhand goods donated without compensation.
      (3)   Transaction of goods at an auction.
      (4)   Antique Dealers.
      (5)   Iowa licensed redemption centers.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them for the purpose of the regulations in this Chapter:
   ANTIQUE DEALER. Any dealer primarily engaged in the buying and selling of
rare collectible objects, including but not limited to pieces of furniture or
works of art that have high value because of the item’s considerable age.
   DEALER. Any reference made in this Chapter to pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
itinerant dealer or scrap metal buyer, and any principal, employee, agent, or
servant thereof, engaged in or conducting business.
   ENGAGED IN OR CONDUCTING BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, barter, pawn, or
exchange of any item as defined in this Chapter, including the advertising
thereof.
   INTERNET-BASED PROPERTY TRACKING SYSTEM. An internet service company
employed by the City used as a repository of searchable property transactions
as required by this Chapter.
   ITINERANT DEALER. Any person or entity as defined herein who engages or has
engaged in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, hotel
room, motel room or other premises used for any duration less than 30
consecutive days or used on a temporary basis.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person or entity who shall in any manner lend or advance
money or other things  for profit on the pledge or possession of personal
property, or other valuable things, other than securities or written evidence
of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a
stipulated price.
   SCRAP METAL DEALER. Any person or entity engaged in the business of buying
or selling scrap metals or reusable materials.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person or entity engaged in the business of buying or
selling secondhand goods. This definition shall include the use of any
automated or camera-enabled kiosk used to purchase secondhand goods from a
seller without the buyer’s physical presence.
   SECONDHAND GOODS. Tangible personal property previously owned by another
person, whether used or not, which property, in its present state, possesses
utility for the purpose for which it was originally intended.
   TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Collectable coins, jewelry or items made in whole or in part of
gold, silver, platinum, copper, or other precious metals.
      (2)   Items containing or consisting of precious or semiprecious
gemstones or other polished stones used for decoration or jewelry.
      (3)   Articles with serial numbers, model numbers, or other identifying
marks, including, but not limited to, appliances, tools, radios, stereo
equipment, radar detectors, televisions, cellular phones, video equipment,
computers, computer equipment and accessories, digital music recorders and
players, and cameras, but not including clothes washers, clothes dryers, and
refrigerators.
      (4)   Musical instruments.
      (5)   Rifles, shotguns, handguns, and other firearms.
      (6)   Commercially recorded movies or music tapes, discs, record albums,
computer software, and video game cartridges; and
      (7)   Any other item of value except books, textbooks, and other print
media.
   TRANSACTION. Any purchase, sale, barter, pawn, or exchange of any item.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, itinerant dealer, or scrap metal dealer without having first obtained a
license therefor (referred to throughout this Chapter as a “dealer’s license”)
as provided in this Chapter or conduct or operate such business in violation of
any of the provisions herein contained. Any dealer’s license may be revoked by
the Council for any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-4 DEALER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   License term and posting of license. Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers,
itinerant dealers, and scrap metal dealers must apply for and obtain a dealer’s
annual license prior to being engaged in or conducting business as a dealer.
Such license shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business named
therein.
   (B)   Application. To obtain a dealer’s license a dealer shall file a
written, sworn application to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City
Clerk signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, and by the president if a corporation. No person other than the
owner of the establishment at which the activities permitted by the license are
intended to occur shall apply for any dealer’s license. Subterfuge or use of
alternative applicants for the purpose of seeking a license under this section
shall be grounds for denial or revocation. The application must provide
information indicating, at minimum, the following:
      (1)   The name or names of the principals, agents, and employees of the
applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed that such business
will be carried on in the City of Fort Madison; the local address or addresses
of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address
or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or
persons will act (as proprietor, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and
the address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business
will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state
it is incorporated;
      (2)   The place or places in the City of Fort Madison where it is
proposed to carry on the applicant’s business, and the length of time during
which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted.
      (3)   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of
the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the
date of said application conducted an itinerant business, stating the nature
thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office
in which such business was conducted.
      (4)   A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising
done or proposed to be done to attract customers; and
      (5)   Credentials from the person, firm, or corporation for which the
applicant proposed to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
   (C)   Fee requirement. Every application for a dealer’s annual license shall
be accompanied by the application fee. The fee for a dealer’s annual license
shall be in such amount as is set by the City Council and may be pro-rated
during the first year of operation to the nearest whole month, expiring as
defined in section (F).
   (D)   Issuance.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a dealer’s license, the City
Clerk shall notify the Fort Madison Chief of Police or Chief’s designee who
shall cause such investigation of the applicant as the Chief deems necessary
for the public good and may recommend issuance or refusal of a dealer’s
license. The Building & Zoning Director, or his/her designee, shall also review
and approve the application to ensure compliance with applicable zoning
requirements.
      (2)   Within ten days of the filing of an application, the City Clerk
shall issue a dealer’s license or refuse to do so for reasons including but not
limited to the following:
         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement of material or
relevant facts contained in the application.
         (b)   The applicant, co-owners, or business partners have been
convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods, burglary, robbery, or
convicted of a financial crime more serious than a simple misdemeanor or
convicted of any felony. However, the prohibition against such applicants who
are felons shall not apply to a felon whose citizenship rights, including the
right to possess firearms, have been fully restored by the Governor.
         (c)   That the applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or
enterprise; or that the applicant has engaged in a pattern of criminal
activity.
         (d)   Additionally, no dealer’s license shall be issued to any
applicant who has been convicted of nuisance or other violation of city
ordinances within the previous three years which pertain to the operation of
any dealer’s business within the previous three years, unless the City Manager
or designee specifically finds that: (1) the nuisance or other violation of the
code has been completely rectified; that (2) the applicant as well as the
applicant’s co-owners or business partners have taken steps in good faith to
ensure the conditions abated are unlikely to recur; and (3) no other violations
of the code of ordinances are pending against the applicant, co-owners, or
business partners.
   (E)   Appeal.
      (1)   If the City Clerk denies an application for a dealer’s license, the
City Clerk shall mail to the applicant, by regular mail to the address on file
for the applicant or by hand-delivery or by email to the email address on file
for the applicant, from the City Clerk or designee setting forth the specific
justification under this section for the denial of the license.
      (2)   An appeal from the decision of the City Clerk may be made in
writing to the City Manager, or Manager’s designee, within ten days of the
receipt of the decision. The written appeal shall state the specific grounds
for the appeal. The City Manager, or Manager’s designee, shall hold a hearing
within a reasonable time of the receipt of the appeal. At the hearing, the
applicant or license holder may be represented by counsel, may cross-examine
witnesses, and may present evidence in his or her favor. The City Manager, or
Manager’s designee, may grant or deny the appeal. That decision shall be final.
   (F)   Expiration. A dealer’s license shall expire on December 31 of the year
in which it is issued. If a dealer’s business is discontinued, moved, or sold
within one year after issuance, the dealer’s license expires and a new license
must be obtained before the dealer’s business is recommenced. The dealer’s
annual license is a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall
there be a partial refund of the application fee where the license holder
discontinues his business prior to December 31 of the year in which the license
was issued.
   (G)   Revocation. Any dealer’s license may be revoked by the City Council
after notice and hearing if it is found that the dealer has knowingly violated
any provision of this Chapter. The City Clerk shall mail to the license holder,
by certified mail, a written notice of a hearing before the City Manager, or
Manager’s designee, 20 days before the hearing date. The notice shall set forth
the grounds of the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing.
At the hearing the license holder may be represented by counsel, may cross-
examine witnesses, and present evidence in his or her favor. The determination
of the City Manager, or Manager’s designee, shall be presented to the City
Council, who may revoke the license and further prohibit such business being
conducted in the city for a period of at least one year. For purposes of this
Chapter, the actions of authorized employees, agents, or representatives of a
licensed organization shall be deemed the actions of the organization. The
actions available to the City Council pursuant to this Section are in addition
to such other actions as are available for violation of City ordinances.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-5 RECORDS OF PROPERTY RECEIVED.
   (A)   The City of Fort Madison Chief of Police shall designate and provide
an internet-based property tracking system. Every dealer, excepting itinerant
dealers in sub. (B), shall report each transaction of secondhand goods and
tangible personal property received within 24 hours of the transaction. The
record of each transaction shall include:
      (1)   An accurate and detailed account of the sale, purchase, pawn,
trade, or exchange.
      (2)   Serial and model numbers, a transcription of any engraving or other
identifying labels, marking, or writings located on the item, the brand name
and model name.
      (3)   The titles of any commercially recorded movies, music, discs,
record albums, computer software, and video game cartridges.
      (4)   The number and description of any decorative precious or
semiprecious gems, stones, or jewelry.
      (5)   The amount paid, advanced, or loaned for each item.
      (6)   The date and time of the transaction.
      (7)   A clear and recognizable digital photograph of each item, which
shall only be required if the item lacks a serial or model number; and
      (8)   A description of the person selling, purchasing, pawning, trading,
or exchanging the item, which description shall include the person’s first and
last name, address of residence, date of birth, sex, and driver’s license or
state issued identification card number including the state.
   (B)   Itinerant dealers shall record transactions according to one of the
following methods, which records shall consist of the information in §
4-6-5(A)(1) through (8) above:
      (1)   Keep and maintain a physical record book of transactions, which
record book shall be presented to the Police Department for inspection and
photocopying before the itinerant dealer leaves the City of Fort Madison; or
      (2)   Report transactions to the internet-based property tracking system
designated by the City of Fort Madison Chief of Police.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-6 RETENTION OF ITEMS.
   (A)   No dealer shall sell, deliver, melt, change the form of, or dispose of
any item subject to this Chapter within ten (10) days of the acquisition of
such item unless one of the following exceptions is met:
      (1)   Permission to do so is granted in writing by the City of Fort
Madison Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee.
      (2)   A pawned item is returned to the person who pawned the item within
the ten (10) day retention period pursuant to the agreed upon terms; or
   (B)   The City of Fort Madison Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee may
inspect all items for which a request to dispose has been granted before the
end of the ten (10) day retention period.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-7 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
Every dealer shall admit any police officer to its premises during its regular
business hours to examine articles purchased or received; and to search for and
to take into possession any article known by that officer to have been reported
missing or known or believed by the officer to have been stolen.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-8 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No dealer shall conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of
concealing, any item purchased or acquired by the dealer for the purpose of
preventing identification thereof by a police officer or any person claiming to
own the same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer in the course of the dealer’s
business or occupation to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange, or pawn, any
goods from any person under 18 years of age.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to acquire, by purchase, barter,
exchange or pawn, items bearing evidence of a serial number which has been
tampered with or scratched or obliterated in any manner unless such person
immediately contacts the Fort Madison Police Department.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to acquire, by purchase, barter,
exchange or pawn, any items prior to examining photo identification with a
physical description of the person selling, bartering, exchanging, or pawning
said articles.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to intentionally misrepresent or
falsify any record of an item, seller, or transaction required to be reported
to the Fort Madison Police Department under this Chapter.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to fail to report to the police
any article pledged with such dealer, if there is reason to believe that the
article was stolen-or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in
the case of a lost article.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
§ 4-6-9 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. Seeking a civil
penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the City from seeking
alternative relief, including, but not limited to, any order for abatement or
injunctive relief from the court in the same action or as a separate action.
(Ord. - -, passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 7: HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
Section
   
4-7-1   Purpose
   
4-7-2   Definitions
   
4-7-3   Tax imposed
   
4-7-4   Payment of tax
   
4-7-5   Expenditure of tax revenues
   
4-7-6   Effective date and repeal of tax
§ 4-7-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the imposition of a 7% hotel
and motel tax pursuant to the authority granted cities by the provisions of
Iowa Code Chapter 423A.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 4-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL and MOTEL. Any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house
or tourist court, or any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to
transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals. However, it does not
include sleeping rooms in dormitories or in memorial unions at universities and
colleges located in the city or the guests of a religious institution if the
property is exempt under Iowa Code § 427.1, subs. 8, and the purpose of renting
is to provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for
transient guests generally.
   RENTING and RENT. Any kind of direct or indirect charge for sleeping rooms,
apartments, sleeping quarters or the use thereof, in any hotel or motel.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 4-7-3 TAX IMPOSED.
   A hotel and motel tax of 7% upon the gross receipts from the renting of any
and all sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any motel is hereby
imposed, except such tax shall not apply to the gross receipts from the renting
of a sleeping room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented by the same
person for a period of more than 31 consecutive days.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 4-7-4 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid and collected as provided by
state law and the rules and regulations of the state’s Director of Revenue.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 4-7-5 EXPENDITURE OF TAX REVENUES.
   One hundred percent of the revenues derived from the imposition of the hotel
and motel tax shall be expended by the city for the acquisition of sites for,
or construction, improving or maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural
or entertainment facilities, including, but not limited to, memorial buildings,
halls and monuments, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums
and parking areas or facilities located at those recreation, convention,
cultural or entertainment facilities or the payment of principal and interest,
when due, on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the city for
those recreation, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities to promotion
and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the city and
surrounding area.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 4-7-6 EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL OF TAX.
   This chapter shall become effective on 4-1-2004 if a 7% hotel and motel tax
is approved by a majority of those voting on the question at the time of the
special election held on 12-30-2003 in the city. The provisions of this chapter
may be repealed or the tax herein levied may be decreased by ordinance of the
City Council effective on a date in the manner provided by state law.
(Ord. C-390, passed 11-18-2003)
CHAPTER 8: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
4-8-1   Purpose and intent
   
4-8-2   Definitions
   
4-8-3   Excluded activities
   
4-8-4   Sexually-oriented business license required
   
4-8-5   Application for sexually-oriented business license
   
4-8-6   Issuance of license
   
4-8-7   Fees and issuance
   
4-8-8   Term of license
   
4-8-9   Transfer of license
   
4-8-10   Location of sexually oriented business facilities
   
4-8-11   Signage
   
4-8-12   Viewing from exterior prohibited
   
4-8-13   Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements
   
4-8-14   Persons younger than 21 prohibited
   
4-8-15   Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
4-8-16   Live shows
   
4-8-17   Illegal activities prohibited
   
4-8-18   Hours of operation
   
4-8-19   Authorization for inspection
   
4-8-20   Cause for suspension of license
   
4-8-21   Cause for revocation of license
   
4-8-22   Violations and penalties
§ 4-8-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and guidelines to
regulate the time, place and manner of operation of an adult oriented business
in order to minimize the negative secondary impacts associated with such
businesses and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
   (B)   It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose
limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative materials.
Likewise, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict
or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials or entertainment protected
by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit
the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use
which otherwise violates any city or county ordinance or statute of the state,
regarding public nuisances unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct,
lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition, distribution or
display thereof.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-2 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
      ADULT. A person 21 years of age or older.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
essential theme of the object described by such phrase.
      EMPLOYEE. Every owner, operator, partner, supervisor, performer,
entertainer, dancer, waitress, bartender, bouncer, manager, food service
worker, cashier, custodial or maintenance person, or other worker, whether paid
or not, who renders services of any nature in the conduct of a sexually-
oriented business. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that every person who
renders services of any nature in the conduct of a sexually-oriented business
is an EMPLOYEE of the sexually-oriented business.
      ENTERTAINER. Any person, performer or dancer, whether an employee or
independent contractor, or any other person who, with or without any
compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for
any patrons of a sexually-oriented business.
      NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The display of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage; the
display of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola with
less than a fully opaque covering; the exposure of any device, costume or
covering which gives the appearance of or simulates human male or female
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female nipple and areola.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, copartnership,
corporation, limited liability corporation, joint stock company, joint venture
or combination of the above in whatever form or character.
      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any business or establishment that regularly
features live or recorded performances that are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or exposure of specified anatomical areas
and/or specified sexual activities. SEXUAL-ORIENTED BUSINESS shall include, but
not be limited to, the following business activities and activities similar
thereto: adult or nude encounter studios; adult or nude dance studios; adult or
nude exhibitions; peep shows; adult or nude wrestling centers; adult or nude
art or photograph studios or exotic lingerie shows. Businesses engaged in the
sale or rental of X-rated videos, DVDs, CDs, magazines, posters, devices,
clothing and the like shall be considered as a SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS when
such materials, sales or rentals constitute in excess of 33% of the businesses’
total revenue or in stock inventory.
      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATOR. Any person in an ownership or
employee capacity who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes,
controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of, the premises
of a sexually-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the
premises thereof.
      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS OWNER. Any person or persons who hold a
financial or other business interest, in whole or in part, either singly or
jointly, in a sexually-oriented business. Indicia of ownership may be
established by evidence including, but not limited to, business license,
information, fictitious business name registration, utility billing
information, corporate filings, or by other competent evidence.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human male and female genitals, pubic region
or buttocks and the nipple or areola of the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following, whether performed
directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
         (b)   Sexual acts, acted or simulated, including sexual intercourse,
oral copulation or sodomy;
         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast;
         (d)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
         (e)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
other activity described herein; and/or
         (f)   Masochism, erotic or sexually- oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain in the context of sexual arousal.
   (B)   The foregoing definitions are generic. The uses and businesses
governed by division (A) above include any other use or business, regardless of
how named or advertised, that is of a character like or similar to the uses and
businesses set forth in division (A) above.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-3 EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES.
   This chapter does not apply to any of the following activities:
   (A)   Any activity by a person licensed to practice one or more of the
healing arts authorized by state law, if and to the extent that such activity
is authorized by license;
   (B)   Any activities conducted or sponsored by any school district or other
public agency; so long as such activity is being conducted as part of and
within the scope of an authorized and regular part of the curriculum or is part
of a training or instructional program being conducted by a public agency;
   (C)   Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by
the state of Iowa or any agency thereof charged with the responsibility of
licensing, prescribing standards for and supervising such activity or
profession, if and to the extent that such activity is conducted within the
course and scope of the exercise of the privileges authorized by such license,
or the duties of such agency; or
   (D)   Any activity as to which a license to operate a massage establishment
or a license to act as a massage therapist or massage therapist trainee is
required by state law.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-4 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, conduct, carry on or permit to be engaged
in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city the
operation of a sexually-oriented business unless the person first obtains and
continues to maintain in full force and effect a license issued by the city as
required by this chapter.
   (B)   A license for such business shall be issued to any applicant who has
complied with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The applicant has filed a completed application and paid the
required sexually-oriented business application fee;
      (2)   The applicant has not made a material misstatement or
misrepresentation in the application;
      (3)   To the extent applicable, the establishment, including the building
and lot or portion thereof where the establishment is located or is proposed to
be situated meets all location and applicable zoning requirements; and
      (4)   There does not exist a basis for denial as set forth in §
4-8-6(D) of this chapter.
   (C)   Each application for a license to operate a sexually-oriented business
within the city shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The
application fee shall be used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred
in the processing of the application, and is not made in lieu of any other fees
or taxes required by statute or ordinance. Renewal fees shall also be
established. Renewal applications shall update any information which has
changed since the filing of the last prior application or renewal application.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-5 APPLICATION FOR SEXUALLY- ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person who proposes to operate, maintain or conduct a sexually-
oriented business within the city shall first submit to the City Council a
completed application for a sexually-oriented business license on a form
provided by the city. The application shall contain all of the information
requested in this section, along with the non- refundable application fee. An
application which is not accompanied by the required application fee shall not
be deemed a completed application.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall provide his or
her legal name, address and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is
at least 21 years of age.
   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership
agreement to the application. The applicant shall also submit satisfactory
written proof that all partners are at least 21 years of age.
   (D)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is
in good standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacities of all
officers and directors and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process purposes.
   (E)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the
business entity or an individual with a 10% or greater interest in the business
entity shall sign the application.
   (F)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the
fictitious name of the sexually-oriented business and show proof of
registration of the fictitious name.
   (G)   Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall
contain:
      (1)   A narrative description of the proposed sexually-oriented business
for which the license is requested, which shall include proposed hours of
operation, number of employees, number of entertainers and a description of the
titles and/or positions of each;
      (2)   A detailed diagram showing the interior floor plan and
configuration of the premises, depicting all interior rooms including, but not
limited to, restrooms, office space, storage areas and public areas and
dimensions. The diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn
to a designated scale and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6");
      (3)   A site plan showing the lot or property on which the sexually-
oriented business will be located, the location of the building(s) or portion
(s) thereof in which the sexually-oriented business will be located, the number
of available parking spaces including those reserved for the persons with
disabilities, the location and type of proposed lighting, landscaping, trash
enclosures and all means of ingress and egress to and from the property. The
site plan need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a scale
with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot (±1');
      (4)   An area map showing the lot or property on which the sexually-
oriented business facility will be located, and the property line(s) and
distance to the property line(s) of any church, school, park, daycare,
governmental office, supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, restaurant,
fast food establishment, other sexually-oriented businesses, residential zoning
or the residence of any registered sex offender located within 3,000 feet of
the property subject to the license application;
      (5)   The full name, address and telephone number of the property owner
and/or property management company if different from the applicant, including a
copy of the lease agreement, if any, in effect at the time of the application,
and a copy of any other agreements, easements, conditions, covenants,
restrictions or other such documents that contain evidence affecting the use or
operation of the lot, property, premises or structures which will be subject to
the license for which the application has been submitted;
      (6)   The full name, including any aliases or stage names ever used,
current residential address, position and/or title of each employee and/or
entertainer and all other information required under division (G)(7) below;
      (7)   Each application shall also contain the following information about
the applicant(s):
         (a)   Full name, including any aliases, current residential address,
telephone number, date of birth, height, weight, color of eyes and hair of each
applicant;
         (b)   Social Security number and driver’s license number or state
identification card number of each applicant;
         (c)   The previous address of each applicant for a period of five
years immediately prior to the date of application and the dates of residence
for each;
         (d)   Written proof that the applicant(s) is/are at least 21 years of
age;
         (e)   Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant(s)
for the five years immediately preceding the date of application;
         (f)   Two recent passport style color photographs of the applicant(s);
         (g)   A fingerprint card with fingerprints attached for each
applicant. These shall be obtained from the city’s Police Department; and
         (h)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate by the City Council.
      (8)   Authorization for the city or its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application regarding the applicant’s request for a license; and
      (9)   A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the information contained in the application is true and correct, with
such declaration sworn to and fully executed at the office of the City Clerk.
   (H)   A sexually-oriented establishment lawfully existing and operating on
the effective date hereof, if it does not have a valid license, shall apply for
a license within 90 days from the effective date hereof and shall be allowed to
continue operating during the pendency of the application; provided, it is
otherwise in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter and state
law.
   (I)   Mr. Movies and J&D Video or their successors are to be exempt from the
definition of a sexually-oriented business and thereby excluded from the
regulations of this chapter; provided that, said businesses do not expand upon
or increase their respective percentage of adult-rated materials within their
store stock or the percentage of total revenues derived from the rental or sale
of such adult rated materials as existed on the effective date hereof.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 4-8-6 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a properly completed and executed application for a
sexually-oriented business license under §
4-8-5 of this chapter, the City Council will conduct a preliminary review of
the application and may, within 25 days of receipt, refer copies of such
application to the Police Department, appropriate fire department(s) and any
other designated agents for review and investigation.
   (B)   The City Council, Police Department, appropriate fire department(s)
and/or any other designated agents to whom the application was referred may,
within 30 days of the referral, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as
a sexually- oriented business facility or, in the case of the Police
Department, conduct a background investigation of the individuals identified in
all areas of the application and, then, all such officials and/or designated
agents may make recommendation to the City Council concerning the premises and
the applicant’s compliance with the matters coming within the jurisdiction of
the aforementioned officials and/or designated agents.
   (C)   Within ten days of receiving the recommendation(s) of the
aforementioned officials and/or designated agents, the City Council will render
their approval or denial of the application.
   (D)   The City Council shall issue a sexually- oriented business license to
the applicant(s) within 90 days of receipt of a properly filed and executed
application unless:
      (1)   Any applicant is less than 21 years of age;
      (2)   Any applicant has failed to provide information as required by §
4-8-5 of this chapter for issuance of a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business;
      (3)   Any applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the application for the license or in any other
document required by the City Council in connection herewith;
      (4)   The required license application fee has not been paid;
      (5)   Any applicant has been associated with a sexually-oriented or
similar business within the last five years that has had their license denied,
suspended or revoked for any cause;
      (6)   Any applicant is a person who is not of good moral character and
reputation within the community he or she resides;
      (7)   Any applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses,
unless upon investigation the City Council or its designated agent finds that
such conviction(s) occurred at least ten years prior to the date of the filing
of the application, there have been no subsequent convictions, and the
applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the
public’s interest.
         (a)   Any felony under federal law or the laws of this or any other
state;
         (b)   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a
place of prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, pimping, obscenity, selling
harmful material or having a tie in the sale of obscene publications under the
laws of the state or equivalent laws or codes of the United States or any other
state; and/or
         (c)   Any other crime or misdemeanor that is sexual in nature and/or
opposed to decency and morality.
      (8)   The City Council has denied the license.
   (E)   If the City Council fails to act in approving or denying a properly
filed and executed application for a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business within 90 days from the receipt and execution of the application, the
application shall be deemed approved and a license to operate a sexually-
oriented business shall issue upon payment of the annual license fee.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-7 FEES AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   A filing fee in accordance with the established fee schedule shall be
charged for each application for initial license and annual renewals to assist
in deferring the cost of the administrative review. An annual license fee shall
also be required upon approval of the application. The applicant(s) shall be
held responsible for submitting the required application fees upon submission
of a completed application. No action shall be taken on any application until
the required application fee is paid in full.
   (B)   The fee schedule, subject to periodic amendment, shall be as follows:
 
Initial application fee $500
Renewal application fee $500
Annual license fee      $250
 
   (C)   The applicant(s), owner and/or operator of a sexually-oriented
business within the city shall keep and maintain liability insurance in an
amount of at least $1,000,000 and shall provide evidence of such insurance upon
application for or renewal of each license.
   (D)   Whether a submitted application or renewal application is granted or
denied, the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of any
fee paid.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-8 TERM OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license issued for the operation of a sexually-oriented business
shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance
unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by
making application and payment of a fee as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Application for renewal should be made at least 90 days before the
expiration date of the previously issued license.
   (C)   In no event shall a license to operate a sexually-oriented business be
extended beyond the original date of expiration.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-9 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   An owner, operator, employee or entertainer cannot and shall not transfer or
attempt to transfer his or her license to another, nor shall an owner,
operator, employee or entertainer operate or attempt to operate a sexually-
oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the
address designated in the sexually-oriented business license application.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-10 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY- ORIENTED BUSINESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, own or operate any sexually-oriented
business in the following locations:
      (1)   In any residential area of a city or town located in whole or in
part within the boundaries of the city, unless otherwise allowed by the
individual city or town; and/or
      (2)   Within 2,000 feet of any parcel of real estate upon which is
located any of the following:
         (a)   A public or private elementary school, junior high school or
senior high school;
         (b)   A daycare facility registered with the state;
         (c)   A church;
         (d)   A park or recreation facility operated and/or improved by the
city, the county’s Conservation Board or the state;
         (e)   A federal, state, county or special district governmental
office;
         (f)   A supermarket, grocery store or convenience store engaged in the
sale of food and/or fuel;
         (g)   A restaurant or fast food establishment;
         (h)   Any other sexually-oriented business; and/or
         (i)   Any other business or establishment reasonably believed to be
catering to family trade.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line
of the sexually-oriented business to the closest property line of the real
property upon which the previously described facilities are located.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-11 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, code or regulation to the
contrary, a sexually-oriented business shall not erect or maintain any sign for
the sexually-oriented business other than one primary sign and one secondary
sign as provided herein.
   (B)   The primary sign shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each
such display surface shall:
      (1)   Not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (3)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area;
      (4)   Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length;
      (5)   Contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations in any manner; and
      (6)   Contain letters of a solid color with each such letter consisting
of the same print type, size and color as all other letters forming each word
on the sign. Additionally, the background behind such lettering on the display
surface of the sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (C)   A secondary sign shall have only one display surface. Such display
surface shall:
      (1)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (2)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
      (3)   Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width;
      (4)   Be affixed or attached to a wall of the enterprise; and
      (5)   Conform with the provisions of divisions (B)(1), (B)(5) and (B)(6)
above relating to primary signs.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-12 VIEWING FROM EXTERIOR PROHIBITED.
   No sexually-oriented business facility shall be conducted in a manner that
permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any public way or from any
property not licensed as a sexually-oriented business facility.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-13 LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of a sexually-oriented
business to:
   (A)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the
property constituting the sexually-oriented business;
   (B)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons
on the property constituting the sexually-oriented business by visually
inspecting such property at least once every hour or inspecting such property
by use of video cameras and monitors;
   (C)   Provide lighting of the exterior premises of the property which
constitutes the sexually-oriented business sufficient to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering, the consumption of
alcoholic beverages, wine or beer or any other unlawful activity; and
   (D)   If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all
times the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed
within an operator’s station or at a cash register where an employee is
regularly present. Recordings shall be made and maintained for a minimum of 30
days. All recordings shall be made available for inspection and viewing upon
request and without a warrant, to any law enforcement officer during regular
business hours.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-14 PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 21 PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person who is younger than 21 years of age shall be allowed to
enter or be on the premises of a sexually-oriented business at any time the
sexually- oriented business is open for business or at any other time during
which an entertainer or employee may be performing or auditioning.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of each sexually-
oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public
entrance to the sexually-oriented business at all times during regular business
hours.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the
age of 21 years of age from entering the sexually-oriented business. For
enforcement purposes, it shall and will be presumed that an attendant knew a
person was under the age of 21 unless such attendant asked for and was
furnished:
      (1)   An authentic, valid, state issued operator’s, commercial operator’s
or chauffeur’s driver’s license indicating that such person is 21 years of age
or older; or
      (2)   An authentic, valid, state issued personal identification card or
certificate indicating such person is 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-15 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   An owner and/or operator of a sexually- oriented business shall not
allow the possession or consumption by any person of any alcoholic beverage,
wine or beer in a sexually-oriented business facility or on any part of the
real property that is used for carrying on the sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of each sexually-
oriented business to ensure that no alcoholic beverage, wine or beer is being
possessed or consumed upon the real property or within the facility comprising
the sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the individually licensed sexually-
oriented business if it has applied for, and been granted, a liquor license as
authorized by the laws of the state.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-16 LIVE SHOWS.
   (A)   All dancing and other live performances shall occur on a stage
constructed and intended for that purpose which is separate and apart from the
general public/patron area and unobstructed from all horizontal views within
the building.
   (B)   All dancing and other live performances shall occur at least five feet
away from any other person or patron.
   (C)   No owner, operator, employee or entertainer shall fondle, caress or
otherwise touch any other person or patron and no person or patron shall
fondle, caress or otherwise touch any owner, operator, employee or entertainer.
   (D)   No person or patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
person or patron. Gratuities may be indirectly given to entertainers by placing
the gratuity on the stage.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-17 ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   No owner, operator, associate, member, representative, agent, employee or
entertainer of such owner or operator shall engage in any activity or conduct
or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in, on, or
about the real property and/or facility comprising the sexually-oriented
business which is prohibited by any ordinance or law of the state or the United
States.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-18 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually-oriented business shall be or remain open for business between
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. No sexually-oriented
business shall be open for business between 11:00 p.m. on Saturday and 6:00
a.m. the following Monday.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-19 AUTHORIZATION FOR INSPECTION.
   An owner, operator or employee of a sexually- oriented business shall permit
any member from the City Council, Police Department, Iowa State Patrol, Fire
and Building Department or any other designated agent(s) to inspect the real
estate and facilities comprising a sexually-oriented business for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with the law and this chapter at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-20 CAUSE FOR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business for a period not to exceed six days if it determines that an owner,
operator, employee or entertainer:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
and/or
      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business
facility and premises as authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   In the event any owner, operator, employee or entertainer has been
found to be in violation of this chapter in a court of law or under the
ordinance hearing procedures, no hearing is necessary prior to suspension of
the license under this section.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-21 CAUSE FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may revoke a sexually-oriented business license if a
cause of suspension set forth in §
4-8-20 of this chapter occurs and the same sexually-oriented business license
has been suspended within the preceding 12 months or, if any owner, operator,
employee or entertainer is convicted of any of the aforementioned criminal
activity.
   (B)   The City Council may revoke a sexually- oriented business license if
it determines that an owner, operator, employee or entertainer of the sexually-
oriented business:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application process;
      (2)   Has knowingly allowed the possession, use or sale of a controlled
substance on or about the premises constituting the sexually-oriented business;
      (3)   Has knowingly allowed the possession, use or sale of any alcoholic
beverage, beer or wine on or about the premises constituting the sexually-
oriented business;
      (4)   Has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises constituting the
sexually-oriented business;
      (5)   Knowingly operated the sexually- oriented business during a period
of time when the sexually-oriented business’s license was suspended;
      (6)   Has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the premises
constituting the sexually-oriented business;
      (7)   Is delinquent in the payment of any city, county, state or federal
taxes, of any nature, or fees past due; and/or
      (8)   Has knowingly or intentionally facilitated another in the
commission of any criminal act or violation of this chapter.
   (C)   When the City Council revokes a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business, the revocation shall continue for one year. No applicant, owner,
operator, employee or entertainer of the sexually- oriented business whose
license was revoked shall be issued a sexually-oriented business license for
one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, however, subsequent
to revocation, the City Council finds that the factual basis for the revocation
did not occur, the revoked license shall be reinstated.
   (D)   After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of any sexually-oriented business
license, any applicant or owner may seek prompt judicial review of such action
in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 4-8-22 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any section of this
chapter shall be assessed a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500, and
may be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days. In
addition, the person shall be responsible for all criminal penalty surcharges
required by the Code of Iowa and any other surcharges imposed by city ordinance
or resolution which shall not be considered part of the city penalty.
   (B)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall also be
responsible for the costs of prosecution and in the event of a default of
payment of said fine, surcharges and/or costs of prosecution, he or she may be
imprisoned in the county jail until said financial obligations are paid, but
not to exceed 30 days for each violation.
   (C)   A violation may also result in the suspension or revocation of the
license to operate a sexually- oriented business in the city pursuant to §§
4-8-20 and
4-8-21 of this chapter.
(Ord. C-439, passed 10-3-2006)
TITLE 5: FIRE
   Chapter
      
1.   Fire and Building Department
      
2.   International Fire Code
CHAPTER 1: FIRE AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
5-1-1   Organization
   
5-1-2   Appointments; promotions
   
5-1-3   Vacations
   
5-1-4   Duties
   
5-1-5   Calls outside corporate limits
§ 5-1-1 ORGANIZATION.
   The Fire and Building Department shall consist of a Chief of the Fire and
Building Department, and such fire captains/shift commanders, lieutenants and
regularly employed firefighters as may be deemed necessary and affordable.
(Ord. C-404, passed 7-20-2004)
§ 5-1-2 APPOINTMENTS; PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire and Building Department shall be appointed by
the City Manager from a list of eligible candidates supplied by the Civil
Service Commission, subject to the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire and Building Department shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Manager and may be removed by the City Manager at any time
thereafter, subject to the approval of the Council.
   (C)   All other appointments or promotions to other positions in the
department shall be made as provided by law by the Chief of the Fire and
Building Department with the approval of the City Manager.
   (D)   All such appointments or promotions shall be promptly reported to the
Clerk of the Civil Service Commission and the City Council.
   (E)   All sworn officers of the Fire and Building Department shall have
civil service rights as provided by Iowa Code Chapter 400.
(Ord. C-080, passed 4-16-1991)
§ 5-1-3 VACATIONS.
   Each member of the Department who has served as such member continuously for
one year or more shall be entitled to two weeks of vacation with pay each year.
(Ord. A-18, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-373, passed 6-15-1982)
§ 5-1-4 DUTIES.
   The Chief shall supervise and direct said Department and all members of said
Department shall have the duty of extinguishing fires within the limits of the
city or elsewhere as provided by law, this code or agreement, and shall enforce
or aid in enforcing all laws pertaining to the prevention of fires, the storage
and use of explosives and flammables, the installation and maintenance of fire
alarm systems and fire extinguishment equipment, the installation and
regulation of fire escapes, the maintenance of protection from fire and
elimination of fire hazards in buildings and elsewhere, the means and adequacy
of exit in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses,
sanitariums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters and all other places in which
numbers of persons work, live or congregate for any purpose, the investigation
of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires and such other and further
duties as may be prescribed by the provisions of this code.
(Ord. A-18, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 5-1-5 CALLS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Except for the protection of property owned by the city or to meet
emergencies arising on said city owned property, and except for the protection
of property which the city has specifically contracted to protect, the Fire and
Building Department shall not be dispatched outside the city limits for
fighting fires or rendering any other emergency assistance, except upon the
request of authorized personnel of the Fire and Building Department of the
appropriate district at the scene in which the fire or emergency is located.
The amount of equipment and personnel to be dispatched shall be determined by
the Chief of the Fire and Building Department or his or her designee, when
performing their official duties, giving due regard to the nature of the
emergency as well as the need to protect the safety and general welfare of the
city.
(Ord. B-249, passed 9-20-1977)
CHAPTER 2: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
Section
   
5-2-1   Adoption of International Fire Code
   
5-2-2   Permits and fees
   
5-2-3   Storage of flammable or combustible liquids
   
5-2-4   Appeals
§ 5-2-1 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   A certain document is on file in the office of the City Clerk being
marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, including
Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the
city regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Fire Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this
section.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert:
         [Fort Madison]
      (2)   Section 109.4. Insert:
         [simple misdemeanor, $65.00, $625.00]
      (3)   Section 111.4. Insert:
         [$65.00, $625.00]
      (4)   Section 113.2.1.
         (New Section)
(Ord. D-081, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 5-2-2 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permits required by the Fire Code shall be subject to the approval and
shall be issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Said permits shall be valid
for one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed upon application.
   (B)   All applications for permits shall be filed in writing with the Clerk
and accompanied by a fee as follows:
Airports                           $20
Bowling alleys                     $20
Cellulose nitrate picture film     $20
Cellulose nitrate plastics         $20
Combustible fibers                 $20
Compressed gases                   $20
Control of hazardous fire areas    $20
Cryogenic fluids                   $20
Dry cleaning plants                $20
Dust explosions                    $20
Explosives and blasting agents     $20
Fireworks                          $20
Flammable and combustible liquids  $20
Flammable finishes, application of $20
Fruit ripening process             $20
Fumigation and fogging             $20
Garages                            $20
Hazardous chemicals                $20
High piled combustibles            $20
Liquefied petroleum                $20
Lumberyards                        $20
Magnesium                          $20
Manufacture of organic coatings    $20
Marinas                            $20
Matches, manufacture of            $20
Motion picture projection          $20
Open burning, incinerators         $20
Ovens, industrial, baking          $20
Places of assembly                 $20
Refrigeration, mechanical          $20
Rifle ranges                       $20
Tank vehicles                      $20
Temporary fire permits             $20
Tents, air supported structures    $20
Tire rebuilding plants             $20
Wrecking yards, junkyards          $20
 
(Ord. D-38, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 5-2-3 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012 International
Fire Code are hereby established as follows.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited):
   1.   All areas under the zoning ordinance which are zoned for residential
use and also those areas in the commercial and industrial zones which because
of heavy population or congestion or special features such as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings and capacity of
proposed tanks, are in the discretion of the Fire Marshal of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention such as to create a danger situation.
Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class
II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited):
   1.   All areas under the zoning ordinance which are zoned for residential
use and also those areas in the commercial and industrial zones which because
of heavy population or congestion or special features such as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings and capacity of
proposed tanks, are in the discretion of the Fire Marshal of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention such as to create a danger situation.
Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids in stationary containers is prohibited):
   1.   All areas under the zoning ordinance which are zoned for residential
use and also those areas in the commercial and industrial zones which because
of heavy population or congestion or special features such as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings and capacity of
proposed tanks, are in the discretion of the Fire Marshal of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention such as to create a danger situation.
Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas):
   1.   All areas under the zoning ordinance which are zoned for residential
use and also those areas in the commercial and industrial zones which because
of heavy population or congestion or special features such as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings and capacity of
proposed tanks, are in the discretion of the Fire Marshal of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention such as to create a danger situation.
(Ord. D-38, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 5-2-4 APPEALS.
   All appeals of orders, decisions, or determination made by the Fire Chief
relative to the application and/or interpretation of the city’s Fire Code, and
any other code adopted pursuant to Title 5 of this code of ordinances, whether
expressly or by incorporation, shall be made to the Construction Board of
Appeals as provided in
Title 2, Chapter 8, of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. D-074, passed 4-16-2021)
TITLE 6: HEALTH AND SANITATION
   Chapter
      
1.   Contamination Prevention of Municipal Water Wells
      
2.   Sanitary District
      
3.   Garbage
      
4.   Nuisances
      
5.   Water Service System
      
6.   Hazardous Substances
CHAPTER 1: CONTAMINATION PREVENTION OF MUNICIPAL WATER WELLS
Section
   
6-1-1   Purpose
   
6-1-2   Definitions
   
6-1-3   Prohibitions
   
6-1-4   Provisions applicable to specific wells
§ 6-1-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety and
to comply with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality of
the state.
(Ord. B-268, passed 9-5-1978)
§ 6-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL ENCLOSURE. A lot, yard, corral or similar structure in which the
concentration of livestock or poultry is such that a vegetative cover is not
maintained.
   ANIMAL PASTURAGE. A fenced area where vegetative cover is maintained and in
which the animals are enclosed.
   ANIMAL WASTE. Animal wastes consisting of excreta, leachings, feed losses,
litter, washwaters or other associated wastes.
   ANIMAL WASTE STOCKPILES. Stacking, composting or contaminant of animal
wastes.
   ANIMAL WASTE STORAGE TANK. A completely fabricated structure, with or
without a cover either formed in place or transported to the site, used for
containing animal wastes.
   ANIMAL WASTE STORAGE BASIN OR LAGOON. Fully or partially excavated or diked
earthen structure, including earthen sideslopes or floor.
   CISTERN. A covered tank in which rain water from roof drains is stored.
   DEEP WELL. A municipal water well located and constructed in such a manner
that there is a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at least five
feet thick located at a depth of at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which the water is to be drawn. Also, such a
well is used by the Municipal Water Works to supply drinking water for human
consumption.
   LOW PERMEABILITY. An unconsolidated soil layer of well sorted fine grain-
sized sediments that, under normal hydrostatic pressures, would not be
significantly permeable. LOW PERMEABILITY soils may include homogeneous clays
below the zone of weathering, mudstone, claystone and some glacial till.
   PRIVY. A structure used for the deposition of human body wastes.
   SEPTIC TANK. A water-tight tank which receives sewage.
   SHALLOW WELL. A municipal water well located and constructed in such a
manner that there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low permeability soil
or rock between the aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25
feet below the normal ground surface. Also, such a well is used by the
Municipal Water Works to supply drinking water for human consumption.
(Ord. B-268, passed 9-5-1978)
§ 6-1-3 PROHIBITIONS.
   The following potential sources of contamination of any municipal water well
shall not be located or permitted to exist or occur any closer to a municipal
water well than hereinafter specified:
   (A)   Wellhouse floor drains to ground surface: five feet;
   (B)   Water treatment plant wastes to ground surface: 50 feet;
   (C)   Sanitary and industrial discharges to ground surface: 200 feet;
   (D)   Floor drains as follows:
      (1)   Floor drains from wellhouse to surface: none within five feet:
         (a)   Five feet to ten feet water main materials enclosed in concrete
permitted;
         (b)   Ten feet to 25 feet must be water main material; and
         (c)   Twenty-five feet to 75 feet must be water-tight sewer pipe.
      (2)   Floor drains to sewers, water plant wastes, storm or sanitary
sewers or drains:
         (a)   None permitted within 25 feet;
         (b)   If closer than 75 feet, must be water main material; and
         (c)   If between 75 feet and 200 feet, must be water-tight sewer pipe.
   (E)   Sewer force mains:
      (1)   None permitted within 75 feet; and
      (2)   If within 200 feet, must be water main material.
   (F)   Land application of solid waste: 100 feet;
   (G)   Irrigation of wastewater: 100 feet;
   (H)   Concrete vaults and septic tanks: 100 feet;
   (I)   Mechanical wastewater treatment plants: 200 feet;
   (J)   Cesspools and earth pit privies: 200 feet;
   (K)   Soil absorption fields: 200 feet;
   (L)   Lagoons: 200 feet;
   (M)   Chemical application to ground surface: 100 feet:
      (1)   Aboveground chemical or mineral storage: 100 feet; and
      (2)   On or underground chemical or mineral storage: 200 feet.
   (N)   Animal pasturage: 50 feet;
   (O)   Animal enclosure: 100 feet;
   (P)   Animal wastes:
      (1)   Land application of solids: 100 feet;
      (2)   Land application of liquid or slurry: 100 feet;
      (3)   Storage tank: 100 feet;
      (4)   Solids stockpile: 200 feet; and
      (5)   Storage basin or lagoon: 200 feet.
   (Q)   Earthen silage storage trench or pit: 100 feet;
   (R)   Basements, pits, sumps: ten feet;
   (S)   Flowing streams or other surface water bodies: 50 feet;
   (T)   Cisterns: 50 feet;
   (U)   Cemeteries: 200 feet;
   (V)   Private wells: 200 feet; and
   (W)   Solid waste disposal sites: 200 feet.
(Ord. C-069, passed 11-6-1990)
§ 6-1-4 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC WELLS.
   (A)   This chapter applies only to municipal water wells.
   (B)   The municipal water wells are located:
      (1)   An area measuring approximately 100 feet north and south and 50
feet east and west located approximately 1,100 feet northeasterly of the north
corner of the pumphouse used by the city’s Water Department at its east city
limits location in the city;
      (2)   An area measuring approximately 50 feet square and located
approximately 1,200 feet west southwesterly of the southwest corner of the
pumphouse used by the city’s Water Department at its east city limits location
in the city;
      (3)   An area measuring approximately 50 feet square and located
approximately 700 feet southwest southwesterly of the southwest corner of the
pumphouse used by the city’s Water Department at its east city limits location
in the city; and
      (4)   An area measuring approximately 50 feet square and located
approximately 200 feet west southwesterly of the southwest corner of the
pumphouse used by the city’s Water Department at its east city limits location
in the city.
(Ord. C-069, passed 11-6-1990)
CHAPTER 2: SANITARY DISTRICT
Section
   
6-2-1   Sanitary District established
§ 6-2-1 SANITARY DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established in the city a “Sanitary District”, said district
to comprise and embrace all that area within the corporate limits of said city,
for the collection and disposal of garbage. Such other waste material as may
become dangerous to the public health or detrimental to the best interests of
the community shall be picked up from only the residential area.
(Ord. A-110, passed 5-7-1957)
CHAPTER 3: GARBAGE
Section
   
6-3-1   Solid Waste Division; definitions
   
6-3-2   Accumulation of garbage
   
6-3-3   Accumulation of used non-burnable food containers
   
6-3-4   Accumulation of ashes
   
6-3-5   Collection requirements
   
6-3-6   Frequency of collections
   
6-3-7   Ownership of articles collected
   
6-3-8   Disposition of garbage and food containers
   
6-3-9   Depositing; permitting waste materials on city parks; other public
property
   
6-3-10   Vehicles used to transport garbage; wastes
   
6-3-11   Solid waste disposal, private individuals or corporations
   
6-3-12   Disposal site requirements
   
6-3-13   Protection of hauling vehicles
   
6-3-14   Littering
   
6-3-15   Collection fees
   
6-3-16   Recycling
   
6-3-17   Yard waste regulations
   
6-3-18   Integrated waste services fee
§ 6-3-1 SOLID WASTE DIVISION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   A separate division of the Public Works Department composed of the
personnel, trucks and other equipment necessary to perform all functions
pertaining to the sanitary collection of garbage and other waste is hereby
created and shall be known as the Solid Waste Division of the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   APPLIANCE. Air conditioners, dehumidifiers, dishwashers, dryers, freezers,
furnaces, garbage disposals, heat pumps, humidifiers, microwave ovens,
refrigerators, stoves, trash compactors, washers and water heaters.
   GARBAGE. Discarded and spoiled food and stuffs produced for humans, the
waste parts of such foodstuffs and similar items. “Used food containers” shall
mean tin cans, bottles, jars, glasses and other containers made from wood,
clay, metal, plastic, paper and other materials which had been used to
transport, to preserve and otherwise contain foodstuffs.
   OTHER WASTE. All other materials and substances discarded on the premises of
the occupant or owner.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Residential recyclable materials specified in rules
adopted by the city.
   YARD WASTE. Organic debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste,
brush and tree prunings, bark, branches and flowers which is produced as part
of yard and garden development and maintenance. YARD WASTE does not include
tree stumps.
   YARD WASTE COMPOSTING. Involves only yard waste in the composting process
resulting in organic material from biological decomposition which can be used
as soil condition or soil amendment.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-2 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE.
   No person shall permit garbage to accumulate on residential premises
occupied by him or her, except in outdoor receptacles as herein specified and
then only after having been first thoroughly drained and securely wrapped in
newspaper or similar material to prevent the foodstuffs from coming in contact
with and adhering to the inside wall, bottom or cover of the receptacle.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-3 ACCUMULATION OF USED NON- BURNABLE FOOD CONTAINERS.
   No person shall permit used non-burnable food containers, including, but not
limited to, jars, bottles and tin cans, to accumulate on residential premises
occupied by him or her, except in outdoor receptacles as herein specified and
then only after said containers have been so thoroughly cleaned that no visible
foodstuffs remains thereon.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-4 ACCUMULATION OF ASHES.
   No person shall permit ashes to accumulate on residential premises occupied
by him or her, except in outdoor receptacles as herein provided or as part of a
driveway, similar surfaced area or fill.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-5 COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Garbage shall be accumulated in city issued 65-gallon or 95-gallon
carts that are provided to each residential unit in the city. Lids should close
on the carts to prevent rain water from entering the cart. Residents are to use
plastic trash bags to contain garbage inside the city issued cart. Only trash
from city issued carts will be collected.
   (B)   All carts should be placed out not earlier than 4:00 p.m. the day
before collection and no later than 6:00 a.m. the day of collection. The city
has no set time of arrival during the day of collection but will have the
garbage collected by the end of their working day, unless notification is
issued by the city.
   (C)   Garbage may be collected by the city for small commercial accounts
which are churches, non- profits, or are located downtown. To fit into this
small commercial account category, the business will be allowed to use no more
than one 95-gallon cart, unless approved by the city.
   (D)   All garbage must be in the City-issued cart for collection.
   (E)   Carts shall be placed in a location designated for collection approved
by the city’s Public Works Director or his or her designee. All carts should
have three feet of clearance around the carts and be placed no more than three
feet distance from the public street or alley for city staff to collect the
carts. Carts shall be placed clear of vehicles.
   (F)   Ashes shall be completely cold and appropriately contained before
being placed into the city issued cart.
   (G)   If collection of garbage takes place in the front or side of a home,
the cart must be removed and placed back in its normal storage location within
twenty-four (24) hours of collection. The normal storage location shall be
either at the rear of the property or the side of the home.
   (H)   All carts are the property of the city. The cart remains at the
assigned address or is returned to the city. A resident may be charged for the
cost of the cart if the cart is removed from the designated address. At the
time that service is discontinued the cart must be left out at the normal
collection location to allow the city to remove the cart until service is
restored.
   (I)   The cleaning of carts is the responsibility of the user or resident
paying for the collection services from the city.
   (J)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, removal of any other items
such as bulk waste shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018; Ord. D-100, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 6-3-6 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTIONS.
   The Solid Waste Division will conscientiously endeavor to make collection
from all residential properties within the City throughout each calendar year
at least fifty-two (52) times per year. Recycling will be picked up once every
other week. Yard waste will be collected per a schedule provided by the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018; Ord. D-100, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 6-3-7 OWNERSHIP OF ARTICLES COLLECTED.
   (A)   All items collected by the city’s Solid Waste Division becomes the
property of the city immediately upon being emptied from the city issued cart.
   (B)   Collected waste will be disposed of in such a manner as directed or as
determined by the city’s Public Works Director to be in the best interests of
the city.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-8 DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE AND FOOD CONTAINERS.
   No person shall place garbage, food containers or other refuse outdoors in
the city, except in a proper city-issued cart as herein provided.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-9 DEPOSITING; PERMITTING WASTE MATERIALS ON CITY PARKS; OTHER PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
   No person shall, through any act or omission to act, deposit or permit to be
deposited any garbage, used food containers, ashes or other waste materials on
any city park, playgrounds, streets, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, buildings
or other public property, except in waste containers situated thereon and
provided by city authorities for that purpose.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-10 VEHICLES USED TO TRANSPORT GARBAGE; WASTES.
   No person shall be permitted to operate any vehicle used to transport
garbage or used food containers over any public streets, alley or other
thoroughfare in the city unless the garbage and food containers loaded thereon
are at all times securely and completely covered so as to prevent said articles
from dropping from the vehicle or being exposed to public view while in transit
to the disposal areas. Vehicles used for the transportation of all other waste
in the city shall be so equipped and maintained so as to prevent the contents
of said vehicle from dropping therefrom while en route to the disposal area.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-11 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS OR CORPORATIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to
engage in the business of removing or hauling non-hazardous residential,
commercial or industrial solid waste unless such person or corporation shall
have first applied for and received a permit to do so from the Great River
Regional Waste Authority.
   (B)   Display of permit number. All vehicles permitted under this section
shall predominately display the permit number on the upper or lower left corner
of the windshield of the vehicle upon a decal to be furnished by the Great
River Regional Waste Authority.
   (C)   Permit exemptions.
      (1)   Vehicles owned and operated by the city or under contract to the
city, shall be deemed to be engaged in a public service function and exempt
from the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Such applicant, by making such application, forever indemnifies the
city and agrees to save it harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits
or liability thereto, however arising from or in connection with or related to,
directly or indirectly, the issuance of such permit or the doing of anything
thereunder or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, servants
or independent contractors of such applicant, to abide by or comply with the
provisions of this section, even though an act or omission of the city may have
caused or contributed thereto.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any
permit issued under the provisions of this section whether expressly recited
therein or not.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-12 DISPOSAL SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person receiving a permit under this section to
haul or cause to be hauled, any solid waste material of any kind, other than
those resulting from the construction or demolition activities to any disposal
place or site or area other than the Great River Regional Waste Authority
Landfill, except the provisions of this section do not apply to waste hauled by
any local entity possessing a valid landfill permit in existence prior to 9-1-
1984, under the provisions of the Department of Water, Air and Waste
Management.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-13 PROTECTION OF HAULING VEHICLES.
   No person shall haul any solid waste upon the streets, alleys or public
places of the city in any manner except in a vehicle or container properly
secured as to prevent the blowing or leakage or dropping off of any of the
contents on the public streets or ways of the city or private property therein.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-14 LITTERING.
   No person shall throw, rake, deposit, drop or spill leaves, litter, solid
waste material or foreign material upon the streets, sidewalks or other public
rights-of-way within the city.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-15 COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   Method. The city’s Utility Office is authorized and directed to render
and collect fees or service charges for garbage and refuse service for
residential units of four or less in accordance with the fees established in
this chapter. The charge shall be collected with the consumer’s regular monthly
water and sewer bill and shall be shown as a separate item on the bill. Parties
charged a water and sewer fee will also be charged a garbage collection fee.
Should a duplex, triplex or four-plex receive only one water and sewer utility
billing, said billing for refuse collection will be the monthly rate times the
number of units. Should there be a break in water and sewer service, it will be
assumed that there is a break in garbage service for the identical time. For
dwelling units, not currently being charged for water and sewer usage, but for
which there is a garbage collection service provided, the owner or tenant will
be assessed the monthly service charge. There shall be a garbage deposit
payable by all renters of rental units and chargeable against all rental
property; provided, the water and the sewer utilities are held in said renter’s
name. The garbage deposit shall be collected by the city’s Utility Department
at the time of the filing of an application for service.
   (B)   Amount. All solid waste fees shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (C)   Penalties: All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by
due date on the utility bill after billing by the Fort Madison Utility Billing
Office. Delinquent accounts will be assessed a ten percent (10%) penalty. All
delinquent accounts are subject to termination of service and further
collection without notice.
   (D)   Delinquent Accounts:
      (1)   If a delinquent account is not paid within thirty (30) days, the
City shall have all rights under law to proceed against the user to collect the
unpaid charges, and in addition, the City may proceed for collection of the
unpaid charges in any manner provided by law for the collection of a Municipal
claim.
      (2)   Upon institution of collection measures or certification of the
delinquent bill to the county treasurer, a service charge of fifteen percent
(15) of the total bill, but not less than one dollar ($1.00), shall be added.
All associated costs will be attached to the bill for this service.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018; Ord. D-100, 7-5-2023)
§ 6-3-16 RECYCLING.
   The city, in cooperation with Great River Regional Waste Authority,
encourages the recycling of waste materials and operates a system for the
collection and recycling of recyclable materials.
   (A)   Residential recyclable material.
      (1)   Residential recyclable material shall be placed for collection
within three feet of the adjacent street or alley.
      (2)   Collection shall be made by the city once every other week unless
collection is precluded by weather conditions or a legal holiday.
      (3)   Collection shall be made from the adjacent street or alley.
      (4)   Residentially-generated recyclable material shall be placed only in
containers approved by the city.
      (5)   Only residential recyclable materials specified in rules adopted by
the city shall be placed in residential recyclable containers.
      (6)   All recyclable materials placed in containers for collection by the
city shall become the property of the city.
   (B)   Other means of recycling. No provision of this chapter is intended to
prohibit, restrict or discourage the recycling of waste materials by means
other than placing recyclable materials in approved containers for collection
by the city. All residents and operators of commercial and industrial
facilities are encouraged to consider and accomplish recycling of waste
materials by other lawful means.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-17 YARD WASTE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Separation of yard waste required. All yard waste for collection by
the city shall be separated by the owner or occupants from all other garbage
and other waste accumulated on the premises and shall be placed in
biodegradable paper bags that are approved by the city.
   (B)   Contents of containers.
      (1)   Containers may be filled with any combination of yard waste
material, except brush and tree prunings more than one inch in diameter.
      (2)   Prunings and limbs greater than one inch in diameter shall be cut
in three-foot lengths, bundled and tied securely with biodegradable rope
(cotton, hemp) in bundles no larger than can be easily handled by one person
and shall be placed with yard waste containers.
      (3)   Containers set out for collection shall have a gross weight not
exceeding 75 pounds.
   (C)   Yard waste collection.
      (1)   City collection shall be made from one-family dwelling units up to
and including four-family dwelling units in accordance with a schedule prepared
by the Public Works Department.
      (2)   Containers shall be collected by the city when easily accessible
to, but not more than ten feet distant from a public street or alley.
   (D)   Non-city collection locations. On properties not included in the
city’s collection schedule, every owner or operator shall provide yard waste
containers adequate to supply the needs of the establishment. All owners or
operators will be responsible for private hauling on a regular schedule.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any owner to permit to accumulate on any
premises, improved or vacant, such quantities of yard waste, that shall
constitute a health or sanitation hazard or nuisance.
   (E)   Owner may transport. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent
the owner from transporting yard wastes accumulating on premises of the owner;
provided, such yard waste is disposed of in a legal manner and location.
   (F)   Owner may compost. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the
owner from collecting and composting yard waste generated on the owner’s
premises.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 6-3-18 INTEGRATED WASTE SERVICES FEE.
   The city’s Utility Billing Office is authorized and directed to bill and
collect an integrated waste services fee for the Great River Regional Waste
Authority (GRRWA). The fee is set by a resolution of the City Council. The fees
shall be collected with the consumer’s regular monthly water, sewer and garbage
collection bill and shall be shown as a separate item on the bill. The
integrated waste services fee is collected by the city and then remitted to the
Great River Regional Waste Authority.
(Ord. D-48, passed 6-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4: NUISANCES
Section
   
6-4-1   Environmental nuisances
   
6-4-2   Nuisances prohibited
   
6-4-3   Enforcement
§ 6-4-1 ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates of requires a
different meaning.
      NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the
free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property is declared to be a NUISANCE. All vacant
structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean,
safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a
blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The contract purchaser, if there is one of record;
otherwise, the record holder of legal title.
   (B)   Nuisances designated. The following things, substances, acts and
conditions are declared to be nuisances; provided, however, this enumeration
shall not be deemed or construed to be exhaustive, limiting or conclusive:
      (1)   Any and all putrid or decaying carcasses, flesh, fish, vegetables,
entrails, offals, filth or other unwholesome or offensive substances of any
kind left, deposited or existing upon any street, alley, private lot or ground
or public place or in or about any vacant or occupied building, except when
enclosed in a receptacle as provided in Chapter 3 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Any accumulation of stagnant water; diverting any stream, creek or
river from its natural course or state;
      (3)   A building, structure or place where:
         (a)   Any activity is conducted which is in violation of any local,
state or federal law; or
         (b)   Drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace or
carrying on or permitted to the disturbance of others;
      (4)   Failure to properly dispose of or quarantine plant or animal matter
containing injurious pests or contagious disease;
      (5)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, fly ash or other emissions in noisome
quantities;
      (6)   Any obstruction placed:
         (a)   On a street, alley, public ground or watercourse, except as
permitted by the city; and
         (b)   Private ways and burial grounds.
      (7)   Failure to secure areas, buildings or places against accidental or
unauthorized access where such access threatens the health or safety of
citizens, and especially where such an area or place is an attraction to the
immature citizen. Fences, railings and other guards should be well built, kept
in good repair, be at least 48 inches from top to ground and of adequate height
to perform their function, and have no sharp points, spikes, hooks, projection
barbs or other devices that are in themselves hazardous; except that, barbed
wire may be used to enclose agricultural land;
      (8)   Any building or location which harbors vectors, vermin or pests;
      (9)   The pollution of any well, stream, lake, river or body of water by
the dumping or throwing of any sewage, industrial waste, carcass, garbage,
refuse, offal or manure, except with the consent and under the direction of the
Department of Natural Resources and the dumping or throwing of any of such
items upon any private or public property;
      (10)   All open cisterns or cisterns with inadequate or improper and
unsafe coverings, open basements, holes, trenches or other excavations not
properly marked and precautionary measures taken to prevent injury to the
public, except under such conditions as are provided by this code;
      (11)   The depositing or keeping of junk and refuse such as, but not
limited to, old lumber, tin, wire, cans, barrels, cartons, boxes, rags, tires,
inner tubes, brush, grass and hedge clippings, rocks, bricks, cinders, scrap
iron, buckets, tubs, windows, screens, glass, bottles, wastepaper, bed springs,
discarded furniture, cleanings and bedding from animal or fowl pens, improperly
covered garbage and waste receptacles, old automobile parts, inoperable
machinery or appliances and bones;
      (12)   The storage of inflammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage,
rubber and paper;
      (13)   All noxious weeds, and all grass, weeds, brush, vines and other
dense or rank growth in excess of 12 inches in height grown upon public or
private property to the centerline of streets and alleys adjacent thereto;
except that, where the property is unplatted or in agricultural use, the
restrictions of this division (B)(13) shall apply only to the outermost 200
feet within the perimeter of the property;
      (14)   (a)   Motor vehicles, trailers, boats, snowmobiles, campers and
the like and any and all other vehicles required to be registered or titled by
the state for respective use within the state, which do not meet all
requirements for use on the public ways or are otherwise inoperable or in a
dilapidated condition and not stored within an entirely enclosed complying
building or other temporary screening that has been approved, in writing, by
the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee;
         (b)   Exception: operable race cars currently being raced in
sanctioned events and antique or classic vehicles actively involved in the
process of restoration, not to include parts; provided:
            1.   Outside storage permitted only from May 15 to September 15 of
any given calendar year;
            2.   Outside storage area must be hard surfaced per this code and
located in the rear yard area;
            3.   Vehicles must be covered with a commercial tarpaulin
constructed especially for motor vehicles, sufficient in size to cover the
entire vehicle; and
            4.   One such vehicle permitted per property containing a legal
building, structure and/or use.
      (15)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within 12 hours
after the snow and ice has ceased being deposited thereon;
      (16)   Any downspout, trough, eave, awning or other device which causes
snow or ice to accumulate on any public drive, road, alley, walk or way;
      (17)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from
cross streets or alleys in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driving at
a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached;
      (18)   All trees or parts of trees which are dead, decayed, diseased or
dying;
      (19)   Dangerous buildings or structures;
      (20)   Buildings, upon which the address has not been legibly posted;
      (21)   Weeds or other growth which constitute a health, safety or fire
hazard;
      (22)   The obstructing of any street, alley or thoroughfare by placing
ice or snow from a parking lot, sales lot or driveway so as to make travel
unsafe or dangerous;
      (23)   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and
walls, that are not maintained structurally sound and in good repair;
      (24)   Any handrail or guardrail that is not firmly fastened and capable
of supporting normally imposed loads and maintained in good condition; and
      (25)   Any abandoned or otherwise unattended refrigerator, icebox or
similar container, with doors, outside of buildings and accessible to children.
(Ord. C-355, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 6-4-2 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is hereby prohibited, and a
nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. B-191, passed 6-3-1975)
§ 6-4-3 ENFORCEMENT.
   If it is determined that a “nuisance” exists, as defined in §
6-4-1 of this chapter, the city shall enforce this chapter in one or more of
the following ways.
   (A)   Municipal infraction. Any person, firm or corporation who causes the
existence of a “nuisance”, as defined in §
6-4-1 of this chapter, or maintains such a nuisance or permits the same to
exist shall be guilty of a municipal infraction.
   (B)   Simple misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who causes the
existence of a “nuisance”, as defined in §
6-4-1 of this chapter, or maintains such a nuisance or permits the same to
exist shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
   (C)   Abatement by city.
      (1)   Expenses. If the person, firm or corporation fails or neglects to
abate a nuisance or condition, after notice the city may perform the required
action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The
itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city may be
collected as provided in §
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances, or in any of the following ways.
         (a)   Expenses to be billed. The Clerk shall mail a statement of the
total expenses incurred by the city for abatement of the nuisance to the
person, firm or corporation who has caused, maintained or allowed the nuisance
to exist.
         (b)   Expenses to be applied to property taxes. The costs of abatement
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer, and assessed to the
property owner of record, and collected in the same manner as general property
taxes.
      (2)   Notice to abate. Prior to the abatement of a nuisance condition
performed by the city, a written notice shall be served upon the person, firm
or corporation causing or maintaining such nuisance.
         (a)   Method of service. The notice may be served by:
            1.   Personal service;
            2.   Certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested; or
            3.   Publication in the form of an ordinance.
         (b)   Contents of notice. The notice to abate shall include:
            1.   The name and address of the person, firm or corporation who
caused or allowed the existence of the nuisance;
            2.   A description of the nuisance;
            3.   The location of the nuisance;
            4.   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance;
            5.   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement; and
            6.   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and
no request for appeal or hearing is made within the time prescribed, the city
will abate it and assess the costs as provided in this division (C).
         (c)   Request for hearing and appeal. Any person, firm or corporation
upon whom a notice to abate has been served may have a hearing with the officer
ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the officer ordering the abatement
within the time stated in the notice.
   (D)   Abatement in emergency. If it is determined by the city manager or his
designee that an emergency exists, the city may perform the required action to
abate without prior notice. The city shall collect the costs as provided in
division (C) above.
(Ord. C-199, passed 6-21-1994; Ord. D-52, passed 4-16-2019)
CHAPTER 5: WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
   
6-5-1   Purpose
   
6-5-2   Definitions
   
6-5-3   Water distribution system
   
6-5-4   Management
   
6-5-5   Disclaimer of liability
   
6-5-6   Emergency suspension of service
   
6-5-7   Water pressure
   
6-5-8   Temporary interruption of service; notification
   
6-5-9   Location of water facilities
   
6-5-10   Water availability
   
6-5-11   Unlawful use of city-owned waterworks system
   
6-5-12   Water leak repairs
   
6-5-13   Application
   
6-5-14   Billing
   
6-5-15   Default in payment
   
6-5-16   Unauthorized use of unmetered water
   
6-5-17   Application for water service connection; repair permit
   
6-5-18   Customer responsibility; neglect, wasting water, failure of valves/
piping
   
6-5-19   Plumbing inspection
   
6-5-20   Standards for dwelling units, commercial uses, industrial uses and
fire services
   
6-5-21   Taps, connections and disconnections
   
6-5-22   General location requirements
   
6-5-23   Material for service pipes
   
6-5-24   Service line appurtenances
   
6-5-25   Stop valves
   
6-5-26   Combination domestic and fire service pipes
   
6-5-27   Repair of water service
   
6-5-28   Water meters generally
   
6-5-29   Residential meters
   
6-5-30   Apartments, duplexes and condominiums
   
6-5-31   Institutions
   
6-5-32   Type and size of meters
   
6-5-33   Ownership
   
6-5-34   Installation and meter location
   
6-5-35   Maintenance
   
6-5-36   Changes in load
   
6-5-37   Meter failures
   
6-5-38   Meter removal restricted
   
6-5-39   Water supply to other persons prohibited
   
6-5-40   Bulk water rates
   
6-5-41   Cross-connections and backflow prevention
   
6-5-42   Water service main extensions generally
   
6-5-43   Connection fee
   
6-5-44   Transmission mains
   
6-5-45   Submittals and procedures
   
6-5-46   Material for service mains
   
6-5-47   Pressure testing and flushing
   
6-5-48   Plumbers’ responsibilities
   
6-5-49   Disinfection of water main
   
6-5-50   Metering
   
6-5-51   Operation of fire hydrants
   
6-5-52   Penalty for unauthorized use
   
6-5-53   Relocation of public fire hydrants
   
6-5-54   Obstruction of hydrants, valves, meter pits or curb stops
   
6-5-55   Painting of public fire hydrants
   
6-5-56   Definition of private fire protection system
   
6-5-57   Design of a private fire protection system
   
6-5-58   Combination service from fire line
   
6-5-59   Alterations of private fire protection system
   
6-5-60   Street excavation
   
6-5-61   Water conservation plan
   
6-5-62   Plan rates
   
6-5-63   Fees and charges
   
6-5-64   Private wells within the city
   
6-5-65   Water use metered
   
6-5-66   Installation charges
   
6-5-67   Meter tampering
   
6-5-68   Water rates
   
6-5-69   Annual adjustment of base charges and user rates
   
6-5-70   Responsibility for customer water billing
   
6-5-71   Water billing cycle
   
6-5-72   Right to protest
   
6-5-73   Discontinuation of service
   
6-5-74   Lien for non-payment
   
6-5-75   Lien exemption
   
6-5-76   Lien notice
   
6-5-77   Security deposit
   
6-5-78   Turn off/on fees
   
6-5-79   Door postings
   
6-5-80   Return check fee
   
6-5-81   Connection required
§ 6-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter pertaining to water distribution is to establish
rules and regulations governing the treatment and distribution of water within
the city in order to protect the public health, safety and well being.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSIBLE. When applied to a fixture, connection, appliance or equipment,
means having access thereto, but which first may require the removal of an
access panel, door or similar obstruction; READILY ACCESSIBLE means direct
access without the necessity of removing any panel, door or similar
obstruction.
   AGENT. Any person or company contracted by the city to represent the city in
the operation and maintenance of its water system.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms used as the dwelling of a family,
including bath and culinary accommodations, located in a building in which
there are three or more such rooms or suites.
   APPROVED. Accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification or
standard stated or cited in these rules and regulations, or accepted as
suitable for the proposed use under procedures and authority of the city.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any sources other than
its intended source.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or means to prevent backflow into the potable
water system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the potable water which
creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the
spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste.
   CORPORATION COCK OR STOP. A water service shutoff valve located on the city
or public water main.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise,
between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank,
receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for non-
potable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water or other substances, to
enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition.
   CURB COCK OR STOP. A water service shutoff valve located in a water service
line with the city or public right-of-way or public easement. This valve is
usually operated by a water valve key which allows or stops the flow of water
in a service line going to a dwelling or structure. All CURB STOPS and meter
pits are the responsibility of the city.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for and used
exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied
exclusively for residential purposes by two or more families.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any portion of the dwelling which is designed for and used
exclusively for residential purposes.
   EXCAVATION. Any removal or disturbance of material to a depth of more than
three inches within the graveled way of any street or alley or the removal or
disturbance of material to a depth of more than ten inches in sod or soil areas
of any publicly owned property. EXCAVATION is further defined to include all
tunneling, pushing or jacking under any publicly owned property within the
corporate limits of the city.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using
common cooking facilities.
   MAIN. The main of any system of continuous piping is the principal artery of
the system to which branches may be connected. These may be either private or
public.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings designed to provide sleeping
accommodation to transient guests for compensation.
   PLUMBING. The business, trade or work having to do with the installation,
removal, alteration or repair or plumbing and drainage systems or parts
thereof.
   PLUMBING APPURTENANCE. A manufactured device or a prefabricated assembly or
an on the job assembly of component parts, and which is an adjunct to the basic
piping system and plumbing fixtures. An APPURTENANCE demands no additional
water supply, nor does it add any discharge load to a fixture or the drainage
system. It performs some useful function in the operation, maintenance,
servicing, economy or safety of the plumbing system.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. All potable water supply and distribution pipes, all
plumbing fixtures and traps, all drainage and vent pipe and all building
drains, including their respective joints and connection, devices, receptacles,
and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises and includes
potable water piping, potable water treating or using equipment, fuel gas
piping, water heaters and vents for same.
   SERVICE LINES. A line is comprised of the piping and related plumbing
appurtenances including the corporation or tapping in valve installed from the
public water main to the outlet connection of the first shutoff device within
the building to be served. The SERVICE LINE belongs to the property being
served. When two or more properties are served by a common line, the properties
shall share all expenses to maintain the shared portion of said line. SERVICE
LINES are the responsibility of the property to fix all leaks after the meter
and owner will pay all associated cost for repair and upkeep.
   STREET. The length as dedicated for use by the public and the width as
defined by the property lines on each side thereof.
   SUDAS. Statewide Urban Design and Specifications Program.
   TRAVELED WAY. The width from curb to curb on curbed streets, from edge to
edge on asphalt non- curbed streets and from shoulder to shoulder on graveled
streets.
   UNIT, BILLING. Dwelling and/or building or portion thereof designed or used
for residential, commercial or industrial use. Each UNIT may be individually
metered, or part of a system that is monitored by a master meter, or
combination thereof.
   UTILITIES. Includes all underground cables, conduit and pipe used for the
transportation or distribution of fuel, electricity, communication services,
water or sewage.
   WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PRIVATE. All wells, reservoirs, mains, laterals,
filters, streams, trenches, pipes, drains, machinery, structures, equipment,
meters, hydrants, apparatus and other requisites used in or necessary for the
construction, maintenance and operation of the waterworks system and as it may
be extended, improved, maintained and operated by the owners of the system.
Units attached to said system may have its own meters and billed by the city,
but the system will be monitored by the master meter and any difference between
the individual unit meters and the master meter shall be the responsibility of
the owners of the private system.
   WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC. All wells, reservoirs, mains, laterals,
filters, streams, trenches, pipes, drains, machinery, structures, equipment,
meters, hydrants, apparatus and other requisites used in or necessary for the
construction, maintenance and operation of the existing waterworks system
originally established and as it may be extended, improved, maintained and
operated by the city.
   WATER MAIN (STREET MAIN). A water supply pipe for public or community use.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-3 WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   The water distribution system includes all wells, reservoirs, mains,
laterals, filters, streams, trenches, pipes, drains, machinery, structures,
equipment, meters, hydrants, apparatus and other requisites used in or
necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of the existing
waterworks system originally established and as it may be extended, improved,
maintained and operated.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-4 MANAGEMENT.
   The Water Department shall be under the management and control of the City
Manager and the City Council. All revenues and monies derived from the
operation of the water system shall be paid to and held by the city separate
and apart from all other funds of the city and all of said sums and all other
funds and monies incident to the operation of said system, as may be delivered
to the city, shall be deposited in a separate fund designated the Water
Department Fund or Account and the Council shall administer said fund in every
respect in a manner provided by the code of Iowa and all other laws pertaining
thereto. The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper records, books and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the water system and at regular annual
intervals the Council shall cause to be made an audit of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the water system. In the policy where the word
“city” is used, this will represent the City of Fort Madison or its agent to
whom responsibility for management of the waterworks system has been delegated.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-5 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking or failure
of any service pipe, meter or other appurtenance, or failure of the water
supply from any cause, or damage arising from suspending water service or in
connection with an emergency or the making of repairs to the waterworks system.
The city does not guarantee a constant supply of water to any user and the
right is reserved to suspend the water supply at any time, notwithstanding any
permit granted to the contrary. The water supplied to users through the
waterworks system is for human consumption and no claims will be allowed by the
city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-6 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   The city may limit or temporarily suspend the use of water in the event the
capacity of the waterworks system is not adequate to supply all demands for
water or in the event of an emergency requiring the diversion of water for such
emergency purpose.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-7 WATER PRESSURE.
   Water pressure varies throughout the distribution system depending upon the
elevation. Information on pressure at a specific location may be obtained upon
request to the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-8 TEMPORARY INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; NOTIFICATION.
   The city may interrupt a customer’s water supply with proper notification in
order to make repairs to the system. An effort will be made to provide 24-hour
advance notification of any interruption. In case of emergencies, such as a
main break, mains or services may be shut down without notification. In case of
emergencies, the city will use whatever media to inform citizens of said
emergencies as soon as possible.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-9 LOCATION OF WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   City-owned facilities. The city will furnish information, as available
from its records, regarding locations of mains, hydrants, valves and other
fixtures owned by the city. The city will use its employees and tools in this
effort at no cost to the person assisted. The city will assume the location of
its mains, pipes, valves or other fixtures. It should be understood that after
the location of the facility is established, the city shall expect the facility
to be protected from damage or harm.
   (B)   Privately-owned water services, valves and the like. This section
references private water mains and valves. On such mains and facilities, the
city will make available, if records are available, to persons who have a
reasonable need for information concerning these mains and facilities from
records on file with the city. Records on private mains and facilities and
similar installations are furnished to the city by the owners or agents of
these mains and facilities. It should be understood that these facilities are
not owned or maintained by the city.
   (C)   Private curb stops and services. All curb stops and meter pits are the
property of the city and all curb stops will be turned on by the city
waterworks only. The city will shut off water for repair at a cost of $25 per
call to that location. Failure to comply with this rule will result in a fee of
$30 if others operate curb stops or enter city meter pits without approval.
   (D)   Maintenance of facilities. Whenever it shall come to the attention of
the city that a water service, stop box, valve (including its stop box cover)
is broken, does not exist or is otherwise in a dangerous or unsafe condition,
the city will make reasonable efforts to repair said item.
   (E)   Accuracy or validity of records and locate time allotment. The city
makes no assurances to the accuracy or validity of the records or information.
Persons shall use their own discretion when making use of these records on
private facilities. The city will, upon request, provide assistance, at its
convenience, in an effort to locate a private pipe, valve or fixture. The city
may offer locating services at a fee to be established by the City Council.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-10 WATER AVAILABILITY.
   All requests for water service will be evaluated on whether adequate
capacity and pressure is available at the desired location. If adequate service
is not available, alternatives may be provided to the owner to obtain the
desired service, which may result in additional cost to the property owner.
   (A)   In the event that a property owner makes a request to the city to
extend a city water main to make service to such owner’s property available,
all cost of the water main extension shall be the responsibility of the party
requesting service and a city application must be completed before work is
started. All requests for any extension must be presented to the Public Works
Director and City Manager for approval. If the party installs a larger main for
further use and complies with the city standards, the city may reimburse the
party for a portion of the cost of the completed project only if all specs,
design and installation comply with SUDAS.
   (B)   If there is any type of an agreement between city and the party
interested in having service extended, such terms of the agreement shall take
precedence over any section in conflict with the agreement.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-11 UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY-OWNED WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   No person shall injure, destroy, deface or disturb any portions of the
waterworks system, nor shall any person interfere with or obstruct the water
supply. No person shall allow, nor shall any person make a tap or connection to
any line in the waterworks system, including any such lines or fixtures ahead
of the meter within a building, without receiving an approved permit from the
city. No person shall operate any water main valves or fire hydrants without
the permission of the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-12 WATER LEAK REPAIRS.
   If a water leak should occur the plumber shall make verbal contact with the
city or its agent previous to any excavation. Water leaks shall have priority
and must be repaired immediately or the city may discontinue water service. All
non-leak type of repairs or disconnects will be completed within seven days of
the date of notification. The customer will pay all cost of the repairs for
their service line. This will include the service line leaving the meter pit to
the dwelling. If the property does not have a meter pit the customer will pay
all cost from the curb stop to the dwelling.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-13 APPLICATION.
   All new water customers moving into a dwelling must complete an application
form for new water user’s account. All forms provided by the city shall be
signed by the customer for the use of water service. All applications will be
located at City Hall, 811 Avenue E, Fort Madison, Iowa.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-14 BILLING.
   Meters will be read monthly. If weather creates unsafe conditions or human
life is in danger by an animal, the city will estimate that month’s water
usage. All water bills will be mailed monthly and shall be due and payable on
or before the due date. Payment may be made by mail or at City Hall, 811 Avenue
E, Fort Madison, Iowa, or at other designated pay stations. A list of the pay
stations and addresses are available, along with paying the bill online. All
customers shall make it possible for the city to obtain readings of any water
meters attached to the water service serving the premises. The water service
may be discontinued if the city or its agent is not allowed to read the meters.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-15 DEFAULT IN PAYMENT.
   When a customer is in default of payment of an account for water supplied to
his or her premises, or fails to comply with these rules and regulations, the
water service may be terminated. Further, the city reserves the right to use
all legal means to collect unpaid bills including, but not limited to,
certification of unpaid water service bills to the County Treasurer for
collection with the real estate taxes assessed against the premises being
provided the water service in accord with Iowa Code § 384.84.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-16 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF UNMETERED WATER.
   Where a water service has been turned off at the stop box, water main or
tagged at the meter control valve for any reason, and is subsequently found
turned on without proper authority, the city shall discontinue the water
service. The water service shall not be reactivated until payment is made for
the expense of disconnecting such water service and all delinquent bills. Each
day, the unauthorized use of unmetered water continues shall constitute a
separate municipal infraction. The discovery of piping bypassing the meter or
tampering with the meter that would allow unauthorized water to be used on the
premises of a customer is in violation of Iowa Code § 714.4. The following
charges will be made against the customer in such cases:
   (A)   Cost for removal of piping and all other incidental costs;
   (B)   An estimated bill for water consumption as determined by the city; and
   (C)   A penalty as established by the city. In addition to the above
charges, the Code of Iowa provides for the punishment for each offense by a
fine or by imprisonment in the county jail or by both fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-17 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE CONNECTION; REPAIR PERMIT.
   No person shall initially connect any water pipes to the city waterworks
system or thereafter, repair, abandon or disconnect the same unless such person
is a qualified licensed plumber or a person employing a qualified licensed
plumber and has first obtained a water permit for the same from the City Clerk.
The city will issue a permit for installation of a water service from the water
meter pit to the building or structure. The work authorized by a permit
application shall be started within six months from the date of permit. After
six months, the permit will be voided and must reapply for a new permit. As
part of the permit for a new service hookup to the system, the property owner
must provide the city with the legal description of the property to be served
and proposed hookup location and/or any multiple services to the premises.
Legal descriptions will not be required for repairs provided replacement
remains as original service line.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-18 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY; NEGLECT, WASTING WATER, FAILURE OF VALVES/
PIPING.
   The customer shall be liable for all water that passes through the meter
until provisions are made for the city to turn off water service or remove the
meter. All water through meters will accurately measure the amount of water
supplied each customer. It shall be a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
or imprisonment in the county jail, for any person, entity or party to alter,
tamper with or deface any water meters, valve pits, fire hydrants, water main
valves or any structure that belongs to the city. It shall also be a simple
misdemeanor for any person, party or entity to secure city water by routing the
water’s flow around a water meter to avoid incurring a bill for the water used.
It shall also be a misdemeanor to turn on or remove a tag from a meter that has
been sealed off. When a customer is moving out of a premises and orders the
water meter read on a certain day, the water must be turned off when the meter
is read, unless there is an application already on file from a prospective
customer. The customer shall protect and safeguard water service pipes and
fixtures. The owner, at his or her expense, must keep service pipes from the
water main and all appurtenances in good working order. The city is not
responsible for service pipes and fixtures past the meter pit or curb stop.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-19 PLUMBING INSPECTION.
   The city or agent will make inspections of any and all work done from the
water pit or curb stop to the outside edge of the dwelling. Inspections must be
done during Water Department staff hours or an overtime fee will be charged.
The inspection will be conducted within two hours of an appointment (staff
working hours only). The purpose of the inspections will be to prevent unsafe
or hazardous conditions and improper plumbing standards which might contaminate
or endanger the water supply. If the inspection reveals unsafe or hazardous
conditions, the city and/or agent will not allow water service until proper
steps have been taken to correct the problem. If the inspection finds that
damage has been caused to the city water system by the person working on the
system, said system shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-20 STANDARDS FOR DWELLING UNITS, COMMERCIAL USES, INDUSTRIAL USES AND
FIRE SERVICES.
   (A)   The following standards shall apply to dwelling units and all
commercial and industrial projects and larger connecting to the city
distribution system. The interpretation of any section, or of any difference in
sections, when appropriate, shall be made by the City Manager or designee. This
interpretation shall be binding and controlling in its application. Before any
connection is made to any structure under this section it shall be required
that a site plan be submitted indicating exterior proposed taps, connections,
and valves.
   (B)   A load profile or an estimate from the customer’s engineer shall be
submitted to assist the city in properly selecting and sizing the meter (above
a standard five-eighths inch household meter) for the proposed facility. A LOAD
PROFILE is defined as a written or graphical estimate of the average and peak
gallon consumption for each hour of a 24-hour period.
   (C)   If large seasonal flow fluctuations are anticipated, a load profile
must be submitted for each season of the year. The type of meter installed will
be based upon size, service requirements, location of meter, and other
conditions which may exist. Property owners or developers are to adequately
size water lines to their building units.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-21 TAPS, CONNECTIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS.
   All taps and/or connections to water mains will be performed by the city
waterworks.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-22 GENERAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All service lines shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   Pipe clearance. A clearance of not less than 18 inches shall be
maintained between the service line and any pipe, cable or conduit in the same
trench.
   (B)   Pipe bury depth. Service lines shall have a cover, wherever feasible,
of not less than four feet. Anything different must have proper approval from
the city.
   (C)   Service line material. Residential service lines shall be seamless
three-fourths inch or one inch type K copper from the main to the water meter
pit. Anything after the meter pit will be allowed to use three-fourths inch or
one-inch type K copper or CTS 200 psi blue pipe, which must be bought through
the city’s Water Department.
   (D)   Commercial, industrial, fire service line size. Commercial, industrial
and fire service lines shall be properly sized for the required demand, but
shall be no smaller than that specified for a residential service.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-23 MATERIAL FOR SERVICE PIPES.
   (A)   Pipe material three-fourths inch through two inches. All water service
pipes of three-fourths inch through two-inch diameter shall be seamless type K
copper or CTS 200 psi blue pipe. All pipe material must be approved by the city
that is hooked or connected to the city water supply.
   (B)   Pipe material four inches or larger. All water services of four-inch
diameter and larger shall be ductile iron pipe or DR 18 PVC (C-900).
   (C)   Ductile iron pipe spec. All ductile iron water service piping shall be
cement mortar lined, Class 52 thickness and conform to AWWA standard C151.
   (D)   Tracing wire. With any non-metallic piping used, tracing wire shall be
installed in accordance with SUDAS specifications. All non-metallic water mains
will have a tracer wire installed below the pipe, but not to exceed one foot
below the pipe, no splices will be allowed unless a termination box is
installed in the run.
   (E)   Fittings, joints and connections. All joints, connections and fittings
shall be of type and installation according piping material used as specified
in the SUDAS manual and specifications.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-24 SERVICE LINE APPURTENANCES.
   All water service lines shall include a water meter pit and curb stop
located in the city right-of-way. No union shall be permitted on copper
services three- fourths inch to one inch in diameter between the corporation
stop and the curb stop when the distance is less than 60 feet. The city owns
all water meter pits, water meters and apparatus that are located in the right-
of-way unless it is deemed that this is a private water line.
   (A)   Curb stop/valve standard. All water service lines shall include a curb
stop or valve between the water main and the property line as follows: a main
shutoff on the water supply line for each customer shall be provided on public
property, or another location approved by the city, in front of the premises to
be served.
   (B)   Valves, valve boxes, castings and precast manholes. Any valves,
roadway boxes, castings and precast concrete manhole vaults must meet SUDAS
specifications or the city waterworks.
   (C)   Setting of valves, valve boxes, castings and precast concrete
manholes. Curb stop boxes, roadway boxes and precast concrete manhole vaults
shall be installed so that they will function properly and so that an access to
the shutoff device is maintained. All shall be set vertically so the top is
flush with the surrounding surface and not be a hazard to the public.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-25 STOP VALVES.
   All service lines shall have a shutoff valve inside the building where the
service enters the building is located.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-26 COMBINATION DOMESTIC AND FIRE SERVICE PIPES.
   A property requiring a domestic service line and a fire protection service
line may be served from a single tap. When a single tap is used, the fire
protection service line shall extend straight from the main to the property
line. A domestic service tee may be placed on an existing fire line if approved
by the Public Works Director and Fire Chief.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-27 REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE.
   If an existing water service is to be repaired, the materials used for the
repair shall be of the type and size specified for new services. If a major
portion of either section of the service, between the water meter pit and the
building, should be replaced, then that entire section should be replaced with
material as approved for new services and approved by the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-28 WATER METERS GENERALLY.
   All water must be metered except: water authorized by the city for the use
by other governmental units, for the purpose of firefighting, street and sewer
flushing and used in flushing or maintaining new and existing mains under the
supervision of the city and water usage for special purposes or demonstrations
when approved by the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-29 RESIDENTIAL METERS.
   Each single-family residence will have its own meter. Mobile homes may be
individually metered, but maintenance will be the responsibility of the park
owner, unless the meter pit is in the right-of-way.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-30 APARTMENTS, DUPLEXES AND CONDOMINIUMS.
   Each building must have at least one individual meter that does not take
water from another metered line or building. Master metering of more than one
building in a complex is an option when approved by the city. If the premises
to be served are multiple and one meter is to serve more than one tenant, it
will be necessary for the owner of the premises or their authorized agent to
apply for the meter. Each water meter will have its own meter control valve. If
the master is used a minimum fee of $10 will be attached to the bill for each
unit in the dwelling. Example: if you have a four-plex with a master meter then
there will be three minimums attached to the water bill. All usage will be
billed off the master meter.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-31 INSTITUTIONS.
   Educational facilities, public housing complexes and other institutions with
a number of buildings may be master metered if they are not separated by a
public thoroughfare. Master metering of such complexes must be requested in
writing and approved by the city. If there is a livable dwelling inside these
facilities, there will be a basic fee of $10 per month.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-32 TYPE AND SIZE OF METERS.
   The type and make of meter used will be specified by the city. Meter sizing
shall be based on flow requirements only and not on pressure loss through the
meter. Information shall be supplied by the prospective user or his agent
before a meter can be sized. Meters five-eighths inch through one and one- half
inches will be sized for general use. Meters two inches and larger must be
sized by the city based on the load profile provided by the owner.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-33 OWNERSHIP.
   All meters to be used for billing purposes shall be supplied by the city and
be owned by the city. The city reserves the right to read, inspect or test the
meter at any reasonable time or with such frequency as deemed necessary.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-34 INSTALLATION AND METER LOCATION.
   The city will own, install all service lines, water meter pits, water meters
and meter valves. All meter pits will be installed in the ROW unless both
parties agree on a different location and property owner has granted an
easement for meter pits on private property. The property owner will be
responsible for all associated cost for installing water service line from
meter pit to dwelling. Anything greater than a standard three-fourths inch
service line must be approved by the city and all costs will be billed to
customer.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-35 MAINTENANCE.
   The city will provide the following maintenance on the meter:
   (A)   Residential. Repair or replace the meter with a new or rebuilt meter
of the same size if the meter becomes inoperative through no fault of the
customer. If there is evidence of physical damage externally or to the interior
of the meter from hot water, freezing, or other casualties, through
carelessness or neglect by the customer, the customer will be billed for the
cost of repairs. The city may test or exchange the meter periodically to
ascertain its accuracy. The exchange meter will be new or rebuilt and will be
the same size if water usage remains the same as designed. The city will test
any meter upon request by the customer and customer must be present during
meter flow test. The fees for such test will be established by resolution of
the City Council. Larger meters may have an additional charge. The customer
will not be billed for the meter test, if the meter exceeds 102% of design
flow; and
   (B)   Industrial and commercial. Meters two inches and smaller will be
maintained in the same manner as residential meters. Meters three inches and
larger will be repaired at no cost to the property owner providing there is no
evidence of physical damage as described in division (A) above. Water meters
shall be equipped with shutoff valves at each end.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-36 CHANGES IN LOAD.
   In cases where production, or other changes in the water supply or system
result in a meter being substantially undersized or oversized, the city may
require the property owner to buy and have installed a larger or smaller meter.
Any alterations in the meter setting will be at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-37 METER FAILURES.
   Charges estimated in the event a water meter fails to register properly, the
water charges for the monthly period involved shall be fixed on the basis of
average water consumption measured by such meter for the preceding active 12
months. Additional usage may be added to cover anticipated usage until repairs
are made.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-38 METER REMOVAL RESTRICTED.
   No person other than authorized city personnel or agent shall remove a water
meter from its setting or interfere with its reading without written permission
from the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-39 WATER SUPPLY TO OTHER PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   No occupant or owner of any premises to which water is supplied will be
allowed to supply water to other persons or families or to permit the same to
be taken, or use or permit the same to be used for any purpose other than
stated in the application. Any consumer violating this rule will be charged
double the usual rates for water so taken or used and if such extra charge is
not paid on demand, the water will be shut off from such premises.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-40 BULK WATER RATES.
   Bulk water is available at the water treatment plant. All volumes must be
recorded and submitted to the city or its agent for the purpose of billing the
water recipient at current bulk rates.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-41 CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   All new service and any customer completing upgrades at the dwelling must
comply with SUDAS for backflow protection. All backflow devices that are
required by the city or by others will be billed to the property owner.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-42 WATER SERVICE MAIN EXTENSIONS GENERALLY.
   A water service main is a privately-owned and maintained water service to a
single property and must be located within an implied public accessway. It is
usually of six inches minimum size. Service mains may have multiple service
line connections. The location of new service mains and connection/ alterations
to existing service mains must be reviewed by the city prior to the
construction to ensure all city requirements are met. One “as built record
drawing” of the service main is to be submitted to the city within 30 days of
its construction, unless otherwise approved by the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-43 CONNECTION FEE.
   At the time the city receives a written notification and site plan of a
proposed new service main or alteration to an existing service main, the city
will determine if a connection fee over and above the standard tap charges is
appropriate. A connection fee will be assessed whenever the property being
served is utilizing water capacity in a pipeline for which the city has a
capital cost investment.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-44 TRANSMISSION MAINS.
   Transmission mains are feeder lines between towers, water tanks and
treatment facilities that may be tapped. Such taps must be approved by the
Public Works Director or operator in charge of the system to allow a service
connection.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-45 SUBMITTALS AND PROCEDURES.
   Following are the procedures for a developer or other individuals who desire
to connect into a water main owned by the city with a service main: submit a
site plan to the city indicating the following minimum information:
   (A)   Show existing city system. Show existing city owned main and size,
relative location with respect to right-of-way lines and existing curb lines;
   (B)   Location of proposed mains. Location of the proposed tap, proposed
valve locations, and routing of proposed service main within public right-of-
way and on private property. In general, valves located on private property for
the individual fire and domestic services must be located in such a manner as
to permit operation by the city 24 hours a day. The service mains must be
routed accordingly, to meet this requirement;
   (C)   Location of proposed building. Location of proposed or existing
buildings on property to be served by service main;
   (D)   Legal description. Legal description of property to be served;
   (E)   Proposed paving. Proposed paved areas for parking lots, driveways and
sidewalks;
   (F)   Dimensions clarifications. Any dimensions required for clarity;
   (G)   All water main parts. Show all hydrants, valves and fittings;
   (H)   Statement of acceptance of COA specifications. Include statement that
all service main work is to be completed under the city’s main extensions
guidelines and specifications;
   (I)   Fire flow requirements. Submit total fire flow requirements (if
applicable for the site);
   (J)   Load profile. Submit a load profile for any domestic or process
service which serves a service line one and one-half inches or larger in
diameter;
   (K)   Pay connection fees. Pay required “connection fee”; and
   (L)   City acceptance and permit issuance. Once the above items are
completed to the satisfaction of the city, the permit for water service will be
issued.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-46 MATERIAL FOR SERVICE MAINS.
   (A)   All service main material shall comply with the SUDAS or this code.
   (B)   All material must be approved by the city’s Public Works Department.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-47 PRESSURE TESTING AND FLUSHING.
   All service mains and lines and appurtenances four inches and larger shall
be tested for leakage in compliance with the city water main specifications.
The plumbing contractor shall notify the city when the service main is
installed and ready to be filled for pressure testing, flushing or
disinfecting. City personnel are to operate service valves for filling of the
service main. If the city completes this task, a fee will be billed for this
service to the property owner.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-48 PLUMBERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Coordinate flushing with city; operate flushing device (hydrants must be
operated with a hydrant wrench); provide proper cleaning velocities provided by
SUDAS or city water main specifications; provide drainage and assume
responsibility for all or any damages due to flushing.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-49 DISINFECTION OF WATER MAIN.
   Following a satisfactory pressure test, in accordance with the current
revision of AWWA standard C-601, all service mains shall be disinfected,
sampled and tested as follows.
   (A)   The form of chlorine used and the procedures for disinfection shall be
as outlined in AWWA standard C-601. A minimum free residual chlorine
concentration of ten milligrams per liter (10 mg/l) shall be maintained for the
24-hour disinfection period. The plumbing contractor will supply the chlorine
for disinfection purposes, and this is to be considered incidental to the
project.
   (B)   After the 24-hour disinfection period, the city personnel shall
supervise the flushing of the service main to remove all free chlorine. The
plumbing contractor will conduct his or her own flushing; this does not include
operating the valve connected at the public water main.
   (C)   Twenty-four hours after the service main has been flushed, the city
personnel shall take a sample of water from the service main to be tested for
compliance with the physical, chemical and bacteriological standards as
prescribed by the national interim primary drinking water standards. Test
results shall be available within 48 hours from the time when the sample was
taken. Water used for flushing and sampling shall be provided by the city for
up to two flushing and sampling procedures, if required, to pass laboratory
tests.
   (D)   If the first two samples do not pass laboratory tests, any labor and
equipment costs incurred by the city for further disinfection, flushing or
sampling shall be billed to the plumbing contractor.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-50 METERING.
   Any private main that is used to provide service for more than one purpose
or end user is to be master metered with that service cost assessed to the
owner of the private pipeline. Individual meters for each tenant may be
installed providing there is an individual service and stop box from the
service main to each unit to be metered.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-51 OPERATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Public fire hydrants are installed primarily for fire protection for the
city’s Fire and Building Department. They may also be used by the city or its
agent to flush water mains, for street sweeping and storm and sanitary sewer
flushing. Fire hydrants placed in new subdivisions shall be placed at locations
approved by the city. Hydrants shall not be used for any other purpose without
express permission of the city. All non-fire use of water will be metered and
quantity will be reported to the city. The city accepts Muller and Clow fire
hydrants only. All others will need approval of the Public Works Director.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-52 PENALTY FOR UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   Anyone who shall operate or attempt to operate a fire hydrant without
permission of the city may be prosecuted as provided by law.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-53 RELOCATION OF PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Where an existing public fire hydrant interferes with a property owner’s use
or proposed use of such person’s property, the hydrant may be relocated only if
feasible and if relocation does not detract from the firefighting function at
the property owner’s expense. Where the grade of an existing street or property
is changed at the request of the property owner, such that an existing public
fire hydrant will not be at the proper elevation with respect to the ground,
the hydrant will be raised or lowered at the expense of the property owner.
Approval from the city must be obtained prior to any work being done.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-54 OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANTS, VALVES, METER PITS OR CURB STOPS.
   Nothing shall be erected or planted which shall interfere with the use of
fire hydrants, valves, meter pits or curb stops. Sufficient clearance of five
feet shall be maintained around fire hydrants, valves, meter pits or curb stops
to permit easy connection of hoses and full circle operation of the hydrant
using regular hydrant wrenches and hose spanners. Shrubs, trees, flowers or
weeds shall not be planted or permitted to grow, so as to prevent full view of
fire hydrants, valves, meter pits or curb stops.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-55 PAINTING OF PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Painting of fire hydrants will be done by the city. The following numbers
will indicate the flow capacity for the fire hydrant:
 
Hydrant Class Number Flow                 Color
Class A       1      1,000 gpm or greater Green
Class B       2      0.00                 Orange
Class C       3      Less than 500 gpm    Red
 
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-56 DEFINITION OF PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.
   Private fire protection systems consist of a fire service connection to the
public water main and any or all of the following: standpipes; automatic
sprinkler systems; fire pumps; or fire hydrants. All fire protection systems
will be metered and all cost of water meters, backflow and usage will be billed
to the property owner. The city reserves the right to set a water meter at any
time. All cost will be billed to the property owner which will or could be for
water usage, cost to set meter, monthly meter charge, parts and cost for all
city labor.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-57 DESIGN OF A PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.
   Fire service connections and fire lines shall comply with applicable
portions of these rules and regulations. All fire system public or private must
be approved by the city’s Fire Chief.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-58 COMBINATION SERVICE FROM FIRE LINE.
   A combination domestic and fire line may be installed if approved by the
owner’s fire underwriter. Domestic service branches shall be metered and have
separate meter pit. Approval by the city’s Fire Chief and Public Works Director
is needed for this option.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-59 ALTERATIONS OF PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.
   When requested by the owner and approved by the city, a private fire system
can be altered by a building owner who shall be responsible for any fees
charged by the city and all changes must be approved by the city’s Fire Chief.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-60 STREET EXCAVATION.
   All street excavation will be approved by the city’s Public Works Director
or his or her agent. All cost for street repair will be billed to the property
owner or their contractor. All excavations must be approved by the city through
a permit process.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-61 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council may declare a water conservation emergency whenever
the supply of water or water system facilities are found to be inadequate for
the needs of the city or whenever there appears to be a substantial and
imminent danger of such inadequacy. A resolution making such findings and
declaring such emergency shall be published, if time permits, for one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   (B)   During a water conservation emergency, potable processed water from
the municipal water system, which does not include water that has been
reclaimed or recycled from an authorized primary use, shall not be used for any
of the following purposes:
      (1)   The use of water consuming air conditioning equipment which
consumes in excess of 5% of the water circulating in such equipment;
      (2)   Watering or irrigation of lawns and all other outside vegetation;
except that, direct applications of water not exceeding one inch per week are
permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on flower and vegetable
gardens, trees and shrubs less than four years old and areas which were newly
seeded or sodded prior to issuance of the emergency resolution;
      (3)   The washing of cars, trucks, trailers and other mobile vehicles or
equipment, except at commercial establishments which provide that service;
      (4)   The cleaning of outdoor surfaces including buildings, sidewalks,
driveways and porches;
      (5)   The non-essential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment,
machinery and interior spaces;
      (6)   The filling of private swimming pools, wading pools, reflecting
pools, ornamental fountains or any other structure making similar use of water;
      (7)   Permitting the loss of water through defective plumbing or
fixtures, except where the customer can provide proof of prompt repair of the
defect;
      (8)   Use by a business or industry of an amount of water exceeding the
amount used during the corresponding month of the preceding year, except where
the business or industry is declared by resolution of the Council to be
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. Where there is no
corresponding period of the use the City Council shall give advance notice to
the business or industrial customer of the public hearing to determine the
allowable use.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-62 PLAN RATES.
   Any person found to be using city water in violation of this section or this
chapter shall be charged twice the rate which would otherwise apply in addition
to any other sanctions available to the city. This rate shall apply to all
metered service through the service connection used in the violation during any
month that a water conservation emergency is declared by the City Council to
exist and during which the violation has occurred or continued.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-63 FEES AND CHARGES.
   The City Council shall set all water associated fees by resolution.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-64 PRIVATE WELLS WITHIN THE CITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to drinking and non-
drinking private water wells, other than monitoring wells used in connection
with soil and ground water contamination within the city limits.
   (B)   Private wells prohibited. No person shall construct a private well
within the city limits after the effective date hereof, and no private well
shall be allowed in any contaminated area, as determined by the city or the
state’s Department of Natural Resources. This prohibition shall not apply to
closed loop geothermal wells.
   (C)   Registration of preexisting wells. Any person who owns property in the
city which has a water well as of the effective date hereof, other than a
monitoring well, shall register said well with the city. There shall be no fee
for the registration of a preexisting well. Registration shall include, but not
be limited to, exact location, well history, separation from public water
supply and vulnerability to contaminants. Any preexisting well located in a
contaminated area shall be plugged and sealed in accordance with the state’s
Department of Natural Resources regulations at the owner’s cost. In addition,
closed loop geothermal wells must be registered with the city upon commencement
of construction, the same as preexisting wells.
   (D)   Hook on to city system.
      (1)   If city water is available in the area, the property must hook on
to the city system.
      (2)   Failure to do so will result in a monthly fee of $10 until property
owner hooks on to the city water supply.
   (E)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person found guilty of a violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500 for each violation.
      (2)   Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-65 WATER USE METERED.
   All water shall be supplied through meters which accurately measure the
amount of water supplied each customer. Those meters shall be provided and
maintained by the city and shall remain city property. The meters shall be
installed by the city.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-66 INSTALLATION CHARGES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be paid by each customer before the city
shall furnish the necessary water meter(s). Water permit fee for city hookup
will be $650. This includes main tap, road repair, meter pit and copper service
line from main tap to meter pit.
   (B)   Basic monthly service charge based on meter size (effective 5-1-2016):
Meter Size FY20     FY21     FY23
           1-1-2020 1-1-2021 1-1-2023
Meter Size FY20      FY21      FY23
           1-1-2020  1-1-2021  1-1-2023
5/8”     $10.38    $10.59    $11.02
3/4”     $14.55    $14.84    $15.44
1”       $27.05    $27.59    $28.70
1-1/2”   $60.40    $61.61    $64.10
2”       $107.37   $109.52   $113.94
3”       $240.77   $245.59   $255.51
4”       $428.36   $436.93   $454.58
6”       $957.68   $976.83   $1,016.30
8”       $1,708.18 $1,742.34 $1,812.73
 
   (C)   For multiple residential units, mobile home parks and trailer parks
being served by one water meter shall be assessed as an additional connection
fee the sum of $10 per dwelling unit per month.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. D-31, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 6-5-67 METER TAMPERING.
   (A)   It shall be a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$100 or imprisonment in the county jail for no longer than 30 days, for any
person to alter, tamper with or deface any water meter.
   (B)   It shall also be a simple misdemeanor for any person to secure city
water by routing the water’s flow around a water meter to avoid incurring a
bill for the water used.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-68 WATER RATES.
   Effective 5-1-2016, water shall be furnished at the following monthly rates
per meter usage, plus the water meter basic service charge:
            Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Usage Group FY20     FY21     FY23
            1-1-2020 1-1-2021 1-1-2023
                                   Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Usage Group                        FY20     FY21     FY23
                                   1-1-2020 1-1-2021 1-1-2023
First 10,000 gallons per month     $6.16    $6.28    $6.54
Next 40,000 gallons per month      $5.53    $5.64    $5.87
Next 200,000 gallons per month     $4.46    $4.55    $4.73
All over 250,000 gallons per month $3.55    $3.62    $3.76
Wholesale gallons per month        $1.98    $2.02    $2.07
Hydrant and other bulk water       $6.16    $6.28    $6.54
 
   (A)   For water supplied to customers outside the corporate limits, upon
approval of supplying water to said customer the rates shall be 200% of the
base and usage rates listed above.
   (B)   (1)   Each individual residential and commercial unit being supplied
city water, including each individual home within a mobile home park, shall be
assessed, on a monthly basis, a base rate for water usage, whether separately
metered or not. For example, each occupied unit of a four-plex being provided
city water shall be assessed for a base rate each month. The usage rate,
however, shall be assessed per meter, not per unit served. Units within a
complex, whether residential, commercial or mobile home park, separately
metered for water usage shall be separately billed for both base and usage
rates and the amount of water used by those units within the complex shall be
subtracted from the amount of water shown as being used by the master meter for
the complex for purposes of billing usage to the owner of the complex.
      (2)   Returning to the four-plex example, if all four units were occupied
and being provided city water through one meter, the party owning the property
would be billed for four monthly base rates, and the usage rate would be
assessed against that party for all water used. If one of the four-plex units
were separately metered, that unit would be billed separately for not only its
base rate, but for its usage as well, and the amount of water it used would be
subtracted from the master meter reading to determine the usage to bill the
owner of the complex and that party would be billed for that usage, as well as
for three base rates.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. D-31, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 6-5-69 ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT OF BASE CHARGES AND USER RATES.
   Effective July 1 of each year, beginning in 2020, the customer base charges
and the customer usage rates as set forth in §§
6-5-66 and
6-5-68 of this chapter shall be increased 2% from the prior year, except as
amended by ordinance of the City Council. The city shall review said charges
and rates every two years to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues
to pay the full costs of operation, maintenance and any debt service and to
maintain adequate fund balances.
(Ord. D-31, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 6-5-70 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CUSTOMER WATER BILLING.
   Only the parties requesting water service and posting security deposit shall
be responsible for payment of all bills submitted by or on behalf of the city
for water service provided them.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-71 WATER BILLING CYCLE.
   Water meters shall be read monthly and bills for water service use shall be
issued monthly by the utility billing office or the party responsible for
reading the water meters. Those bills shall be mailed by ordinary U.S. mail to
the responsible parties within, as nearly as practical, water bills shall be
due 30 days from the billing date. If the thirtieth day following the billing
date should fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the bill shall be due
on the next regular business day thereafter. Payment for all water billing
shall be made to the city’s utility billing office.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-72 RIGHT TO PROTEST.
   Any person having any cause to question or contest his or her water service
bill may file a protest in writing with the City Clerk within the time provided
for payment. The protest shall succinctly set forth the basis for the party’s
challenge. Upon receipt of such a protest, the Clerk shall suspend collection
efforts with regard to the bill and shall schedule a time for the aggrieved
party to address the Council at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-73 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   The city may discontinue the water service afforded any party who has failed
to pay their water service bill within 20 days of billing date unless the party
has protested their water service billing as provided for in the preceding
section. Before any party’s water service shall be disconnected the party shall
be mailed notice by ordinary U.S. mail that their water service will be
discontinued if their delinquent water service bill is not paid within ten
days. A delinquency fee equal to 10% of the outstanding bill or $2, whichever
is greater, shall be assessed with each such notice. Final notice of proposed
discontinuation of the party’s water service shall be posted on the premises
being provided the water service a minimum of 24 hours before discontinuance of
service. A charge of $25 shall be assessed for each such posting. If the
delinquent water service bill, delinquency fees and posting charges are not
paid within ten days of mailing and 24 hours of posting of notice of
discontinuance the city shall discontinue water service. Water service shall be
reinstated upon payment of the outstanding delinquent water service bill, all
delinquency fees and posting charges assessed under the terms of this section.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-74 LIEN FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof
shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the
premises.
   (B)   Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute
a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-75 LIEN EXEMPTION.
   The lien for non-payment shall not apply to residential rental properties
where water service is separately metered and the charges therefor are paid
directly by the tenant, providing the landlord has given written notice to the
Clerk that the tenant is liable for the charges and a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of $100 is paid to the city. The landlord’s written notice shall
contain the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of
occupancy and the date of occupancy. A change in tenant shall require a new
written notice and deposit. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the
Clerk shall refund the deposit if the water service charges are paid in full
and the lien exemption shall be lifted from the rental property.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-76 LIEN NOTICE.
   (A)   If a delinquent account is not paid by date due, the city shall have
all rights to proceed with collection of the unpaid charges in any provided by
law for the collection of a municipal claim.
   (B)   All delinquent bills certified to the county treasurer or that the
city institutes collection measures upon will include a service charge of
fifteen percent (15%) of the total bill, but not less than one dollar ($1.00).
All associated costs will be attached to the bill for this service.
(Ord. D-100, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 6-5-77 SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   (A)   All new water service customers shall be required to post and maintain
a security deposit of $100 for water service. The customer’s security deposit
shall be held in its entirety until the customer’s account is closed.
   (B)   Any interference with a service line that has been locked out shall be
deemed a violation of the rules and regulations governing the water system. A
disconnect notice will be generated for each customer. The day following the
due date on the disconnection notice the city will disconnect service to any
customer who has not paid the past due amount or made payment arrangements.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-78 TURN OFF/ON FEES.
   If the customer is shut off for non-payment, there will be a $30 disconnect
fee. To restore services to the customer during regular working hours, all fees
must be paid in full before reconnection is made.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-79 DOOR POSTINGS.
   The city will post notice on the door of the affected property after the
disconnect notice due date. The door posting fee is $25 each time a notice is
posted to a property owner/customer’s door.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-80 RETURN CHECK FEE.
   A $30 charge will be assessed on all returned checks.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 6-5-81 CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every property abutting a public water main which is occupied by a
dwelling or other water using activity shall be connected to the city water
main and whenever it shall appear to the Council that the owner of such
property has failed, neglected or refused to make such connection, it may, by
resolution, order the work done and the cost thereof assessed against the
property.
   (B)   The Council may, by resolution, waive this mandatory hookup
requirement in the case of newly voluntarily annexed areas.
   (C)   Upon connection to city water service, all private wells on the
property shall be plugged in accord with the regulations of the state’s
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. D-20, passed 10-21-2014)
CHAPTER 6: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
Section
   
6-6-1   Purpose
   
6-6-2   Definitions
   
6-6-3   Cleanup required
   
6-6-4   Notifications
   
6-6-5   Precursor substances
§ 6-6-1 PURPOSE.
   In order to reduce the danger to public health, safety and welfare from the
spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish
responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills within the city limits.
(Ord. B-404, passed 4-19-1983)
§ 6-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   CLEANUP. The removal of the hazardous wastes or substances to a place where
the wastes will not cause any danger to persons or the environment, in
accordance with state rules therefor or the treatment of the material, as
defined herein, to eliminate the hazardous condition, including the restoration
of the area to a general good appearance without noticeable odor as far as
practicable.
   HAZARDOUS CONDITION. The same as set out in Iowa Code § 455B.381, subs. 4.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance as defined in Iowa Code § 455B.381, subs.
5.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Those wastes which are included by the definition in Iowa
Code § 455B.411, subs. 3, par. a.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. The party, whether the owner, agent, lessor or tenant,
in charge of the hazardous substance or hazardous wastes being stored,
processed or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or
substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the
spill would cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment.
   TREATMENT. A method, technique or process, including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the
substance non-hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable
for storage or to reduce it in volume. TREATMENT includes any activity or
processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of
hazardous substance to render it non-hazardous.
(Ord. B-404, passed 4-19-1983)
§ 6-6-3 CLEANUP REQUIRED.
   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous waste or substance, so
that the hazardous substance or waste or a constituent of the hazardous waste
or substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause
the condition to be remedied by a “cleanup”, as defined in §
6-6-2 of this chapter, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.
The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the
responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in
relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the city may by an
authorized officer give reasonable notice, based on the character of the
hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the
cleanup or that the city will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the
responsible person. If the bill for those services is not paid within 30 days,
the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the
cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the city to finance it, the
authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any state
or federal funds available for said cleanup.
(Ord. B-404, passed 4-19-1983)
§ 6-6-4 NOTIFICATIONS.
   The first city officer or employee who arrives at the scene of an incident
involving hazardous substances, if not a peace officer, shall notify the Police
Department, which shall notify the proper state office in the manner
established by the state.
(Ord. B-404, passed 4-19-1983)
§ 6-6-5 PRECURSOR SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   Precursor substances enumerated. The city declares any product
containing the following items to be controlled substance precursors:
      (1)   Anhydrous ammonia;
      (2)   Ephedrine;
      (3)   Ether;
      (4)   Muriatic acid - sulfuric;
      (5)   Pseudoephedrine;
      (6)   Red phosphorus; and
      (7)   Substances containing lithium.
   (B)   Information required. All persons and/or businesses selling,
transferring or otherwise passing for consideration any substances containing
the above described controlled substance precursors shall require the purchaser
or person receiving said substance to provide: name; address; telephone number;
and produce photo identification. Said information shall be kept in a log that
shall be accessible to any law enforcement officer upon request. All
information provided by the purchaser, transferor or person acquiring such
precursor substance shall be accurate and truthful information.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to individuals who purchase
two prepackaged units or less of the above named substances. If the person or
business transferring the substances chooses, however, to request and require
registration of the purchaser, said business or person shall be authorized to
do so pursuant to the terms of this section.
   (D)   Violation; penalty. Any person or business violating this section
shall be committing a municipal infraction punishable by up to a $500 fine per
occurrence or punishable by any other injunctive remedies that the court may
impose, pursuant to §§
1-4-1 and
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-411, passed 2-1-2005)
TITLE 7: POLICE
   Chapter
      
1.   Police Department
      
2.   Misdemeanors
      
3.   Sidewalks
      
4.   Weeds
      
5.   Dogs and Cats
      
6.   Animals; Fowl
      
7.   Dangerous Animals
      
8.   Railway Equipment
      
9.   Parades, Picket Lines and Demonstrations
      
10.   Police Reserve
      
11.   Juvenile Curfew
      
12.   Fireworks
      
13.   Special Events
CHAPTER 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
7-1-1   Organization
   
7-1-2   Appointments; promotions
   
7-1-3   Special police officers
   
7-1-4   Duties
   
7-1-5   Members’ duties
   
7-1-6   Report; investigation of accidents
   
7-1-7   Star of office; uniform
   
7-1-8   Conduct
§ 7-1-1 ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city which shall consist
of the Chief of Police and as many employees as necessary to perform the
responsibilities as hereinafter set out and as established in the annual
operating budget.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-2 APPOINTMENTS; PROMOTIONS.
   The Chief of the Police Department shall be appointed by the City Manager
from a list of eligible candidates supplied by the Civil Service Commission,
subject to the approval of the City Council. The Chief of Police shall serve at
the pleasure of the City Manager and may be removed by the City Manager at any
time thereafter, subject to the approval of the Council. All other appointments
or promotions to other positions in the Department shall be made as provided by
law by the Chief of Police with the approval of the City Manager. All such
appointments or promotions shall be promptly reported to the Clerk of the Civil
Service Commission and the City Council. All sworn officers of the Police
Department shall have civil service rights as provided by Iowa Code Chapter
400.
(Ord. C-080, passed 4-16-1991)
§ 7-1-3 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Mayor may, in case of emergency, appoint such special police officers as
may be deemed proper, reporting such appointments to the City Council at the
next regular meeting. Such special appointments shall continue in force until
such meeting of the Council, unless sooner terminated by the Mayor.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-4 DUTIES.
   The Chief of Police shall have the supervision and general direction of the
Police Department and shall be the ministerial officer of the city who shall
suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, arrest all
disorderly persons in the city and all persons committing offenses against the
provisions of this code and bring such persons before the proper court for
examination or trial. The Chief of Police shall pursue and arrest any person
fleeing from justice and shall diligently enforce all laws, ordinances and
regulations for the preservation of the public welfare and good order and shall
have the same powers and duties as constables in similar cases, and shall
cooperate with all other law enforcing agencies.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-5 MEMBERS’ DUTIES.
   Each member of the Police Department shall perform such duties as may be
ordered by the Chief of Police and shall have the same powers as the Chief of
Police to suppress riots, disturbances or breaches of peace. Each member shall
have the power and it shall be the officer’s duty to arrest any person in the
city found in the act of violating any law or ordinance, or aiding or abetting
any such violation, or any person that the officer has reasonable information
and belief has committed any public offense and who is likely to escape before
a complaint can be filed and warrant issued for an arrest.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-6 REPORT; INVESTIGATION OF ACCIDENTS.
   Each member of the Police Department shall report all accidents that may
happen to any person upon any streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds of
the city, whereby any person shall receive injury to person or property, to the
Chief of Police immediately after the happening of such accident, and the Chief
of Police shall immediately cause a full and complete investigation of the
circumstances attending such accident and report to the City Attorney. The
Chief of Police shall cause to be kept a book in which shall be entered the
names of every person arrested, the date of arrest, the disposition of the
case, the name of the person causing the arrest and a list of any valuable
articles found on the person of each person arrested.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-7 STAR OF OFFICE; UNIFORM.
   Each member of the Police Department except plain clothes officers shall,
while on duty, wear a star of office furnished by the city and such uniforms as
may be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Police Department.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 7-1-8 CONDUCT.
   No member of the Police Department shall willfully mistreat or use
unnecessary violence toward any person, compound any violation of law or
ordinance, or under any circumstances use abusive or profane language toward
any person.
(Ord. B-406, passed 5-17-1983)
CHAPTER 2: MISDEMEANORS
Section
General Provisions
   
7-2-1   Aiding and abetting
   
7-2-2   Applicability
   
7-2-3   Simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction
   
7-2-4   Sentence
Theft
    
7-2-5   Theft of property
   
7-2-6   Entertainment; evading admission fee
Assault
   
7-2-7   Assault
   
7-2-8   Harassment
Damage and Trespass to Property
   
7-2-9   Criminal mischief
   
7-2-10   Multiple acts
   
7-2-11   Criminal trespass
   
7-2-12   Vagrancy
Obstructing Justice
   
7-2-13   Interference with official acts
   
7-2-14   Refusing to assist officer
   
7-2-15   Harassment of public officers and employees
   
7-2-16   False reports to law enforcement authorities
   
7-2-17   Use of false process or records
   
7-2-18   Transacting business without a license
Public Disorder
   
7-2-19   Unlawful assembly
   
7-2-20   Failure to disperse
   
7-2-21   Disorderly conduct
Firearms
   
7-2-22   Sale to minors
   
7-2-23   Annual permit to purchase required
Health, Safety and Welfare
   
7-2-24   Distributing dangerous substances
   
7-2-25   Abandoned or unattended refrigerators
   
7-2-26   Obstructing emergency phone calls
   
7-2-27   Falsely claiming emergency
   
7-2-28   Eaves
   
7-2-29   Offensive substances; removing
   
7-2-30   Spitting in public places
   
7-2-31   Areaways; cellar doors; leaving open
   
7-2-32   Poison; setting out
   
7-2-33   Sidewalks; rights-of-ways; streets; encumbering
   
7-2-34   Obstructions; guarding
   
7-2-35   Paper; throwing in streets
   
7-2-36   Glass; tacks; throwing in streets
   
7-2-37   Danger signals; removing
   
7-2-38   Streets, allowing material to drop from vehicles
   
7-2-39   Barbed wire
   
7-2-40   Bells, gongs
   
7-2-41   Sirens; using
   
7-2-42   Interfering with hydrants
   
7-2-43   Firearms; discharging
   
7-2-44   Bows, slings, air guns
   
7-2-45   Antennas; radio wires
   
7-2-46   Cars in motion
   
7-2-47   Loitering upon public streets
   
7-2-48   Sidewalk; pavement; newly laid; walking or driving on
   
7-2-49   Traction engines prohibited
Animals
   
7-2-50   Noisy animals
   
7-2-51   Bees
Intoxicants
   
7-2-52   Intoxication
   
7-2-53   Intoxicating liquor
   
7-2-54   Bootlegger; buying from
   
7-2-55   Open containers in motor vehicles
Drug Paraphernalia
   
7-2-56   Definitions
   
7-2-57   Offenses and penalties
   
7-2-58   Paraphernalia forfeiture
   
7-2-59   Construction
Casino Gambling
   
7-2-60   Prohibited acts of persons under the age of 21
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-2-1 AIDING AND ABETTING.
   All persons concerned in the commission of a public offense, whether they
directly commit the act constituting the offense or aid and abet its
commission, shall be charged, tried and punished as principals. The guilt of a
person who aids and abets the commission of a crime must be determined upon the
facts which show the part he or she had in it, and does not depend upon the
degree of another person’s guilt.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 703.1
§ 7-2-2 APPLICABILITY.
   Each provision of this chapter shall apply to acts or conduct and only acts
or conduct within the city or its police jurisdiction.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-3 SIMPLE MISDEMEANOR OR MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of any of the sections of this chapter may be deemed either a
simple misdemeanor under Section
1-4-1 or as a municipal infraction under Section
1-4-2, at the option of the citing officer or Code enforcement official. The
option chosen shall be noted by the citing official on the citation.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978; Ord. D-104, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 7-2-4 SENTENCE.
   When a person is convicted of a simple misdemeanor and a specific penalty is
not provided for, the court shall determine the sentence, and shall fix the
period of confinement or the amount of fine, if such be the sentence, within
the following limits: for a simple misdemeanor, imprisonment not to exceed
thirty (30) days; or a fine of at least sixty five dollars ($65.00), but not to
exceed six hundred twenty five dollars ($625.00). In cases where citations for
violations of this chapter are written by the citing official as municipal
infractions rather than as simple misdemeanors, the penalties shall be as set
forth in a schedule approved by resolution of the City Council, which may be
modified from time to time by amendment.
(Ord. C-525, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. D-104, passed 9-19-2023)
THEFT
§ 7-2-5 THEFT OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a theft. A person commits
theft when the person does any of the following:
   (A)   Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in
the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof;
   (B)   Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property of
another which the person has in his or her possession or control, whether such
possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it in a
manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the owner’s
rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates such
property to his or her own use, when the owner of such property is known to him
or her. Failure by a bailee or lessee of personal property to return the
property within 72 hours after a time specified in a written agreement of lease
or bailment shall be evidence of misappropriation;
   (C)   Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession,
control or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of
property of another, by deception. Where compensation for goods and services is
ordinarily paid immediately upon the obtaining of such goods or the rendering
of such services, the refusal to pay or leaving the premises without payment or
offer to pay or without having obtained from the owner or operator the right to
pay subsequent to leaving the premises gives rise to an inference that the
goods or services were obtained by deception;
   (D)   Exercises control over stolen party, knowing such property to have
been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been
stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or
to deliver it to an appropriate public officer. The fact that the person is
found in possession of property which has been stolen from two or more persons
on separate occasions, or that the person is a dealer or other person familiar
with the value of such property and has acquired it for a consideration which
is far below its reasonable value, shall be evidence from which the court or
jury may infer that the person knew or believed that the property had been
stolen;
   (E)   Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone
else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party;
   (F)   (1)   Makes, utters, draws, delivers or gives any check, share draft,
draft or written order on any bank, credit union, person or corporation, and
obtains property or service in exchange therefor, if the person knows that such
check, share draft, draft or written order will not be paid when presented;
      (2)   Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because
of insufficient funds, and the maker has not paid the holder of the instrument
the amount due thereon within ten days of the maker’s receipt of notice from
the holder that payment has been refused by the drawee, the court or jury may
infer from such facts that the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid
on presentation. Notice of refusal of payment shall be by certified mail, or by
personal service in the manner prescribed for serving original notices; and
      (3)   Whenever the drawee of such instrument has refused payment because
the maker has no account with the drawee, the court or jury may infer from such
fact that the maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on presentation.
   (H)   Obtains gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtains
cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the
supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or
tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate
readings; and/or
   (H)   Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of the Iowa
Code.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 714.1
§ 7-2-6 ENTERTAINMENT; EVADING ADMISSION FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter any building or
enclosure where public entertainment or exhibition is being held, and at which
an admission fee is charged, without paying such fee or without leave from the
proper party to so enter.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
ASSAULT
§ 7-2-7 ASSAULT.
   (A)   A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person
does any of the following:
      (1)   Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is
intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act;
      (2)   Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate
physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act; and/or
      (3)   Intentionally points any firearm toward another, or displays in a
threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another.
   (B)   Provided that, where the person doing any of the above enumerated
acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or
other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably
foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an
unreasonable risk of serious injury or breach of the peace, the act shall not
be an assault.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 708.1
§ 7-2-8 HARASSMENT.
   (A)   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      (1)   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph or writing
without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person
annoyance or harm;
      (2)   Places a simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near a building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by another person;
      (3)   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without the other person’s knowledge or consent; and/or
      (4)   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the act did not occur.
   (B)   Any other act of harassment is harassment in the third degree.
Harassment in the third degree is a simple misdemeanor.
(Ord. C-175, passed 10-19-1993)
DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
§ 7-2-9 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   Any damage, defacing, alteration or destruction of tangible property is
criminal mischief when done intentionally by one who has no right to so act.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 716.1
§ 7-2-10 MULTIPLE ACTS.
   Whenever criminal mischief is committed upon more than one item of property
at approximately the same location or time period, so that all of these acts of
mischief can be attributed to a single scheme, plan or conspiracy, such acts
shall be considered as a single act of criminal mischief.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 716.2
§ 7-2-11 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   The term PROPERTY shall include any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly
or privately owned.
   (B)   The term TRESPASS shall mean one or more of the following acts:
      (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the
owner, lessee or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public
offense, to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass or place thereon or
therein anything animate or inanimate, or to hunt, fish or trap on or in the
property. This subsection does not prohibit the unarmed pursuit of game or fur-
bearing animals lawfully injured or killed which come to rest on or escape to
the property of another;
      (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property;
      (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of
unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others; and/or
      (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom,
altering, damaging, harassing or placing thereon or therein anything animate or
inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee or
person in lawful possession.
   (C)   The term TRESPASS shall not mean entering upon the property of another
for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or
inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed or blown onto the property of
another; provided, that the person retrieving the property takes the most
direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the
property as quickly as is possible and does not unduly interfere with the
lawful use of the property.
   (D)   The term TRESPASS does not mean the entering upon the right of way of
a public road or highway.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 716.7
§ 7-2-12 VAGRANCY.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. C-175, passed 10-19-1993
OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE
§ 7-2-13 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer in the performance of any act which is within the scope of
the officer’s lawful duty or authority, or knowingly resist or obstruct the
service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process
or order of any court.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-14 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   (A)   No person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace
officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting
to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall
refuse to render assistance as required.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to unreasonably and without lawful
cause refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-15 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Willfully preventing or attempting to prevent any public officer or employee
from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty shall be unlawful.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-16 FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES.
   Reporting or causing to be reported false information to a fire department
or a law enforcement authority, knowing that the information is false or
reporting the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the same did not
occur shall be unlawful.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-17 USE OF FALSE PROCESS OR RECORDS.
   Representing any document or paper to be any public record or any civil or
criminal process, when the person knows such representation to be false, shall
be unlawful.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-18 TRANSACTING BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person without a license to carry on or
transact any business or occupation for which a license is required by any law
of this city.
PUBLIC DISORDER
§ 7-2-19 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   An unlawful assembly is three or more persons assembled together, with them
or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense. A person who willingly joins in or remains a
part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe
that it is such, violates this section.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-20 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
Any person within hearing distance of such command, who refuses to obey,
violates this section.
§ 7-2-21 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person violates this section when the person does any of the following:
   (A)   Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons; provided that, participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport;
   (B)   Unlawfully disturbs the public quiet of any street, alley, public
square or any religious or public assembly or building, public or private or
any neighborhood, private family or person within the city by giving false
alarms of fire, by loud or unusual noise, by loud music, by ringing bells,
blowing horns or other instruments or by quarreling, assaulting, fighting or by
any other device or means whatever and which causes unreasonable distress to
others. It shall be a violation of this subsection for a person to do any of
the following, which list shall not be construed as the exclusive list of
actions that can constitute a violation of this division (B).
      (1)   No person shall use or operate a radio, television, stereo, MP3
player, speaker, compact disc player, sound-amplifying device or any other
similar form of electronic amplified sound equipment/device that produces or
reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than
the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily
listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet and
comfort of neighbors and passers-by, or is plainly audible at a distance of 100
feet from any person upon a public way. This division (B)(1) shall not apply to
loudspeakers/public address systems, emergency signaling devices, car alarms
and ice cream trucks. This division (B)(1) shall also not apply where the
offending noise is created by an individual, group or event sponsored,
sanctioned or otherwise approved by the city in advance, so long as such
individual, group or event does not make noise beyond what is reasonable under
the circumstances.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle as defined in Iowa Code § 321.1
in a manner, which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighbors and passerby, or is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet from
any person upon a public way, including, but not limited to, squealing tires or
revving engine.
      (3)   No person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a
public way or in close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly and loudly
audible upon the public way, any noise of any kind by crying, calling or
shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, hammer, drum, horn, other
musical instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device or other similar device
so as to destroy or disturb the peace of the neighborhood.
   (C)   Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another;
   (D)   Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs
any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly;
   (E)   By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of
fire, epidemic or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such
warning to be baseless;
   (F)   Without authority or justification, the person obstructs any street,
sidewalk, highway or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its
lawful use by others; and/or
   (G)   Urinate or defecate in or upon any street, alley, public place or in
any place open to public view; provided that, this section shall not apply to
restrooms or public facilities specifically designed and designated for such
purpose.
(Ord. D-068, passed 9-15-2020)
FIREARMS
§ 7-2-22 SALE TO MINORS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, a person who sells, loans,
gives or makes available a rifle or shotgun or ammunition for a rifle or
shotgun to a minor commits a simple misdemeanor.
   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (D) and (E) below, a person who sells,
loans, gives or makes available a pistol or revolver or ammunition for a pistol
or revolver to a person below the age of 21 commits a simple misdemeanor.
   (C)   A parent, guardian, spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or another
with the express consent of the minor’s parent or guardian or spouse who is 18
years of age or older may allow a minor to possess a rifle or shotgun or the
ammunition therefor which may be lawfully used.
   (D)   A person 18, 19 or 20 years of age may possess a firearm and the
ammunition therefor while on military duty or while a peace officer, security
guard or correctional officer, when such duty requires the possession of such a
weapon or while the person receives instruction in the proper use thereof from
an instructor who is 21 years of age or older.
   (E)   A parent or guardian or spouse who is 21 years of age or older, of a
person 14 years of age, but less than 21 may allow the person to possess a
pistol or revolver or the ammunition therefor for any lawful purpose while
under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian or spouse who is 21
years of age or older, or while the person receives instruction in the proper
use thereof from an instructor 21 years of age or older, with the consent of
such parent, guardian or spouse.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, caliber .22 rimfire ammunition shall
be deemed to be rifle ammunition.
(Ord. C-175, passed 10-19-1993)
§ 7-2-23 ANNUAL PERMIT TO PURCHASE REQUIRED.
   Any person who acquires ownership of a pistol or revolver without a valid
annual permit to acquire pistols or revolvers or any person who transfers
ownership of a pistol or revolver to a person who does not have in his or her
possession a valid annual permit to acquire pistols or revolvers is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 724.16
HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE
§ 7-2-24 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance, unless such person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-25 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator,
icebox or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, icebox or similar container to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-26 OBSTRUCTING EMERGENCY PHONE CALLS.
   An emergency call is any call to a fire department or police department for
aid, or a call for medical aid or ambulance service, when human life or
property is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. No person
shall fail to relinquish any telephone or telephone line which the person is
using when informed that such phone or line is needed for an emergency call.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-27 FALSELY CLAIMING EMERGENCY.
   No person shall secure the use of a telephone or telephone line by falsely
stating that such telephone or line is needed for an emergency call.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-28 EAVES.
   No person owning or occupying any building or structure shall cause or
permit the eaves, roof or pipes leading therefrom to spread water over the
sidewalks, and if done shall be liable for any damage resulting therefrom as
provided by law.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-29 OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES; REMOVING.
   No person shall haul along or through any of the streets, avenues or alleys
any refuse, garbage, offal, decayed meat or vegetables, night soil or any other
filthy substances, giving off offensive odors or stenches, except when the same
is contained in boxes or barrels or other receptacles as will in every case
prevent the dropping, scattering or depositing of any such filthy substance on
any street, avenue, alley or private property.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-30 SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall expectorate or spit upon the floor of any public building,
hallway, steps, cellar way, stairway, windows, public motor bus, depot platform
or deposit any gum, tobacco quid, cigar or cigarette stubs in, upon or against
any of the places above mentioned.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-31 AREAWAYS; CELLAR DOORS; LEAVING OPEN.
   No person shall leave or allow to be open any excavation or vault or leave
open any cellar door, grating, areaway or other covering for a cellar,
stairway, coal hole or other excavation in any sidewalk, alley or street
without properly and securely guarding the same with proper guards and lights.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-32 POISON; SETTING OUT.
   No person shall place or throw any poison, poisoned food or substances on
any street, avenue, alley, public or private grounds in such a way that it may
endanger the life of any person or animal; provided, however, that, nothing
herein shall prohibit the setting out of poison in a prudent manner upon one’s
own premises for the purpose of exterminating vermin or rodents.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-33 SIDEWALKS; RIGHTS-OF-WAY; STREETS; ENCUMBERING.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (C) and (E) below, no person
shall obstruct or encumber any sidewalk, right-of-way or street with boxes,
barrels, packages, signs, automobiles, trucks, vehicles, machinery, junk or any
other goods, ware or merchandise of any kind.
   (B)   The right-of-way, sidewalk or street may be obstructed or encumbered
temporarily when receiving or taking away items from adjoining premises, or
when building or improving such property if such obstructing or encumbering is
done after obtaining permission from the Public Works Director under such
conditions as may reasonably be imposed.   
   (C)   Except for home occupations, cottage businesses and businesses
adjacent to the right-of-way of Business Highway 61, 18th Street and 15th
Street, commercial businesses may place signs or displays of goods for sale on
the right-of-way; provided that, the following conditions are adhered to:
      (1)   Signs or displays of goods cannot be placed on the right-of-way
until 7:00 a.m. and must be removed from the right-of-way by 6:00 p.m. the same
day;
      (2)   Signs located on the sidewalk or right-of-way shall be no larger
than 18 inches by 36 inches;
      (3)   No more than three signs will be permitted to be placed on the
sidewalk or right-of-way by any one business;
      (4)   Signs and displays of goods can only be placed on the sidewalk or
right-of-way adjacent to the business which they advertise or from which they
are sold;
      (5)   Displays of goods on the sidewalk or right-of-way shall be no
larger than three feet wide by three feet high by three feet long;
      (6)   No more than two displays of goods will be permitted to be placed
on the sidewalk or right-of-way by any one business;
      (7)   Signs and displays of goods on the sidewalk or right-of-way may not
be located closer than three feet to the back of the curb, nor closer than five
feet to the side property line nor closer than ten feet from the side property
line adjacent to the street of a corner property;
      (8)   Signs and displays of goods, if placed on the sidewalk or right-of-
way, shall be located so that a straight pathway, 42 inches in width, extending
across the property, and in line with sidewalks on adjoining properties will be
kept clear and unencumbered.
   (D)   Except for home occupations, cottage businesses and business adjacent
of the rights-of-way of Business Highway 61, 18th Street and 15th Street,
commercial businesses may place goods for sale on the sidewalk and right-of-way
adjacent to their business in conjunction with a sidewalk sale provided that
the following conditions are adhered to:
      (1)   Displays of goods on the sidewalk or right-of-way cannot be placed
on the sidewalk or right-of-way until 8:00 a.m. each day and must be removed by
sunset each day;
      (2)   Displays of goods on the sidewalk or right-of-way may not be
located closer than ten feet from the side property line adjacent to the street
of a corner property;
      (3)   Displays of goods, if placed on the sidewalk or right-of-way, shall
be located so that a straight pathway, 36 inches in width, extending across the
property, and in line with sidewalks on adjoining properties will be kept clear
and unencumbered; and
      (4)   Sidewalk sales are limited to no longer than one week in duration
and to, nor more than, 12 in a calendar year.
   (E)   Except for commercial and industrial enterprises, the right-of-way may
be obstructed or encumbered by Christmas decorations under the following
restrictions.
      (1)   Christmas decorations may be placed upon the right-of-way
commencing at 4:00 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day and removed by 4:00 p.m. on New
Year’s Day.
      (2)   No individual item of Christmas decoration may exceed 40 inches in
height or 60 inches in width.
      (3)   Christmas decorations may not be placed closer than three feet to
an adjoining property line. Christmas decorations may not be placed closer than
two feet to the traveled portion of the roadway or street.
      (4)   Christmas decorations that constitute a traffic hazard or
obstruction to the vision or clear view of vehicular traffic may be prohibited
by the Chief of Police.
      (5)   Christmas decorations that require an electrical cord across the
sidewalk and/or right-of-way will be prohibited. Any person erecting Christmas
decorations in the parking, that require electrical power, will maintain a
liability policy in an amount as established by the City Council.
(Ord. C-181, passed 1-4-1994; Ord. C-218, passed 9-20-1994; Ord. C-231, passed
1-17-1995; Ord. C-302, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020; Ord. D-95,
passed 12-20-2022)
§ 7-2-34 OBSTRUCTIONS; GUARDING.
   No person shall, while constructing any sidewalk, residence, building or
other improvement, or while making repairs to same, or for any other purpose,
pile sand, dirt, brick, lumber or other material upon any street, avenue, alley
or public place, or within the street limits, without maintaining at and
thereon at proper places a lighted lamp, lighted lantern or flares between the
hours of sunset and sunrise, sufficiently bright to be easily observed at a
distance of 300 feet.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-35 PAPER; THROWING IN STREETS.
   No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any
paper, cards, advertisements or the like, into any street, alley or other
public place.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-36 GLASS; TACKS; THROWING IN STREETS.
   No person shall throw or place in any street, avenue, alley or public place
any broken glass, glass bottles or other articles of glass, tacks, nails or any
other sharp pointed materials, substance or things.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-37 DANGER SIGNALS; REMOVING.
   No unauthorized person shall remove, throw down, interfere with, destroy or
carry away from any street, alley or public place, any lamp, lantern, flare or
other light, barricade or danger signal erected and placed therein for the
purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places or giving warning
or notice thereof.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-38 STREETS, ALLOWING MATERIAL TO DROP FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall haul, carry or otherwise convey materials on any public
streets or alleys in such a manner as will allow any portion thereof to fall or
otherwise be deposited upon such street or alley.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-39 BARBED WIRE.
   No owner or occupant of any premises shall construct, maintain or permit to
remain thereon any fence or enclosure constructed wholly or in part of barbed
wire; except that, barbed wire may be permitted as an addition on the top of a
six-foot or higher cyclone type fence or to enclose an area of not less than
five acres if such area is used solely for restraining animals or for
agriculture purposes.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-40 BELLS, GONGS.
   No person, except churches or schools, shall ring bells, sound gongs, blow
or sound horns, or use a broadcasting or other similar device for the purpose
of advertising without first having secured permission of the Mayor.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-41 SIRENS; USING.
   No person, other than law enforcement officers, firefighters and operators
of emergency vehicles, shall use a siren or any other device producing a sound
similar to the sound produced by the sirens on the fire and police equipment of
the city.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-42 INTERFERING WITH HYDRANTS.
   Any person, unless properly authorized, other than an employee of the city
or a member of the Fire and Building Department in the performance of his or
her duty, who takes off or unscrews the cap from any water hydrant in the
streets or avenues, or interferes or meddles with such hydrant in any manner,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-43 FIREARMS; DISCHARGING.
   No person shall, except in proper defense of himself or herself or property,
or a peace officer in the performance of his or her duties, fire off or
discharge any cannon, gun, rifle or other firearm; provided, however, that,
nothing herein shall apply to military funerals or public observances; hunting
grounds possessing a valid special use permit as provided for in Title 10 of
this code are exempt under the limited circumstances therein provided.
(Ord. D-010, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 7-2-44 BOWS, SLINGS, AIR GUNS.
   No person shall discharge any projectile or missile from any bow, air gun,
sling or similar appliance, whereby any person is likely to or shall be hurt or
hit, any window broken or other property injured or destroyed.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-45 ANTENNAS; RADIO WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any antennas or radio wires to
any pole used in conveying electric current, or to any pole carrying telephone
or telegraph wires; or to string, place or continue any such antennas or radio
wires over or to string any such antennas or radio wires in or on or across any
street, avenue or alley. This section shall not apply to any attachments made
under franchise granted by the city and with permission to the affected utility
company.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-46 CARS IN MOTION.
   No person, other than an officer or employee connected with the railroad, or
passengers departing or arriving thereon, shall get on or off, or attempt to
get on or off, any railroad locomotive, car, train or bus while the same is in
motion.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-47 LOITERING UPON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to loiter upon the public highway,
or within five feet of the traveled portion of any roadway, or closer than the
sidewalk on any roadway where a sidewalk exists, nor shall any pedestrian
bodily impede, or impede by any other means, the flow of traffic on any public
roadway, nor shall any person obstruct visibility of traveling motorists. This
section shall not apply to city employees lawfully conducting traffic control
for a lawful reason. Persons lawfully soliciting upon public roadways shall
observe the requirements of this section.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978; Ord. D-97, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 7-2-48 SIDEWALK; PAVEMENT; NEWLY LAID; WALKING OR DRIVING ON.
   Any person who walks or drives a vehicle upon any newly laid pavement or
sidewalk before the same has been opened up to traffic, or who removes or
interferes with any barriers protecting the same, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-49 TRACTION ENGINES PROHIBITED.
   Any motor vehicle, truck, traction engine or other conveyance which by the
laws of the state is prohibited from operating upon any paved or graveled
highway, is hereby prohibited from operating upon any paved street, avenue or
alley within the city.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
ANIMALS
§ 7-2-50 NOISY ANIMALS.
   No person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals shall permit his
or her animal to annoy or disturb other persons in the area by excessive or
continuous barking, howling or emitting other loud noises.
(Ord. C-313, passed 6-1-1999)
§ 7-2-51 BEES.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor bees which disturb or annoy the
residents of the immediate neighborhood.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
INTOXICANTS
§ 7-2-52 INTOXICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or simulate
intoxication in a public place.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-53 INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   The manufacture, sale, possession or transportation of intoxicating liquor,
contrary to the laws of the United States or the State of Iowa, is hereby
declared to be an offense against the city.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-54 BOOTLEGGER; BUYING FROM.
   No person shall buy or receive intoxicating liquor from a bootlegger, or
from any person not duly authorized to sell under the laws of the United States
and the State of Iowa.
(Ord. B-256, passed 3-7-1978)
§ 7-2-55 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway
in the city shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an
open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage. PASSENGER AREA means the area designed to seat the driver and
passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily
accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions,
including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An
unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind
the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a
trunk. A person convicted of a violation of this division (A) is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
   (B)   Passengers.
      (1)   (a)   A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or
highway in the city shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor
vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
         (b)   PASSENGER AREA means the area of a motor vehicle designed to
seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any
area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their
seating positions, including the glove compartment.
         (c)   An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage
may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle.
         (d)   An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be
transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle does not have a trunk.
      (2)   This division (B) does not apply to a passenger being transported
in a motor vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the
transportation of persons for compensation, or a passenger being transported in
the living quarters of a motor home, mobile home, travel trailer or fifth wheel
travel trailer.
      (3)   A person convicted of a violation of this division (B) is guilty of
a simple misdemeanor.
(Ord. C-364, passed 9-3-2002)
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 7-2-56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor enumerated,
defined or established pursuant to the provisions of Schedules I, II, III, IV
and V of Iowa Code Chapter 124, Division II, as amended, or hereafter amended,
known as the Uniform Controlled Substance Act.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any equipment, product or material of any kind which is
primarily intended or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of the species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or
measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting controlled
substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing
twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or
intended for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended
for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used or intended for use in storing
or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended
for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
      (12)   Objects used, or primarily intended or designed for use, in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature spoons with level capacities of one-tenth cubic
centimeter or less;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs;
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers;
         (n)   Wired cigarette papers; or
         (o)   Cocaine freebase kits.
      (13)   In determining whether an object constitutes DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of Iowa Code Chapter 124;
         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of Iowa Code
Chapter124; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of Iowa Code Chapter 124 shall not prevent a finding
that the object is used or intended for use as DRUG PARAPHERNALIA;
         (g)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         (i)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale, including
its proximity to other objects commonly used or intended for use in planting,
propagating, cultivation, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Iowa
Code Chapter 124;
         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         (l)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. C-503, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 7-2-57 OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code Chapter
124, as amended or hereafter amended. Any person who violates this division (A)
is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code Chapter 124, as amended or
hereafter amended. Any person who violates this division (B) is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
   (C)   In addition to, or in the alternative to the provisions of divisions
(A) and (B) above, the city or an interested person may institute civil
proceedings to obtain injunctive and declaratory relief or such other orders of
the court as are reasonable and proper to abate practices, conditions or
circumstances found to be contrary to or prohibited by the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, drug
paraphernalia.
(Ord. C-503, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 7-2-58 PARAPHERNALIA FORFEITURE.
   (A)   All drug paraphernalia shall be subject to forfeiture and may be
seized and destroyed by the city. Such property shall not be subject to
replevin.
   (B)   Property subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by the
city when:
      (1)   The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search pursuant to a
search warrant;
      (2)   The property subject to seizure has been subject to prior judgment
in favor of the city in an injunction or forfeiture proceeding based upon this
chapter; and/or
      (3)   The city has probable cause to believe that the property was used
or is intended to be used in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. C-503, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 7-2-59 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter constitutes remedial legislation and is to be liberally
construed to give effect to its purpose.
(Ord. C-503, passed 6-7-2011)
CASINO GAMBLING
§ 7-2-60 PROHIBITED ACTS OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   (A)   Entering and/or attempting to enter a gambling facility. It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to enter or attempt to enter a
gambling facility licensed to operate gambling games pursuant to Iowa Code
Chapter 99F, unless said person is exempted from this section as set out in
division (B) below. As used in this section, the term GAMBLING FACILITY shall
include and be defined as those areas where gambling games are conducted in a
gambling facility licensed to operate gambling games pursuant to Iowa Code
Chapter 99F.
   (B)   Employment exemption. Persons 18 years of age or older are permitted
to enter a gambling facility if they are employed by the operator of the
facility and are on duty at the time that they are in the gambling facility.
(Ord. C-360, passed 4-16-2002)
CHAPTER 3: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
7-3-1   Duty of owners; snow, ice; accumulations
   
7-3-2   Violation
   
7-3-3   Assessment
§ 7-3-1 DUTY OF OWNERS; SNOW, ICE; ACCUMULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of owners, tenants and persons in charge of any lot,
block or parcel of real estate abutting upon any sidewalk in the city to keep
such sidewalk free and clear from all snow, ice and accumulations.
(Ord. A-67, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 7-3-2 VIOLATION.
   Any owner, tenant or person in charge or control of any such property, who
shall permit snow, ice, or accumulations to remain upon the adjoining and
abutting sidewalks for more than a reasonable time, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. A-67, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 7-3-3 ASSESSMENT.
   Should snow, ice or accumulation be permitted to remain upon any sidewalk
for more than a reasonable time, the City Engineer, with or without notice to
the owner, tenant or other person in charge of the property abutting upon said
sidewalk, shall cause said snow, ice or accumulations to be removed, and the
expenses of removal shall be specially assessed to the abutting property, in
accordance with §
1-6-9 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. A-67, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-292, passed 9-4-1979)
CHAPTER 4: WEEDS
Section
   
7-4-1   Definitions
   
7-4-2   Requirements
   
7-4-3   Violation
   
7-4-4   Work done by city
   
7-4-5   City not liable
   
7-4-6   Costs
   
7-4-7   Emergency measures
§ 7-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL AREA. An area devoted to the processes of planting, growing and
harvesting of crops.
   CHEMICAL CONTROL. The application of a herbicide (weed killer) in strict
accordance with the direction of the product and the regulations of Iowa Code
Chapter 206 (Pesticide Act) and all additions thereto that may be adopted.
   ENFORCEMENT PERIOD. May 15 through October 15 of each year.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Weeds defined by the Code of Iowa, and all additions to this
list so declared by the Secretary of Agriculture, State of Iowa.
   OFFICE. A designated individual responsible for weed control enforcement.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). The part of the street, avenue or highway in the city
lying between the lot line and the curb line; on unpaved streets, that part of
the street, avenue or highway lying between the lot lines and that portion of
the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
   SOIL EROSION CONTROL. A method of planting and cultivation, or lack of same,
designed to retain soil and to prevent soil movement caused by natural or
manmade causes.
   UNDEVELOPED LOT OR AREA. An unimproved lot or area.
   UNTENDED AREA. An area allowed to grow without care and supervision, where
weeds and grasses are more than the allowed height.
   WEEDS. Plants growing uncultivated and out of context with the surrounding
plant life with a height in excess of 12 inches when such plant has a seed head
forming or formed.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 7-4-2 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each owner and each person in possession or control of any developed
or underdeveloped lot shall be responsible to keep said lot along with the
parking adjacent to alleys, public ways or areas up to the centerline of the
ways free of any weeds and to keep grasses on said land mowed so that the grass
is 12 inches or less in height.
   (B)   Each owner and person in the possession or control of any land shall
not allow any plant growth to remain in such a manner as to render the streets,
alleys or public ways adjoining said land unsafe for public travel or in any
manner so as to impede pedestrians or vehicular traffic upon any public place
or way.
   (C)   (1)   Where creek banks are found within any developed or undeveloped
lot, the owner or person in possession or control shall be responsible to keep
the flat or accessible portion of the creek bank free of any weeds and grasses
more than 12 inches in height.
      (2)   If creek bank is within the right of way of a street or alley, the
adjacent property owner or person in possession is responsible to maintain that
portion of creek free of weeds.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
§ 7-4-3 VIOLATION.
   Any violation of this chapter is a municipal infraction (§ 1-1-7 of this
code of ordinances) after proper notice is given as described in Title 6,
Chapter 9, of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
§ 7-4-4 WORK DONE BY CITY.
   In the event any property owner fails to cut or destroy weeds, vines, brush
or other growth by May 15 of each year, and thereafter by the fifteenth day of
each succeeding month through October 15 of each year, then a person or person
(s) designated by the City Manager may destroy such weeds, noxious weeds, and
grasses in excess of 12 inches in height by cutting or use other methods as may
be necessary to make such destruction including contracting for cutting.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
§ 7-4-5 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   In the event the city destroys weeds, noxious weeds or grasses 12 inches or
in excess thereof in height, any loss or damage to crops growing on or near the
property, or other damage caused to the property shall be borne by the owners
or occupants of the property and not by the city or its employees or agents.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
§ 7-4-6 COSTS.
   Expenses to be assessed against the property for cutting or clearing weeds,
vines, brush or other growth by persons designated shall be measured in actual
cost, plus charges as described under “municipal infractions”.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
§ 7-4-7 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever in the
opinion of the weed enforcement official or Fire Marshal an emergency exists
creating a health, safety or fire hazard which may require weed control without
prior notice, control measures shall be taken and costs assessed against the
property for collection in the same manner as property tax. However, prior to
such assessment, the city shall give the property owner notice by certified
mail and the opportunity for hearing as described in Title 6, Chapter 9,
Sections 4, 5, and 7.
(Ord. B-513, passed 11-4-1987)
CHAPTER 5: DOGS AND CATS
Section
   
7-5-1   Annual license
   
7-5-2   Rabies vaccination required
   
7-5-3   License tag
   
7-5-4   Exception to license requirement
   
7-5-5   Running at large
   
7-5-6   Impounding; disposition of dogs and cats
   
7-5-7   Vicious dogs, cats or other animals
   
7-5-8   Dogs disturbing the peace
   
7-5-9   Number of pets allowed
   
7-5-10   Animals quarantined
   
7-5-11   Disposition of diseased or injured animals
   
7-5-12   Abuse to animals
   
7-5-13   Seizure of abused animals
   
7-5-14   Use of tranquilizer gun to control animals
   
7-5-15   “Owner” defined
   
7-5-16   Disposition of abused animals
   
7-5-17   Schedule of penalties
   
7-5-18   Solid waste removal
§ 7-5-1 ANNUAL LICENSE.
   The owner of all dogs or cats six months old or older shall annually obtain
a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
   (A)   Application by owner. The owner of a dog or cat, for which a license
is required, shall, before January 1 of each year, apply to the City Clerk for
a license for each dog or cat owned by him or her. Such application for license
may be made after January 1, and at any time, for a dog or cat which has come
into the possession or ownership of the applicant or which has reached the age
of six months after said date.
   (B)   Form of application. Subject application shall be in writing on blanks
provided the City Clerk and shall state the owner’s name, address and phone
number, type of animal (dog or cat), breed, sex, age, color, markings, name
and, if microchipped, the number of the microchip. Such application shall also
state the date of the most recent rabies vaccination and the date the dog or
cat shall be revaccinated.
   (C)   License fee. The annual license fee shall be set by the resolution of
the City Council. A written certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be
required to prove that a dog or cat is spayed or castrated.
   (D)   Condition for license. Before a license is issued for any dog or cat,
the owner must present evidence with the application required by divisions (A)
above that the dog or cat has a current, valid, and unexpired vaccination for
rabies. Such evidence shall be a certificate of vaccination signed by a
licensed veterinarian. The certificate shall:
      (1)   Show the date of the veterinarian’s signature;
      (2)   Identify the animal by name, species, breed, color, sex, birth date
and weight;
      (3)   Identify the owner by name and address; and
      (4)   Identify the vaccination by type, date given, expiration date and
serial number.
   (E)   Certificate of vaccination. The rabies vaccination required by
division (D) above shall be an injection of anti-rabies vaccine approved by the
state’s Department of Agriculture, and the frequency of revaccination necessary
for approved vaccination shall be as established by subject department. The
vaccine shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian and shall be given as
approved by the state’s Department of Agriculture. The veterinarian shall issue
a tag with a certificate of vaccination, and such tag shall at all times be
attached to the collar of a dog or cat.
   (F)   Penalty fee. All licenses for dogs and cats shall expire at 12:00
midnight on December 31 of each year. Any application for a renewal license
received after the expiration date shall be charged a late fee. Original
applications for licenses for dogs and cats becoming six months of age are not
subject to a late fee if the application is filed before the dog or cat is
older than six months of age. Original applications for licenses for dogs and
cats that have just come into the ownership of the applicant shall not be
assessed a late fee if the application is filed with the City Clerk within five
days of the date that the applicant acquired ownership. All penalty fees shall
be set by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. B-325, passed 8-19-1980; Ord. C-262, passed 6-4-1996; Ord. C-308, passed
1-5-1999; Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-5-2 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every dog and cat six months of age, or older, shall, at all times,
have a current, valid and unexpired rabies vaccination.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to own, or have in his or her
possession, a dog or cat six months of age, or older, which does not have a
current, valid and unexpired vaccination for rabies.
(Ord. C-308, passed 1-5-1999)
§ 7-5-3 LICENSE TAG.
   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of application, payment of license fee
and proof of rabies vaccination, deliver or mail to the applicant a license
which shall be in the form of a metal tag.
   (A)   Use of license tag. The license tag shall be attached by the owner of
the dog or cat to a substantial collar, and during the term of license shall be
at all times kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued. On the
expiration of the license, the owner shall remove the tag from the dog or cat.
   (B)   Duration of license. All licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of the year of issuance, and a license tag issued for one dog or
cat shall not be transferable to another dog or cat.
   (C)   Transfer or change of ownership. The application for and the receipt
of a license, as required in this chapter, shall include an implied consent by
the owner to permit an inspection of both real and personal property under his
or her control for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter,
including inspection for cruelty to animals.
(Ord. B-325, passed 8-19-1980; Ord. C-262, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 7-5-4 EXCEPTION TO LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   The foregoing requirements for licenses for dogs or cats shall not apply to
dogs or cats that are under the control of owners or handlers and which are in
transit or to be exhibited or belong to non-residents of the city if they are
in the state less than 30 days or which are assigned to a research institution
or like facility.
(Ord. B-325, passed 8-19-1980)
§ 7-5-5 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, owning or harboring any dog or cat, to
allow such dog or cat to run at large within the city. For the purpose of this
section, a dog shall be considered not to be at large whenever said dog is
under the control of a person by means of a leash, chain, cord or rope of not
more than ten feet in length and of sufficient strength to control said dog.
Every violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. B-325, passed 8-19-1980)
§ 7-5-6 IMPOUNDING; DISPOSITION OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Impoundment. Any dog or cat found in the city in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be impounded by the city’s Police Department or
such person as designated by the Chief of Police, and placed in the city-
designated animal impoundment facility or other suitable place as may be deemed
necessary. Unless the dog or cat is redeemed and all charges paid, said dog or
cat may be sold or destroyed in the most humane manner possible after the
expiration of 72 hours or 120 hours, if said dog or cat appears to be a well-
kept animal or has a license, collar or similar identification, from the time
the dog or cat is impounded; provided, however, that, any dog or cat which
appears to be suffering from rabies or other dangerous disease shall not be
released, but may be destroyed forthwith.
   (B)   Redemption fees. Only a person responsible for the impounding of dogs
or cats shall release any impounded dog or cat and then only upon the receipt
of evidence that the impoundment charges have been paid to the City Clerk. The
impoundment charges shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Notice. It shall be the duty of the city, or any such entity or person
as designated by the Chief of Police, within 24 hours after the dog or cat has
been impounded as provided for herein, to notify the owner thereof if known, of
such impounding or distraint and place where such dog or cat can be found, and
the amount of costs to be first paid in order to release same.
(Ord. B-384, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-5-7 VICIOUS DOGS, CATS OR OTHER ANIMALS.
   Any person who keeps, owns or harbors any dog or cat or other animal which
is known to be vicious or dangerous without keeping such animal securely
confined at all times, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. C-232, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 7-5-8 DOGS DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog, whether actually
dangerous or not, that habitually runs out and barks at passing pedestrians or
vehicles on the sidewalk or street or that threatens passing pedestrians, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog, whether actually
dangerous or not, that habitually barks or howls or that threatens passing
pedestrians, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. B-325, passed 8-19-1980; Ord. C-014, passed 10-18-1988)
§ 7-5-9 NUMBER OF PETS ALLOWED.
   (A)   No single household shall own and keep more than a total of four dogs
or cats, over six months of age, or any combination thereof.
   (B)   (1)   As a prerequisite for renewal, existing kennel licensees shall
be required to present evidence:
         (a)   Of having complied with the State of Iowa Animal Welfare Rules
and Regulations contained in Iowa Admin. Code Chapter 67; and
         (b)   Of compliance with all applicable zoning laws.
      (2)   Applications for renewal shall be filed with the City Clerk between
July 1 and August 1 each year. The annual renewal fee will be $100.
(Ord. C-261, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 7-5-10 ANIMALS QUARANTINED.
   (A)   Any animal which bites a person or is suspected of having rabies shall
be quarantined for a period of 14 days. Quarantine of the animal shall consist
of the animal being securely confined and kept from contact from any other
animal. The quarantine may be carried out at the animal owner’s residence if
the animal has a current rabies shot and a city license and proof of same can
be shown.
   (B)   All other suspect animals will be held at a veterinary hospital that
has a valid veterinarian on its staff. All costs involved in transporting and
holding of the animal will be at the owner’s expense. These costs will be paid
by the owner at the end of the quarantine period. If the owner fails to claim
the animal after the quarantine period, the animal will be destroyed and all
costs charged to the owner.
(Ord. B-436, passed 2-7-1984)
§ 7-5-11 DISPOSITION OF DISEASED OR INJURED ANIMALS.
   Notwithstanding any other part of this chapter to the contrary, the City
Veterinarian, Animal Control Officer or a police officer may euthanize any
diseased or injured animal found running at large, and/or impounded, so as to
prevent further suffering of the animal. However, if the animal has a license
tag attached to its collar, every reasonable effort will be made to notify its
owner prior to such euthanization.
(Ord. C-029, passed 6-20-1989)
§ 7-5-12 ABUSE TO ANIMALS.
   The following acts shall constitute abuse to animals and shall subject owner
or harborer to a simple misdemeanor charge for the commission thereof:
   (A)   Failure to provide the animal with food, water and shelter;
   (B)   Beating, tormenting, overloading or overworking an animal;
   (C)   Permitting or encouraging any combat between animals or between
animals and humans;
   (D)   Abandoning any animal;
   (E)   Exposing any known poisonous material with intent of allowing or
encouraging the material to be eaten by any domesticated animals;
   (F)   Failure to maintain sanitary conditions where animals are kept; and
   (G)   Harboring or owning any diseased or injured animals without procuring
veterinarian care for said animals.
(Ord. C-046, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 7-5-13 SEIZURE OF ABUSED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal which is suspected of being abused may be seized by the
city’s Police Department or other such person or entity as designated by the
Chief of Police, and impounded in a city-designated animal impoundment facility
or other suitable place as may be deemed necessary.
   (B)   Contemporaneously with such seizure, the owner of the animal shall be
charged with the appropriate violation of this chapter.
      (1)   If the owner is found or pleads guilty of violating this chapter,
the animal may be returned to the owner only upon full payment of the
confinement expense.
      (2)   If after the conclusion of the court case, the owner does not
redeem the animal, it will be held five days, and thereafter adopted or
destroyed as deemed appropriate by a police officer, a veterinarian or other
such person or entity as designated by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   A police officer or such other person or entity as designed by the
Chief of Police, is authorized to enter into any yard, pen or other holding
facility to inspect any animal suspected of being abused.
(Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-5-14 USE OF TRANQUILIZER GUN TO CONTROL ANIMALS.
   A violation of §
7-5-12 of this chapter is punishable as a simple misdemeanor, if a monetary
fine is levied, it shall be in an amount as set by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-5-15 “OWNER” DEFINED.
   The term OWNER, as used herein, means any person, partnership, corporation
or association owning, keeping or harboring an animal or animals.
(Ord. C-029, passed 6-20-1989)
§ 7-5-16 DISPOSITION OF ABUSED ANIMALS.
   If a person is found guilty of a violation of §
7-5-12 of this chapter, the disposition of the abused animal shall be
determined by the court.
(Ord. C-117, passed 5-5-1992)
§ 7-5-17 SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.
   A violation of §
7-5-12 of this chapter is punishable as a simple misdemeanor, if a monetary
fine is levied, it shall be in an amount at least as follows:
 
1st offense $60 minimum
2nd offense $120 minimum
3rd offense $180 minimum
 
(Ord. C-117, passed 5-5-1992; Ord. C-322, passed 4-4-2000)
§ 7-5-18 SOLID WASTE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any person who shall walk or ride an animal on public or private
property shall provide for the disposal of the solid waste material excreted by
that animal by immediate removal of the waste. A violation of this section
shall be a municipal infraction.
   (B)   Exemptions: the solid waste removal provision of this section shall
not apply to those animals associated with the Tri-State Rodeo event for two
days preceding, during and two days after the rodeo.
(Ord. C-282, passed 7-15-1997)
CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS; FOWL
Section
   
7-6-1   Animals prohibited
   
7-6-2   Potbellied pigs; license
   
7-6-3   Enclosures
   
7-6-4   Running at large
   
7-6-5   Tying of animals
   
7-6-6   Impounding
   
7-6-7   Sale
   
7-6-8   Title to purchaser
   
7-6-9   Cruelty to animals
   
7-6-10   Disposition of animals impounded for cruelty
   
7-6-11   Cats, chickens, other fowl; disturbing the peace
   
7-6-12   Animal traps
   
7-6-13   Violation
   
7-6-14   Ferrets
§ 7-6-1 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No domestic animal of the species of horse, mule, cattle, sheep, goat or
swine shall be kept stabled or maintained by any person within the corporate
limits of the city as defined by §
1-14-1 of this code of ordinances. Vietnamese potbellied pigs, Asian potbellied
pigs or potbellied pigs, not to exceed one in number per household, are not
proscribed by this chapter.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-2 POTBELLIED PIGS; LICENSE.
   Vietnamese potbellied pigs, Asian potbellied pigs and potbellied pigs will
be licensed annually and shall not exceed 60 pounds in body weight. Said
license will be $20 annually and shall be processed the same as dog and cat
licenses.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-3 ENCLOSURES.
   Any enclosure, pen, coop or hutch in which pets are maintained shall be kept
clean. All enclosures must be kept in good repair and free of garbage. They
shall be located at a minimum of 25 feet from any neighboring dwelling.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-4 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No domestic animal, or no domestic fowl of any kind shall be permitted or
allowed by any person to run at large at any place within the city.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-5 TYING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   No domestic animal or fowl shall be tied upon private grounds by any
person, so that it will reach or be upon private grounds of any person, so that
it will reach or be upon any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds within
the corporate limits of said city.
   (B)   No animal shall be tied to any street signs, mailboxes, telephone
poles, traffic signal poles, trees or structures in the park.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-6 IMPOUNDING.
   If any animal or fowl is found contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
it shall be the duty of such person or entity as designated by the Chief of
Police to impound such animal or fowl and charge an impound fee, which is
payable to the City Clerk, any person claiming such animal or fowl so impounded
shall pay the City Clerk for day or part of a day’s keep for each animal or
fowl. The impounding fee, plus all per diem keep fees, must be paid in full
before the animal or fowl is released from impoundment. Such fees shall be set
by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-6-7 SALE.
   Animals or fowl impounded may be sold by the city to the highest bidder for
cash after giving at least five days’ notice of such sale by one publication in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The money arising from a sale
shall pay all expenses of taking and keeping said animal or fowl and the
balance, including fees, shall be paid to the city.
(Ord. D-083, passed 1-4-2022)
§ 7-6-8 TITLE TO PURCHASER.
   The purchaser at such sale shall take thereby a title to the property
purchased absolute as against all persons.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-9 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   Any person who tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance,
mutilates, leaves any toxic substance where an animal can reach or shoots with
a BB gun, air rifle, arrow and the like or overdrives, overloads, drives when
overloaded, cruelly beats or cruelly kills any animal, or unnecessarily fails
to provide the same with proper food, drink, shelter or protection from the
weather, or drives or works the same or commits any other act or omission by
which unjustifiable pain, distress, suffering or death is caused to any animal,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Training collars that utilize prongs
or employ painful choking are prohibited.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-10 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS IMPOUNDED FOR CRUELTY.
   (A)   If a person is found guilty of a violation of §
7-6-9 of this chapter, the disposition of the animal shall be determined by the
court.
   (B)   The court may also prohibit the violator from owning, harboring or
keeping any animals within the city limits for a determined amount of time.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-11 CATS, CHICKENS, OTHER FOWL; DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   Any person owning, keeping or harboring within the city cats, chickens,
ducks or other fowl, which by their howling, crowing, quacking or other noises,
disturbs or annoys the residents of the immediate neighborhood, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-12 ANIMAL TRAPS.
   (A)   No animal traps will be utilized, used or set within the city limits
unless issued or approved by the Animal Warden.
   (B)   All animals trapped pursuant to this section shall be disposed of in a
manner approved by the Animal Warden.
   (C)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-13 VIOLATION.
   Any person violating the provisions of §§
7-6-1,
7-6-4 and
7-6-5 of this chapter shall be considered to be maintaining a nuisance and
shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances. It is specifically provided that the penalty
herein provided is not penal in character, but is imposed for the promotion of
the public health and welfare and shall not exclude any rights given to the
city by law to maintain actions in law or equity to restrain or abate any such
nuisance or for damages.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
§ 7-6-14 FERRETS.
   All ferrets age three months and older shall be vaccinated for rabies. The
owner of said animal shall obtain the vaccination. The vaccination must meet
the requirements set out in §
7-5-2(A) of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-214, passed 8-16-1994)
CHAPTER 7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Section
   
7-7-1   “Dangerous animal” defined
   
7-7-2   Keeping prohibited
   
7-7-3   Exceptions
   
7-7-4   Regulation of keeping dangerous animals
   
7-7-5   Escape; general prohibition and duty
   
7-7-6   Seizure, impoundment and disposition of dangerous animals
§ 7-7-1 “DANGEROUS ANIMAL” DEFINED.
   The term DANGEROUS ANIMAL shall mean one or more of the following:
   (A)   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals and
having known tendencies as a species to do so;
   (B)   Any animals declared to be dangerous by the City Council; and
   (C)   The following animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous animals
per se:
      (1)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynxes, cheetahs and
bobcats;
      (2)   Wolves, coyotes and foxes;
      (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels and skunks;
      (4)   Raccoons;
      (5)   Bears;
      (6)   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
      (7)   Alligators and crocodiles;
      (8)   Scorpions;
      (9)   Snakes that are venomous or constrictors;
      (10)   Gila monsters;
      (11)   Any crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics
to the animals specified above;
      (12)   Piranha and sharks; and
      (13)   Any dog which has proven itself to be dangerous or a vicious
animal.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987)
§ 7-7-2 KEEPING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter or harbor for any purpose within the city a
dangerous animal, except as provided in §§
7-7-3 and
7-7-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987)
§ 7-7-3 EXCEPTIONS.
   The prohibition contained in §
7-7-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in
the following circumstances:
   (A)   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide educational or medical
institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as live specimens for
the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction, research or study;
   (B)   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a
bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show licensed to perform in
the city;
   (C)   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment;
   (D)   The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization
with appropriate permit from the state’s Conservation Commission;
   (E)   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession
of the state’s Conservation Commission pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 109;
   (F)   Any guard or sentry dog properly contained as required by law; and
   (G)   Any animal specially trained to assist a disabled person.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 7-7-4 REGULATION OF KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation keeping, sheltering or harboring a
dangerous animal as permitted under §
7-7-3 of this chapter shall at all times keep such animal securely confined
within a cage or other enclosure approved by the Animal Control Officer.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring a dangerous animal as permitted under §
7-7-3 of this chapter shall permit or allow such animal to enter upon, be
placed in, or traverse any public property, park property, public right of way,
public waterway or lagoon, or public sewer system, or any business
establishment licensed by the city, or the property of another, except when
such animal is being transported while caged or confined.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the persons permitted to keep dangerous
animals under §
7-7-3 of this chapter to report to the Police Department when any dangerous
animal is found missing.
   (D)   No person shall keep or harbor a dangerous animal which has
demonstrated a propensity without provocation to attack or bite.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987)
§ 7-7-5 ESCAPE; GENERAL PROHIBITION AND DUTY.
   No person shall aid or cause any dangerous animal, whether owned by such
person or not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement
or impoundment be upon such person’s property or that of another by opening any
gate, door or window or making any opening of any fence, enclosure or structure
or by unleashing or releasing such animal.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987)
§ 7-7-6 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended
upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, public waterway,
lagoon or public sewer system, or the property of someone other than its owner,
thereby creating a hazard to person or property, such animal may, in the
discretion of the animal control officer or other designee, or a peace officer
be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The city shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at
large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its
destruction.
   (B)   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises in the city in violation
of this chapter or who keeps a dangerous animal which has demonstrated a
propensity to attack or bite without provocation, the Animal Control Officer
shall cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the
facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or
harboring a dangerous animal in the city, the Animal Control Officer shall
order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the
city, permanently place the animal with an organization or group allowed under
§
7-7-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the animal,
within three days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained
in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be given in
writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal,
and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to
remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where such dangerous animal
has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person in which
case the animal control officer shall cause the animal to be immediately seized
and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without
risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
   (C)   The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the animal control
officer may be appealed to the City Manager. In order to appeal such order,
written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within three days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous
animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver
of right to appeal the order.
   (D)   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing of
such appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
City Manager may affirm or reverse the order of the Animal Control Officer.
Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed
with the City Clerk within three days after the hearing, or any continued
session thereof.
   (E)   If the City Manager affirms the action of the Animal Control Officer,
the City Manager shall order in the written decision that the individual or
entity owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous animal, remove
such animal from the city, permanently place such animal with an organization
or group allowed under §
7-7-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy it. The decision
and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom
rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of
the animal control officer is not appealed or is not complied with within three
days of the order of the City Manager after appeal has been served, the animal
control officer or other designee or the Police Department is authorized to
seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded
for a period of seven days. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the
person against whom the decision and order of the animal control officer or
City Manager was issued has not petitioned the Lee County District Court for a
review of said order, the animal control officer shall cause the animal to be
disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or
group allowed under §
7-7-3 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a
humane manner. All impoundment fees shall be at the expense of the owner of the
dangerous animal which said fee shall be the actual cost of the feeding and
care of the animal.
(Ord. B-512, passed 9-15-1987)
CHAPTER 8: RAILWAY EQUIPMENT
Section
   
7-8-1   Speed
   
7-8-2   Signs at crossings
   
7-8-3   Signal to be given
   
7-8-4   Streets; sidewalks not to be obstructed
§ 7-8-1 SPEED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to run or move any locomotive, car, or
cars upon any railroad track within the City limits in excess of the following
speeds:
   (A)   Thirty mph on the A.T. & S.F. Railway Company tracks between the east
City limits and 20th Street;
   (B)   Thirty mph on the C.B. & Q. Railroad tracks between their mile post
No. 203 as presently located adjacent to the water works and 35th Street; and
   (C)   Fifteen mph on any railroad tracks located north of the Burlington
Northern mainline tracks.
(Ord. B-443, passed 5-15-1984; Ord. A-39, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 7-8-2 SIGNS AT CROSSINGS.
   It shall be the duty of all persons, operating railroads within the City to
erect and maintain signs with white grounds and black letters at each place
where such railway intersects any public street, containing the words “RAILROAD
CROSSING” and to erect and maintain audible signs which are clearly visible at
night at such crossings as the Council may by resolution direct, a copy of
which resolution to be served on the local representative of the firm or
corporation involved and the Iowa State Commerce Commission.
(Ord. A-39, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 7-8-3 SIGNAL TO BE GIVEN.
   At all railroad crossings not controlled by flashing lights and bells or
flashing light and gates, it shall be the duty of the conductor or engineer of
any locomotive, railway car or cars attached or unattached thereto, but a part
of a combination of cars or car under their control to cause an appropriate
warning signal to be given upon the approach of a train or part thereof to any
street or highway crossing. This will encompass the use of a flagman using red
flags during daylight hours and flares or comparable equipment at night to
insure that no danger is imposed to motor vehicles and pedestrians using the
crossings. Whenever any person or animal may be upon the railroad tracks, a
warning signal will be given and if necessary to avoid danger, to slacken the
speed of such train or stop said train.
(Ord. B-443, passed 5-15-1984)
§ 7-8-4 STREETS; SIDEWALKS NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to allow any locomotive, car or cars or
train or cars to obstruct any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk for a period of
longer than ten minutes.
(Ord. A-39, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 9: PARADES, PICKET LINES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
Section
   
7-9-1   Definitions
   
7-9-2   Permits and notifications
   
7-9-3   Parade permits, issuance
   
7-9-4   Revocation of permit
   
7-9-5   Certain activities prohibited
   
7-9-6   Interference with parade
   
7-9-7   Additional regulations applicable to picketing and demonstrations
   
7-9-8   Exceptions
§ 7-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. The portion of any street lying between its intersection with other
streets.
   DEMONSTRATIONS. Any person, or persons, acting alone or together for the
purpose of protesting any matter or of making known any position or promotion
of such person or persons, or of or on behalf of any organization or class of
persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention to such assembly.
   PARADE. Any person or persons participating in or operating any vehicle in
any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the
public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public grounds or places.
   PICKET LINE. Any person or persons acting alone or together for the purpose
of making known any position or promotion of such person or persons, or of or
on behalf of any organization or class of persons.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-2 PERMITS AND NOTIFICATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to organize, conduct or
participate in any parade in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place within the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the
city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person or persons
responsible for organizing a picket line or demonstration shall, no later than
the beginning of this activity, notify the Chief of Police of this activity in
order that appropriate measures may be taken to protect public order and
safety.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-3 PARADE PERMITS, ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to issue permits as
required in § 7-9-2 of this chapter and, in the issuance thereof, shall:
   (A)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than 72
hours in advance of such parade;
   (B)   Refuse to issue such permit for a parade to commence before 6:00 a.m.
or terminate after 6:00 p.m.;
   (C)   Require that the application for a permit specify whether or not
minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate; and
   (D)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit
shall designate the name and address of the person or persons in charge of the
activity. Such person shall be required to accompany the parade and shall carry
such permit with him or her at that time. Such permit shall not be valid in the
possession of any other person.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-4 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for any of the following
causes:
   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 7-9-5 of this chapter; and/or
   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-5 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line or demonstration, are
hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon or
article, including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks or flashlights,
which, by their use, might constitute a dangerous or deadly weapon;
   (B)   The taking or keeping of any vicious animal, whether leashed or
unleashed;
   (C)   The obstruction of public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public grounds or places, without specific permission from an authorized public
official; and
   (D)   The disruption, or interference, of the public’s use of the following
facilities for their intended purpose: public streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parks, or other public grounds or places.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-6 INTERFERENCE WITH PARADE.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade being
conducted under authority of a permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.
§ 7-9-7 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PICKETING AND DEMONSTRATIONS.
   Picket lines, picketing and demonstrations shall be subject to the following
additional regulations.
   (A)   Picketing and demonstrating may be conducted only on the sidewalks
reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a
street used primarily for vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Not more than ten pickets prompting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one
time.
   (C)   Pickets and demonstrators may carry written or printed placards or
signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the
objective for which the picketing or demonstrating is done; provided, the words
used are not derogatory or defamatory in nature.
   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and not march closer
together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets and demonstrators
shall not be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curb line and shall
be in continuous motion.
   (E)   If pickets or demonstrators promoting different objectives desire to
use the same sidewalk for picketing or demonstrating and such use would result
in the presence of more than ten pickets or demonstrators thereon, the Chief of
Police shall allot time to each group of pickets or demonstrators for the use
of such sidewalk on an equitable basis.
(Ord. C-475, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 7-9-8 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions; and/or
   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
CHAPTER 10: POLICE RESERVE
Section
   
7-10-1   Establishment and purpose
   
7-10-2   Definitions
   
7-10-3   Members of the Police Reserve
   
7-10-4   Disobedience a misdemeanor
   
7-10-5   Reserve member qualifications
   
7-10-6   Personal standards
   
7-10-7   Residence of Reserve police officers
   
7-10-8   Standards and training
   
7-10-9   Training
   
7-10-10   Status of Reserve officers
   
7-10-11   Carrying weapons
   
7-10-12   Supplementary capacity
   
7-10-13   Supervision of Reserve police officers
   
7-10-14   No reduction of regular force
   
7-10-15   Reserve police officer compensation
   
7-10-16   Removal, suspension and disciplinary actions
   
7-10-17   Worker’s compensation and hospitalization
   
7-10-18   Liability insurance
   
7-10-19   No participation in pension or retirement system
   
7-10-20   Civil defense
§ 7-10-1 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A police reserve unit is established to assist the city’s Police Department
in all its activities and functions including the preservation of the peace and
the enforcement of the laws of the municipality, the state and the United
States. The Reserve shall be known as the “Fort Madison Police Department
Reserve Officers Unit”.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   MINIMUM TRAINING COURSE. A curriculum of 150 hours of training and
instruction required for certification as a Reserve officer, excluding weapons
training.
   RESERVE OFFICERS UNIT. An organization of Reserve peace officers established
as provided by this chapter.
   RESERVE POLICE OFFICER. A volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the city’s
Police Department who serves with or without compensation, has regular police
powers while functioning as a representative of the city’s Police Department
and participates on a regular basis in law enforcement activities including
crime prevention and control, preservation of the peace and enforcement of the
law.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-3 MEMBERS OF THE POLICE RESERVE.
   Individuals over the age of 18 shall be appointed to serve on the Police
Reserve officers Unit by the Chief of Police, subject to approval of the City
Council. All Reserve police officers faithfully patrol their posts while on
duty. They shall be charged with the enforcement of all city ordinances and the
laws of the state and shall report any violations thereof to the proper
authorities. They shall have and perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of Reserve police officers to
preserve the public peace and enforce all laws, ordinances and orders of the
City Council, the execution of which devolves upon the Police Department of the
city. They shall devote their whole time and attention while on duty to the
business of the Department and shall at all times be subject to the rules and
regulations as prescribed by the Chief of Police or this chapter concerning
their conduct and duties.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-4 DISOBEDIENCE A MISDEMEANOR.
   It is a misdemeanor for any Reserve police member of this Department to
disobey any rule, regulation or ordinance or neglect any duty as prescribed by
this chapter.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-5 RESERVE MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS.
   All appointees to the Police Department Reserve Officers Unit shall have the
following qualifications:
   (A)   They must be citizens of the United States or have received
naturalization status;
   (B)   Must be at least 18 years of age;
   (C)   Must be able to secure and hold a weapons permit;
   (D)   Must have a valid Iowa driver’s or chauffeur’s license;
   (E)   Must never have been convicted of a felony;
   (F)   Must be in good health, sound body, steady habits and good moral
character;
   (G)   Must be a high school graduate with a diploma or equivalency
certificate;
   (H)   Must be able to read and write the English language;
   (I)   Must reside within ten miles of the corporate city limits in the
state; and
   (J)   Must be committed to providing quality and professional law
enforcement services through the community policing concept.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-6 PERSONAL STANDARDS.
   The members of the city’s Reserve Officers Unit shall be subject to the
minimum standards of physical, educational, mental and moral fitness as shall
be established by the Director of the state’s Law Enforcement Academy.
Additionally, the members of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officers Unit
shall be subject to the rules, regulations, policies and procedures as set
forth by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall make the bylaws, rules,
regulations, policies and procedures available to all members of the city’s
Police Department Reserve Officers Unit which shall govern the conduct of the
members. All members of the Reserve unit shall observe and obey the orders of
superior officers, Chief of Police and Mayor.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-7 RESIDENCE OF RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS.
   All Reserve police officers must reside within the state within 60 days of
their first day of service and must remain residents of the state throughout
the period of their service with the city’s Police Department. In addition, all
members shall reside within ten miles of the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-8 STANDARDS AND TRAINING.
   (A)   All members of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officers Unit
shall meet minimum standards as required by state law and as implemented by the
Chief of Police. In addition, if a Reserve peace officer is authorized to carry
weapons, the Reserve officer shall satisfactorily complete the same training
course in the use of weapons as required for basic training of regular police
officers by the state’s Law Enforcement Academy. The minimum training course
for Reserve officers must be satisfactorily completed within four years from
the date of appointment. Weapons training will be completed in the first year.
   (B)   A Reserve officer who does not carry a weapon shall not be required to
complete a weapons training course, but the officer shall comply with all other
training requirements.
   (C)   A person appointed to serve as a Reserve police officer, who has
received basic training as a peace officer and has been certified by the
state’s Law Enforcement Academy pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 80B and rules
adopted pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 80B, may be exempted from completing the
minimum training course at the discretion of the Chief of Police, if the
officer meets one of the following qualifications:
      (1)   The appointee is serving as a regular peace officer with a bona
fide law enforcement agency when the application for a Reserve police officer
appointment is made; and
      (2)   The appointee has served as a regular peace officer with a bona
fide law enforcement agency within three years of the date of application for
appointment as a Reserve officer.
   (D)   A Reserve officer will be eligible for certification as a Reserve
officer upon satisfactory completion of 150 hours of training required for
certification.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-9 TRAINING.
   Training for individuals appointed to Reserve police officers shall be
provided by the city’s Police Department or from others approved by the Chief
of Police. Upon satisfactory completion of training, the state’s Law
Enforcement Academy will certify the individual as a Reserve peace officer.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-10 STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS.
   Members of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officers Unit shall serve as
peace officers on the orders and the discretion of the Chief of Police of the
city. While in the actual performance of official duties, members of the city’s
Police Department Reserve Officers Unit shall be vested with the same rights,
privileges, obligations and duties as any other peace officer for the city.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-11 CARRYING WEAPONS.
   No member of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officers Unit shall carry
a weapon in the performance of his or her duties until such time as he or she
has completed firearms training and has been certified to allow issue of a
weapons permit by an academy-certified firearms instructor. After approval for
a weapons permit, a member of the Reserve unit may carry a weapon in the
performance of his or her official duties as authorized by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-12 SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY.
   Reserve police officers of the city’s Police Department shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular force and shall not assume full-time
duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements
for regular police officers.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-13 SUPERVISION OF RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS.
   Reserve police officers shall be subordinate to regular police officers,
shall not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of regular police
officers, and shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the Chief of Police unless
he or she shall designate alternate apparel for use when engaged in special
assignments. The Reserve officers shall not wear insignia of rank. The Chief of
Police shall designate a regular civil service police officer as the Reserve
force co-coordinating and supervising officer. That officer shall report
directly to the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-14 NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE.
   The city shall not reduce the authorized size of the regular force because
of the establishment or utilization of Reserve police officers.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-15 RESERVE POLICE OFFICER COMPENSATION.
   While performing official duties, each member of the city’s Police
Department Reserve Officers Unit shall be considered an employee of the city
and shall be paid a minimum of $1 per year. The City Council, at its
discretion, may provide additional monetary assistance for the purchase of
uniforms or equipment used by the Reserve police unit, but said compensation
shall not exceed the allowance provided in Iowa Code § 80D.11.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-16 REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may dismiss, suspend or invoke disciplinary
actions on any member of the Reserve police officers unit for violations of
Departmental rules, regulations, policies or procedures. He or she shall also
have the right to dismiss, suspend or invoke disciplinary action for any
violations of state code or city ordinances. Members can be dismissed without
cause for conduct unbecoming a police officer.
   (B)   Every member of the city’s Police Reserve Officers Unit shall be
subject to reprimand, suspension or dismissal according to the nature of the
offense for any of the causes hereinafter set out or for violations of any of
the other rules, regulations, policies, procedures or orders of the Chief of
Police not extant, or that may hereafter be issued:
      (1)   Intoxication, immoral conduct, cowardice or neglect of duty,
violation of any criminal law, disobedience of orders, insubordination or
disrespect towards his or her superiors, using coarse, profane or insolent
language while on duty, drinking any kind of intoxicating liquor or beer while
on duty or any other conduct unbecoming an officer or employee of the
Department;
      (2)   Gossiping about members of the Department or any officer of the
city or publicly criticizing them or communicating or giving out Departmental
information or neglecting to appear neat and clean at all times in public or
neglecting to wear the official badge of office or refusing to give the number
of his or her badge when requested by a responsible citizen or neglecting to
pay just indebtedness incurred while in service or failure to live with and
support his or her family without cause;
      (3)   Neglect to turn over all property taken from a prisoner or to
report any member of the Department guilty of any violation of rules,
ordinances or laws;
      (4)   Receiving or accepting any fee, reward, bribe or gift of any kind
from any person arrested, or from any friend in his or her behalf while in
custody or after his or her discharge, or from any person for services rendered
as a member of the police officers Reserve unit of the Department without the
consent and permission of the Chief of Police;
      (5)   Communicating any information which may aid a person to escape
arrest or to delay the apprehension of a criminal or secure the removal of
stolen or embezzled property or money;
      (6)   Each Reserve officer in his or her conduct and deportment must be
quiet, civil and orderly. In the performance of duty, he or she must maintain
decorum and attention, command of temper, patience and discretion, but at the
same time be required, if necessary, to act with firmness and sufficient energy
to perform his or her duties;
      (7)   Batons, PR-24s or ASPs must be used only in case of defense or of
forcible or violent resistance to officers in discharge of their duties. Each
member of the Reserves shall be certified on the baton, PR-24 or ASP in order
to carry one. Weapons shall be used only when the officer reasonably believes
that such force is necessary to protect his or her life or that of another,
that the person is known to have committed forcible felony, that the officer
made a reasonable attempt to make known his or her identity and intent to
arrest, that the officer’s identity and intent in his or her mind has been made
known to the person to be arrested, that all other methods of apprehension have
been exhausted, and the officer believes in his or her own mind that the
discharge of his or her weapon may be done without substantial risk of injury
to innocent persons;
      (8)   No Reserve officer shall directly or indirectly interest himself or
herself or interfere in any manner whatever in the employment of any attorney
to aid in the defense of persons arrested or accused; and
      (9)   No officer shall directly or indirectly be concerned in making any
compromise or arrangement between thieves or other criminals or other persons
who suffered by their acts, with a view to permit the criminal to escape the
penalties provided by law, and any Reserve officer who has any knowledge
thereof and fails to give information to his or her superior officer shall be
subject to immediate dismissal.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-17 WORKER’S COMPENSATION AND HOSPITALIZATION.
   As set forth in Iowa Code § 80D.12 and Iowa Code Chapter 85, the city shall
contract to insure the city against liability for worker’s compensation and
against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing and
medical attention for Reserve police officers of the city’s Police Department
who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-18 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The city shall contract to insure the city against liability of the city or
members of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officers Unit for injuries,
death, property damage or false arrests arising out of and while performing
official police duties in the same manner as a regular police officer.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-19 NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing or permitting any member
of the city’s Police Department Reserve Officer Unit to become eligible for
participation in a pension fund or retirement system created by the laws of the
state wherein a regular police officer for the city may become a member as
provided in Iowa Code.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 7-10-20 CIVIL DEFENSE.
   This chapter in no way applies to local civil defense forces organized and
in operation in the city who are governed by federal regulations and the United
States Office of Civil Defense.
(Ord. C-279, passed 6-17-1997)
CHAPTER 11: JUVENILE CURFEW
Section
   
7-11-1   Purpose
   
7-11-2   Definitions
   
7-11-3   Offenses
   
7-11-4   Defenses
   
7-11-5   Enforcement
   
7-11-6   Nocturnal hours curfew
   
7-11-7   Penalties
   
7-11-8   Review
§ 7-11-1 PURPOSE.
   The City Council determines that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city, and
specifically to achieve the following purposes:
   (A)   Reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults
responsible for minors;
   (B)   Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed
individually and in gangs after the curfew hour; and
   (C)   Protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity by
individuals and by gangs that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS (NOCTURNAL).
      (1)   For 17 and under when school is in session the next day: 11:00 p.m.
to 5:00 a.m.; and
      (2)   For 17 and under when school is not in session the next day: 12:30
a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; and
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age, except those persons under 18 years
of age that have attained majority under Iowa Code § 599.1 or by order of the
courts.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation,
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT.
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person;
and
      (2)   A person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent
or guardian in writing to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN.
      (1)   Linger or stay; and
      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-3 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-4 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
7-11-3A of this chapter that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Engaged in political activity, or going to or returning home from
political activity without any detour or stop;
      (6)   Involved in an emergency;
      (7)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (8)   Attending a private activity which is conducted under the direct
supervision and control of a responsible group of adults with the full
knowledge and consent of the minor’s parents for which the supervising persons
take responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning from said activity
without any detour or stop;
      (9)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (10)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; and/or
      (11)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with Iowa Code § 599.1 or by order of the courts.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
7-11-3(B) of this chapter that the parent or guardian promptly notified the
Police Department that a minor under their guardianship was, without their
permission, in violation of a curfew.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in §
7-11-4 of this chapter is present.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-6 NOCTURNAL HOURS CURFEW.
   Any child found in violation of §
7-11-3(A) of this chapter shall be issued a citation and instructed to return
home immediately. The child’s parent or guardian shall receive a copy of the
citation and a letter notifying them of the violation by mail. A child found
violating §
7-11-3(A) of this chapter a subsequent time during that night shall be issued
another citation and returned to their parent or guardian. If a child is found
in violation of §
7-11-3(A) of this chapter a subsequent time, the parent or guardian shall be
issued a citation as provided under §
7-11-3(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 7-11-7 PENALTIES.
   (A)   For the minor’s first and subsequent violations of §
7-11-3(A) of this chapter, the minor shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
Upon conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 or
to perform community service as ordered by the court.
   (B)   For the parent/guardian’s first and subsequent violations of § 7-11-3
(B) of this chapter, the parent/guardian shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $200 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997; Ord. C-322, passed 4-4-2000)
§ 7-11-8 REVIEW.
   This chapter shall be reviewed by staff on the first anniversary of
enactment. Staff shall determine if an effect has been made on juvenile crime.
Council shall review findings and review this chapter. If no further action is
taken at the one-year anniversary, this chapter shall remain in force.
(Ord. C-288, passed 9-16-1997)
CHAPTER 12: FIREWORKS
Section
   
7-12-1   Definitions
   
7-12-2   Use of consumer fireworks
   
7-12-3   Location of use
   
7-12-4   Public display
   
7-12-5   Violation and enforcement
   
7-12-6   Fireworks sales regulations
   
7-12-7   Exceptions
§ 7-12-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. (Iowa
Code, § 727.2)
   CLASSES OF FIREWORKS.
      (1)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. 
         (a)   First-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer
fireworks First-class consumer fireworks include:
            (1)   Firecrackers;
            (2)   Roman candles;
            (3)   Bottle rockets;
            (4)   Aerial shells; and
            (5)   Fireworks that are intended to produce visible or audible
effects through combustion and meet U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
(CPSC) requirements.
         (b)   Second-class consumer fireworks" include:
            (1)   Sparklers;
            (2)   Fountains;
            (3)   Smoke devices
         (a)   Novelties with limited movement or sound
      (3)   Display fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation
and that include but are not limited to salutes containing more than two grains
(130 mg) of explosive materials, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of
chemical composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits of
consumer fireworks. Said fireworks are not for public sale and require a
federal ATF license and a state permit. Said fireworks are for use only by a
licensed pyrotechnician and typically used in public shows sponsored by the
local governmental authority or licensed private company.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those items defined in Iowa Code, § 727.2.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Those items requiring a professional license and permit
from the State Fire Marshal.
   FIRE BAN. A lawful restriction on combustion or explosions imposed by the
Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or designee.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fort Madison Fire Department or, for purposes
of this chapter, the Chief's designee.
   NOVELTIES. Items such as handheld sparklers, snakes, smoke bombs and party
snappers that are not classified as first class or second-class fireworks.
(Ord. D-50, passed 12-5-2018; amd. Ord. D-122, passed 6-17-2025)
7-12-2 USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be a municipal infraction to discharge consumer fireworks in
the City limits, except on July 3, July 4, and December 31.
   (B)   It shall be a municipal infraction for any person to discharge any
fireworks while intoxicated under the influence of drugs; to discharge
fireworks in any conditions altered from the fireworks' original design or
packaging; or in any location subject to a lawfully declared fire ban. (Ord. D-
122, passed 6-17-2025)
7-12-3 LOCATION OF USE.
   Fireworks may only be used on private property with the owner's consent.
Fireworks shall not be discharged on public property, including right-of-way
and all City-owned properties, except by licensed individuals with the City's
consent. (Ord. D-122, passed 6-17-2025)
§ 7-12-4 PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   (A)   Upon written application, the city may grant a permit for the display
of fireworks by a city agency, fair association, or other organizations, or
groups, as may be approved by the City and when such fireworks display will be
handled by a licensed and competent operator. No public display permit shall be
issued unless the licensed operator or sponsoring organization provides
evidence of insurance coverage meeting the requirements set forth by the State
of Iowa.
      (1)   Public displays shall require a city-issued permit, which may be
issued to City agencies, fair associations, amusement parks, or other approved
organizations using licensed and competent operators.
      (2)   Application must include:
         (a)   Proof of liability insurance in compliance with State of Iowa
requirements;
         (b)   Site and safety plan; and
         (c)   Operator credentials;
   (B)   No Application shall be approved until approved for safety by the Fire
Chief or designee for compliance with all requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. D-50, passed 12-5-2018; amd. Ord. D-122, passed 6-17-2025)
§ 7-12-5 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode any first- or second-
class fireworks within the corporate limits of the city, outside of the
permitted discharge times established in Section
7-12-2(1), unless granted a permit approved by the Fire Chief for a Public
Display.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or the Chief of the Fire and Building Department,
or their designees, are charged with the duty of enforcing these provisions.
   (B)   The penalty for violation of this chapter may include confiscation
and/or destruction of any prohibited fireworks as well as all permitted relief
and fines for violation under Section
1-4-2 and Iowa Code Chapter 364.22.
   (C)   Violations may also be enforced as simple misdemeanors and may be
reported to the State Fire Marshal.
(Ord. D-50, passed 12-5-2018; amd. Ord. D-122, passed 6-17-2025)
§ 7-12-6 FIREWORKS SALES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person or entity displaying or selling fireworks shall:
      (1)   Be licensed by the State Fire Marshal
      (2)   Be registered with the City Clerk
      (3)   Comply with applicable zoning, building, and fire codes. The sale
or display of fireworks shall only occur within B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-
2 Zoning Districts.
      (4)   Possess the required consumer fireworks sellers license as required
under Iowa Code, Ch. 100, including maintaining insurance in accordance with
Iowa law.
   (B)   Permanent Structures. Fireworks may be sold from permanent structures
year-round, provided all state and local requirements are met.
   (C)   Temporary Structures. Fireworks may be sold from temporary structures
only from June 13 through July 8.
   (D)   Inspections. Any property, building, or premises, whether permanent or
temporary, intended for fireworks sales shall have an initial fire inspection
completed by the Fire Chief or designee prior to sales. An annual inspection
shall occur for each selling period and shall meet the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association 1124 (2006 edition and amendments thereto)
and the current Fire Code adopted by the city.
   (E)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for inspections
related to fireworks sales.
   (F)   Posting Requirements. All locations selling fireworks within the City
of Fort Madison shall prominently post a notice which shall include:
      (1)   A summary of the city code regulations regarding the use of
fireworks; and
      (2)   The specific dates and times when fireworks discharge is allowed
within the city limits.
(Ord. D-50, passed 12-5-2018; amd. Ord. D-122, passed 6-17-2025)
7-12-7 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Sale of legal items shipped out of state.
   (B)   Blank cartridges for theater, athletics, signals, or military.
   (C)   Substances for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
   (D)   Sales and use permitted under Iowa Code § 727.2. (Ord. D-122, passed
6-17-2025)
CHAPTER 13: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
7-13-1   Applicability
   
7-13-2   Purpose and intent
   
7-13-3   Definitions
   
7-13-4   Application and permit required
   
7-13-5   Application requirements
   
7-13-6   Permit review process
   
7-13-7   Fees required
   
7-13-8   Insurance required
   
7-13-9   Appeal procedure
   
7-13-10   Permit revocation
   
7-13-11   Violations
   
7-13-12   Penalties
   
7-13-13   Exemptions
§ 7-13-1 APPLICABILITY.
   The following regulations shall apply to special event permit applications
submitted to the City.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   These regulations prescribe the condition through which special events of
limited duration may be permitted to occur within the city that involve a
request from an individual or organization, to use public property or right of
way to conduct or promotion of an event, thereby creating an anticipated
significant impact to City services, public property, right of way, or the
closure of a public street, and it is advisable or necessary to include City
staff in the preparation, planning, coordination, and approval of the requested
special event to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public
and of the event participants or attendees.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-3 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   CITY: The City of Fort Madison in the county of Lee, in the state of Iowa.
   PERSON: Any natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization,
its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of them.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: The land owned and maintained by the City, to include:
streets, alleys, right of ways, sidewalks, and parks.
   SPECIAL EVENT: Any organized and advertised gathering for the purpose of
entertainment, recreation, competition, public rally, parade or public march,
or festival purposes that will impact City services or public right of way.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-4 APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A special event permit shall be required for all events that relate to the
stated purpose and intent of this chapter. A special event permit must be
timely applied for and issued by the City Council prior to the commencement of
the event. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage,
sponsor, or participate in any event described herein without having first
applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. Receiving
approval of a special event permit from the City shall not preclude, supersede,
circumvent, or waive the applicant’s responsibility to obtain any additional
permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state and federal
regulations. The City reserves the right to impose special guidelines and
restrictions for any special event based upon the nature of the proposed event,
the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance of the
event. The City also reserves the right to temporarily suspend other City code
requirements for any special event based upon the particular event details.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-5 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   For any special event defined or described within this chapter, the
following information, at a minimum, shall be submitted with the application to
the City:
   (A)   A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to
the City on a form provided by the City. The application must set forth the
following information regarding the proposed special event:
      (1)   The name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of the
applicant(s) and sponsor(s) of the event and contact person(s).
      (2)   If the proposed special event would be conducted for, on behalf of,
or by an organization, the name, address and phone number of the headquarters
of the organization and the authorized responsible heads of such organization.
      (3)   The date(s) and duration of time for the proposed special event,
specifically identifying the date(s) and duration of time for which the
requested use of the public property or right of way would occur.
      (4)   An accurate description of that portion of the public property or
right of way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The map should
depict the requested location of any activities, structures, tents, barricades,
parking, traffic control devices and personnel, signage, trash collection, and
portable restroom facilities necessary for the proposed event.
      (5)   The estimated number of participants or attendees.
      (6)   The proposed type of special event, described in detail, including
a description of the planned activities and the proposed location.
      (7)   Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits
for any of the following: the sale of alcoholic beverages, amusements rides,
amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable building
permits. Copies of any such permits, including the name of the specific person
or entity who will hold the license, shall be provided by the applicant with
the application.
   (B)   After the initial filing of the application, City staff may request
additional information from the applicant to determine whether a special event
permit should be issued, including, but not limited to, a crowd control plan.
   (C)   All other applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the special event unless the
City decides to waive the deadline. The City reserves the right to reject any
applications that have not been timely submitted to the City.
   (D)   Before the City decides to approve the special event permit, the City
may require the applicant to provide notice of the proposed event to all
affected neighboring property owners and known tenants. The City may also
require the applicant to petition, or canvass affected neighboring property
owners and known tenants to ascertain whether there is sufficient support for
the proposed event. Alternatively, the City may elect to provide the
notification to the affected neighboring property owners and known tenants
itself and the applicant shall then be responsible for reimbursing the City for
the incurred costs.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-6 PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   A team of City staff that consists of representatives from the
following departments: administration, fire, public works, and police shall
review special event applications, identify potential issues and concerns, and
work with the applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve those
identified issues and concerns. Additional City staff from other departments
may assist with the review depending upon the details of the proposed event.
   (B)   City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in
reviewing the special event permit application. City staff reserves the right
to consider additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
      (1)   Whether the applicant provided all the necessary information.
      (2)   Whether the applicant obtained necessary permits or provided
information necessary to apply for required permits involving the sale of
alcoholic beverages, amusement rides, amplified sound, fireworks, temporary
signs, and any applicable building permits.
      (3)   Whether the applicant previously held events of similar size and
scope within the city, and if they have held previous events were they
conducted in a manner that the City would be willing to allow the event to be
held again. Have all fees associated with the previous event been paid in full
and in a timely manner.
      (4)   Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would
substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the vicinity of the
event’s location.
      (5)   Whether the event would unduly interfere with proper access for
fire and police protection and other emergency services.
      (6)   Whether the estimated number of participants, attendees or the size
or type of event or equipment is sufficiently large enough to require the
closing of a public street, or if there is an alternative available to closing
a public street.
      (7)   Whether another special event permit has already been granted for
substantially the same date, time, or location within the city.
      (8)   Whether the size or time of the event would require so great a
diversion of the city police department as to prevent normal police protection
throughout the city or at another previously scheduled event in the city.
      (9)   Whether City personnel are necessary to regulate and monitor the
event can reasonably be made available.
      (10)   Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons
or property and if there is adequate planning for crowd control of participants
or attendees.
      (11)   Whether adequate sanitation or other health facilities will be
available at the event.
      (12)   Whether there is a sufficient number of parking places within a
reasonable distance to accommodate the number of vehicles expected.
      (13)   Whether the time, size or nature of the event is compatible with
the normal activity at that location.
      (14)   Whether the proposed use or event will likely have a significant
adverse environmental impact.
      (15)   Whether negative police reports or other reports of past
activities held or sponsored by the applicant or in the same location merit a
recommendation of denial.
      (16)   If required, whether the applicant has obtained the necessary
approval of neighboring residents or businesses.
      (17)   Whether sufficient negative impact from the event on neighboring
properties or individuals warrant denial of the application.
      (18)   Whether the applicant, including its employees, agents and
volunteers have violated City code provisions or City policies at past events.
      (19)   Whether the applicant has timely paid the City all fees due and
owed under any City code provision or City policy.
   (D)   The approval or denial of a completed application by the City review
team shall be made to the applicant as soon as reasonably practicable.
   (E)   Where the applicant seeks or where the City staff recommends lane
closure(s) of arterial or collector streets within the City, as those streets
have been classified by the DOT, such permit may be issued only by the City
council. City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of all other special
event permits unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-7 FEES AND OTHER COSTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant for a special event permit shall pay the applicable
nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the
City council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the
time of submittal of the application.
   (B)   If the permitted event will require the use of any City equipment,
facilities, or services, the
applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the use of the City equipment,
facilities, or services in advance of the event, if the City requests advanced
payment be made, or the City may direct the applicant to pay the actual costs
for the use of the City equipment, facilities, or services following the event
within thirty (30) calendar days of billing by the City.
   (C)   Where the applicant requests or City staff recommends City
sponsorship/co-sponsorship of an event which would include full or partial
waiver of application and related fees, the proposed fee waiver must receive
City Council approval.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-8 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining liability insurance
coverage and Dram Shop insurance (if alcohol is to be served by the event
organizer) for the special event, in amounts as determined by the City. The
applicant shall also provide the City with a certificate of insurance, naming
the City as an additional insured, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled
event.
   (B)   The applicant must also sign a hold harmless and indemnification
agreement with the City in which the applicant holds the City harmless and
indemnifies the City of any negligent, reckless, or intentional act
attributable to the applicant or the applicant’s officials, employees, agents,
or volunteers.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-9 DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall approve or deny the permit application in its sole
discretion based upon the facts and comments presented to it on the overall
effect the special event would have on the City and its citizens.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-9 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The decision to approve or deny a special event permit or deny City
sponsorship of an event may be appealed to the City Council by making a written
request to the City Clerk. The appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next
available council meeting.
   (B)   After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the
City Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision to issue the permit.
The decision of the City Council shall be the final determination as to whether
the City approves the special event permit.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-10 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A special event permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the
event terminated by the chief of police, fire chief, city manager, or their
respective designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by
activities generated during the event, or weather conditions at the time of the
event, the participants or attendees engage in violent or destructive behavior
causing injury to person or damage to property, or if there is a major
violation of the conditions of the permit such that the standards of issuance
have not been satisfied.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-11 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and
specifically shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
   (A)   No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for
which a special event permit is required without possessing a valid special
event permit.
   (B)   No person shall violate any condition placed upon a special event
permit.
   (C)   No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written
application for a special event permit.
   (D)   No alcohol shall be served by any special event organizer during any
special event, except under a lawful alcohol license and pursuant to Iowa law
regarding service of alcohol.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-12 PENALTIES:
   Any person who violates or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the initial offense and seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. Any person who
violates a provision of this chapter after having previously been found guilty
of violating the same provision of this chapter at the same location, shall be
guilty of a repeat offense. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
section does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief, including,
but not limited to, any order for abatement or injunctive relief from the court
in the same action or as a separate action.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
§ 7-13-13 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a special
event permit for the following:
      (1)   Funeral processions.
      (2)   Events conducted entirely on the property of a church, educational
institution, or campus, unless foreseeable circumstances will likely require
City services (e.g., police, fire, public works), disrupt neighboring streets
with crowds or traffic congestion. However, this type of event may require a
temporary site plan that would need to be approved by the City.
      (3)   Events conducted on City owned property subject to a contract,
lease, or agreement. However, this type of event may require a temporary site
plan that would need to be approved by the city.
      (4)   Events conducted entirely on property containing an occupied
private residence with little potential to impact City services or right of
way.
(Ord. D-102, passed 8-1-2023)
 
TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
   Chapter
      
1.   Public Improvements
      
2.   Use of Public Sewers
      
3.   Waterfront
      
4.   Sidewalks
      
5.   Public Library
      
6.   Numbering Buildings
      
7.   Sewage Works
      
8.   Utility Wires; Poles
      
9.   Trees
      
10.   Cemeteries
      
11.   Public Sewer Connections and Sewage Disposal Systems
      
12.   Storm Water Utility System
      
13.   Parks and Parks Facilities
CHAPTER 1: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
8-1-1   Amortization period
§ 8-1-1 AMORTIZATION PERIOD.
   (A)   The period of amortization for public improvement projects for
opening, establishing or grading streets, the construction of portland cement
concrete or asphalt concrete street improvements, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water mains, pedestrian underpasses and overpasses, sewage pumping
stations, disposal or treatment plants, drainage conduits, channels and levees,
street lighting, parking facilities and appurtenant facilities, is hereby
established as ten years, to be calculated commencing from the date of adoption
by the Council of the city of the resolution accepting the completed public
improvements.
   (B)   The period of amortization, to be computed in the same manner as
established above, is hereby established as seven years for sidewalks and three
years for the repair of street grading, street surfacing with oil, gravel, oil
and gravel or chloride, or for the removal of diseased or dead trees.
   (C)   In any instance where the Council determines that the useful life of a
public improvement should be for a different time period than hereinabove
established, the Council may so provide for such period by amendment hereto,
prescribing the appropriate amortization period as may be applicable to these
specific public improvements.
(Ord. B-282, passed 2-6-1979)
CHAPTER 2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Section
   
8-2-1   Definitions
   
8-2-2   General sewer use requirements
   
8-2-3   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
8-2-4   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process
   
8-2-5   Reporting requirements
   
8-2-6   Compliance monitoring
   
8-2-7   Confidential information
   
8-2-8   Publication of industrial users in significant non-compliance
   
8-2-9   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
8-2-10   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
8-2-11   Supplemental enforcement action
   
8-2-12   Pretreatment charges and fees
§ 8-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ABBREVIATIONS.
      (1)   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
      (3)   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      (4)   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.).
      (5)   U.S.C. United Stated Code.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER. A responsible corporate
officer or manager, a partner, proprietor or representative as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 403.12(1).
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with § 307 (b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts
405 through 471.
   COLOR. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of pollutants introduced into the POTW from any
non-domestic source regulated under § 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge process, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or
of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder: §
405 of the Clean Water Act (CWA), being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; the SWDA, including
Title II (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.; any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; and the Toxic
Substance Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic
agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commences after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
therefore promulgated in accordance with that section.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in
quantities or concentration which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural or industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances: these prohibitions
appear in § 8-2-2(A) of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A “treatment-works” as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the municipality. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means
the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewerage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like).
   SHALL; MAY; TENSES. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive or
discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Applies to:
      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
      (2)   Any other industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater;
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant;
or
         (c)   Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this chapter or any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an
accidental spill or a non- customary batch discharge.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this chapter or his or her duly authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of 126 pollutants or combination of those pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of §
307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
   TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT. Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into
waters of the state.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwelling, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-2 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards. No industrial user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all
industrial users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirement. Furthermore, no industrial user shall contribute the
following substances to the POTW:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the Municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including but not limited to waste streams with
a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods
specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or
endangering city personnel;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or
animals;
      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F or 40°Ce;
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair;
      (10)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent thereby violating the city’s NPDES’s permit;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except as specifically approved by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, non-contact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;
      (13)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent;
      (15)   Any wastewater containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed and causes
the treatment plant effluent to violate the city’s NPDES permit or causes the
treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (17)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F;
      (18)   Any wastes which cause unusual concentrations of inert suspended
solids or inert dissolved solids;
      (19)   Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
a “slug load”, as defined herein;
      (20)   Any water or waste waters not in compliance with national
categorical pretreatment standards as defined in §
8-2-1 of this chapter; and
      (21)   Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored
in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial
user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
   (B)   Influent limits. The maximum influent limits shall not exceed those
limits as established in the pretreatment program manual at Table 8, page 18,
as adopted by the City Council.
   (C)   Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard
or requirement.
   (D)   Special agreement. The city reserves the right to enter into special
agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may
discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (E)   City’s right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in this
chapter. The Superintendent shall have the authority to develop local limits
based on the maximum allowable headworks loadings (MAHL) and the authority to
apply these limits in industrial user discharge permits.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-3 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Provision of necessary wastewater treatment. Industrial users shall
provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter
and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits and the prohibitions set out in §
8-2-2 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the
state or the Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be
provided, continuously operated and maintained at the industrial user’s
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved, in
writing, by the city before construction of the facility. The review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Restriction of discharge. Whenever deemed necessary, the
Superintendent may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during
peak flow periods, to install and maintain a suitable storage and flow control
facility to ensure equalization of flow, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
industrial user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Interceptors and bar screens. Grease, oil and sand interceptors and
bar screens shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they
are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amount
of grease and oil, sand or screenings; except that, such interceptors shall not
be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned and repaired regularly as needed, by the owner at his or her expense.
   (D)   Combustible gas detection meter. Industrial users with the potential
to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an
approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (E)   Slug control plan. The Superintendent may require any industrial user
to develop a slug control plan which outlines discharge practices, describes
stored chemicals and contains procedures both to notify the treatment plant
immediately and to prevent adverse impacts from any accidental or slug
discharges.
   (F)   Hauled wastewater.
      (1)   Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated
receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are
established by the Superintendent; provided, such wastes do not violate this
chapter or any other requirements established or adopted by the city. The
Superintendent may issue discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such
facilities and may require the completion of records to establish the origin of
and the constituents in the hauled waste.
      (2)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial septage”
requires prior approval from the city. The Superintendent shall have authority
to prohibit the disposal of such wastes or any other hauled wastes if such
disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers are
subject to all other sections of this chapter.
      (3)   Fees for dumping septage or other hauled wastes and fees for
analyzing such wastes may be established by the Superintendent in conjunction
with the sewer rate system provisions in § 8-7-2 of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the
owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any
structure, appurtenance or equipment or other part of the POTW. Any person
found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set
out in this chapter.
   (I)   Pollution control equipment. An industrial user defined as a “new
source” shall install and have in operating condition and shall “start up” all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards
before beginning to discharge. Within 90 days, new sources must meet all
applicable pretreatment standards.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   Wastewater survey. When requested by the Superintendent all industrial
users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their
wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their
discharge. The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to
complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
industrial user and shall be considered a violation of the chapter.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirements.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to
discharge wastewater into the city’s POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and
local law.
      (2)   The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. Any significant
industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior to the
effective date hereof and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the city for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with division (E) below, and shall not cause or
allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date
hereof, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Superintendent.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any significant
industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes
into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning
or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents. In order to be
considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all industrial users required to
have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required in §
8-2-5(A)(2) of this chapter. The Superintendent shall approve a form to be used
as a permit application. In addition, the following information may be
requested:
      (1)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to
the POTW;
      (2)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation of the POTW;
      (3)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
      (4)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (5)   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation and all points of discharge;
      (6)   Time and duration of the discharge; and
      (7)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (F)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following
certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction of supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Superintendent will
evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information. Within 15 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time
period, the application will be deemed denied. The Superintendent may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
   (H)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years at
the discretion of the Superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   (I)   Wastewater discharge permit contents.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect ambient air quality and protect against damage
to the POTW.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-
transferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
standards in federal, state and local law;
         (d)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law; and
         (e)   Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum;
         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges;
         (e)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
   (J)   Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the
industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   If the city fails to act within 30 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Lee County District Court at Fort Madison within ten days.
   (K)   Wastewater discharge permit modification.
      (1)   The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
industrial user’s operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since
the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
         (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;
         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
         (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
         (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;
         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; and
         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
      (2)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
   (L)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a
new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 15 days advance
notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must include a
written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;
         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.
   (M)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following
reasons:
         (a)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed
condition pursuant to §
8-2-5(E) of this chapter;
         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         (f)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility
premises and records;
         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (h)   Failure to pay fines;
         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility; and/or
         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon non-use,
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge
permit.
   (N)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A significant industrial user
shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with division (E) above a
minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration of the industrial user’s existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-5 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.
      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment
standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW,
shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information
listed in division (A)(2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be
required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in division (A)(2) below. A new source shall also be required to report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants discharged.
      (2)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section including:
         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners;
         (b)   Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental
control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility;
         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the
operations carried out by such industrial user. This description should include
a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes;
         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            1.   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process;
            2.   Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
division (J) below; and
            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in division (K) below.
         (f)   Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard; and
         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with §
8-2-4F of this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by division (A)(2)(g) above. The schedule shall
contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine
operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months. The
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, (and, if appropriate) the
steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to
the Superintendent.
   (C)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in divisions (A)(2)(d)
through (A)(2)(f) above. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial
user’s long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the industrial user’s actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
8-2-4(F) of this chapter.
   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the Superintendent but in no case less than
twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with §
8-2-4(F) of this chapter.
      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (3)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and
of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
POTW, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (E)   Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to
notify the Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the industrial
user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of
its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.
      (1)   The Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
8-2-4(E) of this chapter.
      (2)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
8-2-4(B) of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under §
8-2-4(K) of this chapter.
      (3)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions
until and unless the Superintendent has responded to the industrial user’s
notice.
      (4)   For purposes of this requirement flow increases of 10% or greater,
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed
significant.
   (F)   Reports of potential problems.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to
accidental discharges of a non- routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the POTW
(including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
8-2-2(A) of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to
immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter.
      (3)   Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
      (4)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in division (F)(1) above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (G)   Reports from non-significant industrial users. All industrial users
not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as
the Superintendent may require.
   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must
notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required
to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial user’s at least
once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the industrial user’s
initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this
sampling.
   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
      (1)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed, of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the
industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained
in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and an estimation of
the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notification must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this division (I)(1)
above need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notification of changed discharges must be submitted under division (E) above.
The notification requirements in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements in divisions (A), (C)
and (D) above.
      (2)   (a)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of division (I)
(1) above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification.
         (b)   Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA, being 42
U.S.C. § 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
   (K)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in division (K)(2) below, the industrial user
must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or through a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide
a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
   (L)   Determination of non-compliance. The Superintendent may use a grab
sample(s) to determine non-compliance with pretreatment standards.
   (M)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date post-marked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a
mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the
report shall govern.
   (N)   Record keeping. Industrial users shall retain and make available for
inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained
under this chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration
of any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the
industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
the Superintendent.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-6 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the
facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the
industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users
shall allow the Superintendent or his or her representatives ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (1)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city,
state and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The city, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
      (3)   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be born by the industrial user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the
industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the Superintendent has been refused access to a
building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the Superintendent
has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the City
Attorney, the Magistrate Judge can issue a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant
shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property
described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the
Superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the
event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be
made without the issuance of a warrant.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-7 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes
or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will
not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the
public without restriction.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-8 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON- COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the
industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NON- COMPLIANCE shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge that the city believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city’s exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non- compliance; and
      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-9 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the Superintendent finds that any
user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the
Superintendent or his or her agent may serve upon said user a written notice of
violation. Within seven days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user
to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for non-compliance. Such
orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the non-
compliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant division (D) below and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Superintendent may order any user which causes
or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or
orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Superintendent and show cause why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such actions and a request that the user show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least seven days prior to the hearing. Such notice may served on any
authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as
ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing
date. A show cause hearing shall not be prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate the ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or
orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard of requirement, he
or she may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a period of time specified in the
order. If the user does not come into compliance within the specified period of
time, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the non-
compliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order
release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking
any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Superintendent finds that a user is violating this
chapter, the user’s wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past
violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an order to the
user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s discharge
(after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user’s
discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in division (G) below are
initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the date
of any show cause or termination hearing under division (C) above and division
(G) below.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (G)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to those provisions in §
8-2-4(M) of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions of
this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, is
subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
8-2-2 of this chapter; and
         (f)   Failure to pay sewer use charges as specified in § 8-7-2 of this
code of ordinances, or any other fee that may be assessed by matters covered by
this chapter.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (C) above
why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-10 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent may petition the Lee County
District Court at Fort Madison through the City’s Attorney for the issuance of
a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirements imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such
other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be
sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a
prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the Superintendent for a maximum
civil penalty of $1,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorney fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by
the city.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective action by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a user.
   (C)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   Any user that wilfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $200 per violation
per day or imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
      (2)   Any user that wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of
not more than $200 or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal
injury or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit or order or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than
$200 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
   (D)   Simple misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, is a simple misdemeanor. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   Municipal infraction.
      (1)   Any violation of this chapter arising from non-compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 by an
industrial user is a municipal infraction and punishable by a civil penalty of
not more than $1,000 for each day a violation exists or continues.
      (2)   The city may classify a municipal infraction, other than a
violation arising from non- compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement, as an environmental violation if the infraction is a violation of
Iowa Code Chapter 455B or a violation of a standard established by the city in
consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both. A municipal
infraction which is classified an environmental violation is punishable by a
civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each occurrence. A person committing
an environmental violation is not subject to a civil penalty, if all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The violation results solely from the person conducting an
initial start-up, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing or conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or
the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation;
         (b)   The person notifies the city of the violation within 24 hours
from the time that the violation begins; and
         (c)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
      (3)   The city shall not enforce this section against a person committing
an environmental violation, until the city offers to participate in informal
negotiations with the person. If the person accepts the offer, the city and the
person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues alleged
to be the basis for the violation.
   (F)   Remedies non-exclusive. The provisions in §§
8-2-9 through
8-2-11 of this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right
to take any, all or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right
to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further,
the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any non-
compliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993; Ord. C-322, passed 4-4-2000)
§ 8-2-11 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (A)   Liability insurance. The Superintendent may decline to reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user which has filed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, any order or a previous wastewater discharge permit
issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused
by its discharge.
   (B)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter, orders or wastewater discharge permits
issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only
recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its
ability to comply.
   (C)   Public nuisances. Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Superintendent or his or her
designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the city code.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-2-12 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit application including the cost of
processing such applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user’s discharge and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and
   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties
chargeable by the city.
(Ord. C-172, passed 9-7-1993)
CHAPTER 3: WATERFRONT
Section
   
8-3-1   Definitions
   
8-3-2   Prohibited use of waterfront; adjacent waters
   
8-3-3   Compliance
   
8-3-4   Illegal docking
   
8-3-5   Tearing down; defacing sign
   
8-3-6   Permit, lease revocation
   
8-3-7   Non-liability of public officers
   
8-3-8   Fees
§ 8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ADJACENT WATERS. All that part of the Mississippi River lying between the
main channel of said river and the waterfront.
   FLOAT. Any landing stage, launch house, boat stall or other structure of any
kind floating on the river or supported from its bed and used or designed to be
used for the discharge or taking on of passengers or freight in connection with
any waterborne craft or for the protection, mooring or housing of any craft.
   FLOATATION DEVICE. Any raft, diving platform, landing stage, launch house,
boat stall or other waterborne structure of any kind floating on the river.
   HOUSEBOAT. Any craft without inboard propelling motor or engine and used or
designed to be used as living quarters for one or more persons.
   IMPROVED WATERFRONT. All that portion of the waterfront of the city, between
the east bank of what is known as “Prison Creek” (in the east part of the city
adjacent to the Fort Madison Water Company facilities) and the extended west
line of 11th Street.
   LARGE CRAFT. All steamboats, motorboats, barges and other watercraft having
an overall length (exclusive of stage and stern wheel) of 80 feet or more.
   LEASE. A formal written lease executed by the Parks Board as lessor, or a
formal grant from the said Board entered upon the records of such Board.
   LESSEE. The tenant in any lease executed by the Parks Board or the grantee
in any formal grant by the said Board.
   OFFICIAL CONSENT. The formal consent of the Parks Board. The same may be
expressed by written permit or lease. All OFFICIAL CONSENT shall be revocable
at any time at the discretion of the said Board without notice, except as
otherwise provided herein.
   SMALL CRAFT. All steamboats, motorboats, launches, barges, rowboats,
sailboats and other watercraft having an overall length (exclusive of stage and
stern wheel) of less than 80 feet.
   UNIMPROVED WATERFRONT. All that part of the waterfront of the city, except
the improved waterfront as above defined.
   WATERCRAFT. Houseboats, large craft, small craft and any waterborne craft.
   WATERFRONT. That entire area of land abutting upon and adjacent to the
Mississippi River in the city, bounded on the east by an extension of the north
line of Madison Township, on the west by the west line of Madison Township, and
on the south by the Mississippi River, and on the north by each street first
intersecting to the north of the high-water mark, excepting therefrom all land
lying between the east bank of Dry Creek and the east line of Section 7 in
Madison Township.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. C-027, passed 5-16-1989)
§ 8-3-2 PROHIBITED USE OF WATERFRONT; ADJACENT WATERS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Place or maintain any building, structure or obstruction upon the
waterfront without first having obtained official consent therefor;
   (B)   Dump, throw or place upon any part of the waterfront or in the
adjacent waters any garbage, dead animals, refuse, sweepings, trash, offal,
scrap iron, cans, bottles, glass, boxes, cartons, unpiled lumber, wastepaper,
clothing or cloth or any other material likely to create a fire hazard,
dangerous to persons or property, or offensive to sight or smell;
   (C)   Permit any van, truck, trailer or other highway vehicle designed or
used for the transportation of freight, to remain standing upon the improved
waterfront for a period longer than is reasonably necessary to discharge or
take on its freight;
   (D)   Place any trailer, or other highway vehicle, with living
accommodations for one or more persons upon the improved waterfront without
official consent, or allow the same to remain thereon without official consent;
   (E)   Store, keep, or maintain any merchandise, building materials, or
products of manufacture, trade, or commerce, upon the improved waterfront for a
period of longer than ten days without official consent;
   (F)   Anchor, land or moor any large craft along any part of the improved
waterfront or waters of the Mississippi River adjacent thereto; except that,
part of the improved waterfront and waters adjacent thereto between the
extended east line of 4th Street and the extended west line of 11th Street;
   (G)   Anchor, land or moor any large craft on that part of the improved
waterfront and waters adjacent thereto between the extended east line of 4th
Street and the extended west line of 11th Street for a period longer than 48
hours, without official consent, and any such craft shall be promptly moved
upon the request or order of the Parks Board or any member thereof when, in the
opinion of said Board or any such member, the location of such craft is
creating or is likely to create an unreasonable obstruction of such waterfront
and waters adjacent thereto, or the use thereof;
   (H)   Keep, maintain or moor any float or house boat in adjacent waters
abutting upon the improved waterfront, except by the lessee on space leased by
a lease from the Parks Board and in accordance with the terms of such lease;
   (I)   Keep, maintain or moor any float in the adjacent waters abutting upon
the improved waterfront without official consent;
   (J)   Keep or maintain any float along the waterfront without having the
owner’s name in legible lettering painted thereon or attached thereto in a
conspicuous place;
   (K)   Moor any craft in or to any float belonging to another unless the
owner’s consent is first obtained;
   (L)   Drive or propel any water craft of any kind at a speed greater than
five mph in the following areas:
      (1)   The water bounded on the east by a line extending due north from
the east end of the floating boom of the A.T.&S.F. Railway Company (at the east
end of the improved waterfront), on the south by said floating boom, on the
west by the west line of the A.T.&.S.F. Railway Company bridge, and on the
north by the improved waterfront between the west line of the A.T.&S.F. Railway
Company bridge and a point due north of the east end of said floating boom; and
      (2)   The water within what is, known as the upper harbor and entrance
thereto, the entrance thereto being more particularly defined as that area
bounded on the west by the east edge of what is known as Riverview Park, on the
south by the extended south line of said Park, on the east by the extended east
line of 3rd Street, and on the north by the harbor breakwater and extended line
thereof.
   (M)   Move any rocks or throw any rocks or gravel into the river; allow a
dog to run at large; pick any flowers; or damage any flowers, flowerbeds,
ornamental shrubs, trees or other property upon the waterfront property.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. A-167, passed 7-18-1961)
§ 8-3-3 COMPLIANCE.
   Any person in charge of any craft who fails to comply with the reasonable
request of the person in charge of another watercraft or who fails to comply
with any lawful order of a member of the Parks Board shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954)
§ 8-3-4 ILLEGAL DOCKING.
   Any person landing a boat at or in, or making any use of, a float moored in
the adjacent waters or building or structure on the waterfront contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
as specified, in §
1-4-1 of this code; provided that, in the unimproved waterfront and adjacent
waters there shall have been placed by the Parks Board or a member thereof upon
such float, building or structure, a sign to the effect that “this structure is
illegally maintained and any person using the same will be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor”, with the words “Parks Board of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa”
noted thereon; and, provided that, in the improved waterfront and adjacent
waters, the lessee shall have been also given a five-day written notice of non-
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 8-3-5 TEARING DOWN, DEFACING SIGN.
   Any person tearing down or defacing any sign placed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or defacing or tearing down any sign placed under
the direction of the Parks Board shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 8-3-6 PERMIT, LEASE REVOCATION.
   The Parks Board may, at its discretion, cancel or revoke, on 30 days’
notice, any permit, consent or lease that has been granted to any person
violating any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 8-3-7 NON-LIABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS.
   Every person using the waterfront or adjacent waters, whether under the
terms of this chapter or any official permit, lease or consent, or otherwise,
shall do so at his or her own risk, and neither the city, nor its Parks Board
nor any official or employee of the city or Board shall be in any manner liable
for damage to person or property in connection with or in any way related to
such use.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 8-3-8 FEES.
   The charge or fee for the use of the improved water front for the keeping or
maintenance of any float, house boat or other structure or building shall be
set from time to time by the Parks Board. The amounts collected by the Parks
Board as such fees and charges shall be used only for the purpose of defraying
the necessary annual expense of the Board in constructing and operating the
improvements and works authorized by Iowa Code Chapter 384, as amended.
(Ord. A-79, passed 8-2-1954; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
CHAPTER 4: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
8-4-1   “Sidewalk” defined
   
8-4-2   Specifications; permanent sidewalks
   
8-4-3   Plans; specifications; permit
   
8-4-4   Construction; reconstruction; repair; permanent sidewalks
   
8-4-5   Violation
   
8-4-6   Abutting property owner to maintain
   
8-4-7   Location of multi-use trails
§ 8-4-1 “SIDEWALK” DEFINED.
   (A)   All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed in the city on
streets, highways, avenues or public grounds that are at grade or have been
ordered brought to grade shall be permanent sidewalks. All other sidewalks
shall be temporary sidewalks.
   (B)   MULTI-USE TRAIL means a way or place, the use of which is controlled
by the city as an owner of real property, designated by the multi-use
recreational trail maps, as approved by the City Council, and no multi-use
trail shall be considered as a street or highway.
(Ord. A-68, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-066, passed 8-18-2020)
§ 8-4-2 SPECIFICATIONS; PERMANENT SIDEWALKS.
   No permanent sidewalks in the city shall be constructed or reconstructed
unless it shall:
   (A)   Be done so that, when completed, such sidewalks shall be at the
established grade and remain permanently in such position;
   (B)   All permanent public sidewalks hereafter will be designed and
installed to specifications approved by the City Council. Said specifications
will be on file in the City Engineer’s office; and
   (C)   Be of width uniform with that of adjoining sidewalks, if any, and
placed so as to have each edge in line with the corresponding edge of adjoining
sidewalks; provided that, all permanent sidewalks shall extend from the lot
line to the curbing in areas zoned as business and shall be not less than 42
inches in width in all other parts of the city.
(Ord. A-68, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. A-95, passed 7-5-1955; Ord. C-176, passed
11-1-1993)
§ 8-4-3 PLANS; SPECIFICATIONS; PERMIT.
   Before constructing or reconstructing any sidewalk, the owner of the land
adjacent thereto shall furnish the City Engineer plans and specifications for
the same, which shall contain the name of the owner of the property, a legal
description of the land in front of which the sidewalk is to be built and a
statement that the sidewalk will be built in accordance with the plans and
specifications and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon
approval of plans and specifications, the City Engineer shall file the same,
with his or her approval endorsed thereon, with the Clerk, who shall forthwith
issue a permit for said construction or reconstruction. No sidewalks shall be
constructed or reconstructed without such permit or in any manner other than in
accordance with this chapter and the approved plans and specifications.
(Ord. A-68, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-4-4 CONSTRUCTION; RECONSTRUCTION; REPAIR; PERMANENT SIDEWALKS.
   The city shall have the power to construct, or reconstruct, or repair
permanent sidewalks within its limits and to assess the costs thereof to
private property.
(Ord. A-68, passed 12-28-1953)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 389.38
§ 8-4-5 VIOLATION.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a municipal infraction,
punishable as provided in §
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-200, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 8-4-6 ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER TO MAINTAIN.
   (A)   Pursuant to Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(c), as amended, abutting property
owners are required to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines
and inside the curb lines upon the public streets; except that, the property
owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the
publicly owned property or right-of-way.
   (B)   The owner of any lot or parcel thereof abutting upon any sidewalk on
the city streets in the city shall maintain said sidewalk in a state of good
repair, free from cracks, holes and unevenness so that the sidewalk does not
constitute a safety hazard. A state of sidewalk disrepair is hereby declared a
public nuisance. The owner of any lot or parcel who fails to repair said
sidewalk shall be liable to any person injured as a result of such failure and
shall further save, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city of Fort
Madison from and against any claim arising out of the failure to maintain said
sidewalk.
   (C)   Multi-use trails, as defined in Chapter 4, §
8-4-7, shall not be considered sidewalks under this section.
(Ord. B-459, passed 3-5-1985; Ord. C-407, passed 10-5-2004; Ord. D-066, passed
8-18-2020)
§ 8-4-7 LOCATION OF MULTI-USE TRAILS.
   (A)   Along Bluff Road, from Crescent Lane to a point 980 feet West of 48th
Street;
   (B)   From Ivanhoe Park to Bluff Road;
   (C)   48th Street to the point of intersection, with the Ivanhoe to Bluff
Road Trail;
   (D)   Avenue L from 48th Street, West to a point of connection with Fort
Madison Community Hospital Pond Trail; and
   (E)   Rodeo Park Connector, from the intersection of Bluff Road and 21st
Street across the High School property, along Avenue B from 18th Street to 15th
Street, along 15th Street from Avenue B to 302nd Avenue, along 302nd Avenue
from 15th Street to Rodeo Park.
(Ord. D-066, passed 8-18-2020)
CHAPTER 5: PUBLIC LIBRARY
Section
   
8-5-1   Name
   
8-5-2   Establishing Library
   
8-5-3   Library rules
§ 8-5-1 NAME.
   The structure located on real estate legally described as Lot 9, Block 15 of
the Douglas Addition to the city, with a street address of 1920 Avenue E, Fort
Madison, Iowa, shall be known as the Fort Madison Public Library.
(Ord. D-023, passed 12-2-2014)
§ 8-5-2 ESTABLISHING LIBRARY.
   There is hereby established in said Fort Madison Public Library Building a
free public library.
(Ord. D-023, passed 12-2-2014)
§ 8-5-3 LIBRARY RULES.
   Any person who takes from the public library, any book, pamphlet,
periodical, paper or other property, except in accordance with the rules of
such library, or who takes or borrows from such library any book, pamphlet,
periodical, paper or other property and neglects or refuses to return the same
within one week after receiving notice to do so, or who shall willfully cut,
mutilate, mark, tear, write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or injure any
book, pamphlet, periodical, map, document, picture or other property of such
library, or who violates any other rule of the said library, or disturbs the
peace and quiet thereof by disorderly conduct, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. D-023, passed 12-2-2014)
CHAPTER 6: NUMBERING BUILDINGS
Section
   
8-6-1   Plan; duty to number
   
8-6-2   Numbering on north, south streets
   
8-6-3   Numbering on east, west avenues
   
8-6-4   Basis of numbers for each block
   
8-6-5   Number to be conspicuous
   
8-6-6   Violation
   
8-6-7   Duty of city to furnish correct numbers
   
8-6-8   Exceptions
   
8-6-9   Kenel Addition; additions; subdivisions
§ 8-6-1 PLAN; DUTY TO NUMBER.
   Buildings now or hereafter erected and fronting public streets or avenues
within the city shall be numbered and the owners, agents or occupants shall
cause said numbers to be placed on their property and maintained in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-2 NUMBERING ON NORTH, SOUTH STREETS.
   All buildings fronting on streets running north and south shall be numbered
commencing at Avenue A. All such buildings thus fronting on a north and south
Street and lying south of Avenue A, but north of Avenue B shall be numbered
from 101 on the west side of the street and from 102 on the east side of the
street and all such buildings lying south of Avenue B, but north of Avenue C
shall thus be numbered commencing with 201 and 202 on the west side and east
side of said streets respectively and thus continuing southward to the city
limits with an additional hundred added for each east and west avenue crossed.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-3 NUMBERING ON EAST, WEST AVENUES.
   (A)   All buildings fronting on avenues running east and west shall be
numbered commencing with 1st Street and all such buildings thus fronting on
such avenues and lying west of 1st Street and east of 2nd Street shall be
numbered from 101 on the north side of the avenue and 102 on the south side of
the avenue, and the numbering shall thus continue westward to the city limits
with an additional hundred added for each north and south street crossed.
   (B)   Provided, however, that, the blocks lying between 15th and 16th Street
shall be numbered as one block as though 15th Place did not exist and the block
lying between 34th and 35th Street shall be numbered as one block as though
34th Place did not exist.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-4 BASIS OF NUMBERS FOR EACH BLOCK.
   In numbering, each block shall be assigned numbers on the basis of one
number to each 25 feet of frontage. Whenever there is a building or a fraction
of a lot less than 15 feet across, it shall be designated by the number before
it with one-half added.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-5 NUMBERS TO BE CONSPICUOUS.
   The number may be made of metal, wood or glass or may be painted on pieces
of tin not less than two inches wide by three inches long, and shall be nailed
to the first story or in front of the buildings, or painted on the front door,
post or transom of the building. Every owner is required to place a suitable
number on every dwelling fronting on a street or avenue.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-6 VIOLATION.
   Failure to post the address numbers as required by this chapter within 30
days after being notified either in person or in writing, is a municipal
infraction and is punishable as provided in §
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-200, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 8-6-7 DUTY OF CITY TO FURNISH CORRECT NUMBERS.
   It is hereby made the duty of each person to call upon the City Engineer or
the Clerk to learn the correct number of his or her property and it is hereby
made the duty of said officers to give each person applying the correct number
of his or her premises free of charge.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-6-8 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   General exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
8-6-2 through
8-6-4 of this chapter, the numbering in Bluff View Acres and Richards Second
Addition, (except for 28th and 29th Streets and R Lane) Storms Court, Blackhawk
Heights, Sunnyside Drive and High Point shall be in accordance with the plats
now on file in the office of the Clerk.
   (B)   Burlington Hill. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
8-6-2,
8-6-3,
8-6-4 of this chapter, the lane or street running approximately north and
south, east of and approximately parallel to, that part of the U.S. Highway 61
known as Burlington Hill, shall be named Iris Lane. The property on the east
side of said street legally described as: the north 200 feet of the South
660.64 feet of the southeast one-quarter (SE1/4) east of Highway #61, Section
34, Township 68 North, Range 4: 1.28 acres; and the north 200 feet of the south
660.64 feet of the west 104.88 feet of the southwest one-quarter (SW1/4) of
Section 35, Township 68, Range 4 West: 48 acres, shall be designated as #50,
and two numbers added to each 50 feet of frontage to the north of the property
above described and two numbers subtracted from each 50 feet of frontage to the
south of the property above described.
   (C)   Oak Drive. The street commencing at the east end of Richards Drive,
just west of 27th Street, and extending north from Avenue G, is hereby
designated as Oak Drive. All lots fronting on said Oak Drive north of Avenue G
shall be numbered with even numbers on the east side of said Oak Drive, and
with odd numbers on the west side of said Oak Drive, commencing with numbers 1
and 2 for the lots on the south end of the said Oak Drive and continuing in
numerical sequence to the north end of said Oak Drive.
   (D)   Twenty Fifth Street. The part of 25th Street extended lying north of
Avenue A and south of the north corporation limits is hereby designated as 25th
Street. All buildings fronting on said 25th Street north of Avenue A shall be
numbered commencing at the building on the east and farthest north and shall be
numbered 90, and on the west side of the street shall be numbered 91, and
continuing with even numbers on the east and odd numbers on the west to Avenue
A.
   (E)   Skyline Drive. For the use of the city, there shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk a plat showing the exact location and numbering of the lots
herein referred to. Said lots shall be numbered from 4 through 14, there being
one number given to each 80 feet in width east and west. The starting point for
lot number 4 on the east being 1,279.25 feet west of the northeast corner of
Section 4, Township 67 North, Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian in
Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
(Ord. A-3, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. A-90, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. A-138, passed 2-
3-1959; Ord. A-142, passed 5-26-1959; Ord. C-200, passed 6-21-1994; Ord. D-063,
passed 8-4-2020)
§ 8-6-9 KENEL ADDITION; ADDITIONS; SUBDIVISIONS.
   The basis for numbering buildings in Kenel Addition and all additions or
subdivisions hereafter platted in the city shall be by lots instead of foot
frontage as is now provided in §
8-6-4 of this chapter. Each block shall be assigned numbers on the basis of one
number to each platted lot.
(Ord. A-159, passed 1-3-1961)
CHAPTER 7: SEWAGE WORKS
Section
   
8-7-1   Definitions
   
8-7-2   Sewerage rate system
   
8-7-3   General
   
8-7-4   Sewer deposit
   
8-7-5   Metering stations, calibration reports and inoperable meters
§ 8-7-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
   CONTRIBUTOR. Any person, firm, corporation, government, agency,
organization, institution or others responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into
the city’s sanitary sewer system or should be so discharged under the
provisions of the Sewer Use Ordinance.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NH3-N. The quantity of total ammonia as nitrogen determined under standard
laboratory procedure, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating or disposing
of sewage.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOTAL NITROGEN. The quantity of total nitrogen defined by Iowa DNR under
standard laboratory procedure, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   TOTAL PHOSPHOROUS. The quantity of total phosphorous defined by Iowa DNR
under standard laboratory procedure, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   WASTEWATER SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of wastewater treatment plant
of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent, representative.
   WATERWORKS. The Water Department of the city.
(Ord. C-083, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. D-089, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 8-7-2 SEWERAGE RATE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Unit rates, monitored and non-monitored contributors.
      (1)   Minimum unit rates for service billed after 7-1-2022 will be
assessed contributors to the sewage works, as follows:
 7/2022 (2%) 7/2023 (2%) 7/2024 (2%)
                                          7/2022 (2%) 7/2023 (2%) 7/2024 (2%)
Non-monitored customers - Class 1 rates
Basic service charge (per bill)           26.53       27.06       27.60
Volume charge (per 1,000 gallons)         6.13        6.25        6.38
Minimum monthly charge (per 1,000 gallons 5.55        5.55        5.55
for non-metered contributions)
Monitored customers
Basic service charge (per bill)           26.53       27.06       27.60
Volume charge (per 1,000 gallons)         1.95        1.99        2.03
BOD (per pound)                           0.80        0.81        0.82
SS (per pound                             0.84        0.85        0.86
NH3-N                                     2.52        2.57        2.62
COD                                       0.39        0.40        0.41
 
      (2)   Effective July 1 of each year, beginning in 2021, the customer base
service charges and volume charges as set forth in this section shall be
increased 2% from the prior year, except as amended by ordinance of the City
Council. The city shall review said charges and rates every two years to ensure
that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the full costs of operation,
maintenance and any debt service and to maintain adequate fund balances.
      (3)   Past due bills will be subject to a 10% late fee.
      (4)   The portion of this rate system applicable to monitored
contributors is applicable where wastewater volume is continuously measured and
wastewater strength is determined on the basis of regular sampling and
analysis. Monitored contributors will be billed for a minimum volume of 30,000
gallons per month. If the analysis for BOD produces unreliable or erroneous
results, as determined by the Superintendent, due to inhibition or interference
of the waste sample, the monitored contributor may be billed on the basis of
chemical oxygen demand (COD) in lieu of BOD.
      (5)   The charges for total nitrogen and total phosphorus will be
developed by the Wastewater Superintendent and implemented by 7-1-2023 so as to
meet the nutrient requirements in the current POTW NPDES permit as amended by
ordinance of the City Council.
      (6)   The city has adopted reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement
of costs of setting up and operating the city’s billing program, monitoring,
inspection and surveillance procedures and all laboratory testing required
which include:
         (a)   Fees for wastewater laboratory testing at the city’s Water
Pollution Control Plant are updated annually by the Wastewater Superintendent
effective July 1 of each year, beginning in 2022;
         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user’s discharge
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users. Fees for
monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures at the city’s Water
Pollution Control Plant are updated annually by the Wastewater Superintendent
effective July 1 of each year, beginning in 2022;
         (c)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
         (d)   Fees for filing appeals; and
         (e)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties
chargeable by the city.
      (7)   Haulers of septic tank wastes and industrial or other wastes that
are hauled to the wastewater treatment plant for discharge and treatment are
subject to all provisions of this chapter. Contributors not falling within the
rate system provided herein shall be subject to charges and requirements, as
determined by the Superintendent.
   (B)   Base rate. Each individual residential and commercial unit being
supplied city sewer, including each individual home within a mobile home park,
shall be assessed, on a monthly basis, a base rate for sewer rental, whether
separately metered for water or not. For example, each occupied unit of a four-
plex being serviced with city sewer shall be assessed for a base rate each
month. The usage rate, however, shall be assessed per meter, not per unit
served. Units within a complex, whether residential, commercial or mobile home
park that has a master meter and then each unit is separately metered for water
usage shall be separately billed for both base and usage rates and the amount
of water used by those units within the complex shall be subtracted from the
amount of water shown as being used by the master meter for the complex for
purposes of billing usage to the owner of the complex.
   (C)   Minimum sewerage charge. The minimum charge for service shall be
assessed for each month or fraction thereof. This minimum sewerage service
charge shall apply to any contributor connected to the sewage works. Any
contributor which is not connected to a public sewer but should be under the
requirements of any chapter shall pay this minimum sewerage charge.
   (D)   Classification system, non-monitored contributors.
      (1)   The following classification system for non-monitored contributors
is adopted to recognize wastewater strengths greater than domestic wastewater.
Wastewater strength less than domestic wastewater concentrations shall be
recognized as domestic wastewater. The classification system establishes
standard strength units which combine the three strength parameters, BOD or
COD, suspended solids and NH3-N into a single, common measurement. The number
of strength units assigned are based on the ratio of sewage works unit cost for
each parameter. Presently, the ratio of sewage works unit cost associated with
BOD to suspended solids to NH3-N is 1.35:1:1 and COD to suspended solids to
NH3-N is 0.64:1:1. Therefore, standard strength units are:
         (BOD mg/l x 1.35) + (suspended solids mg/l) + (NH3-N mg/l)
         or
         (COD mg/l x 0.64) + (suspended solids mg/l) + (NH3-N mg/l)
      (2)   The classification system defines the relative sewage works costs
associated with the wastewater strength for each class. The sewage charges
shall be calculated from metered water use times the sewage rate stated in
division (A) above, times the factor presented in the following table:
 7/2022 7/2023 7/2024
 (2%)   (2%)   (2%)
                                                           7/2022 7/2023 7/2024
                                                           (2%)   (2%)   (2%)
Non-monitored customers - Class 1 rates
Basic service charge (per bill)                            26.53  27.06  27.60
Volume charge (per 1,000 gallons)                          6.13   6.25   6.38
Minimum monthly charge (per 1,000 gallons for non- metered 5.55   5.55   5.55
contributions)
Monitored customers
Basic service charge (per bill)                            26.53  27.06  27.60
Volume charge (per 1,000 gallons)                          1.95   1.99   2.03
BOD (per pound)                                            0.80   0.81   0.82
SS (per pound                                              0.84   0.85   0.86
NH3-N                                                      2.52   2.57   2.62
COD                                                        0.39   0.40   0.41
 
 
      (3)   The customer charge, referred to in division (A) above, is
applicable to all of the above classes, regardless of wastewater strength.
   (E)   Customer class.
      (1)   The Wastewater Superintendent shall be responsible for assigning
each contributor to a customer class. Any customer may appeal the assignment to
a customer class by presenting wastewater sampling data and/or other pertinent
data relative to the customer operation and wastewater characteristics. The
wastewater sampling shall be 24-hour composite samples unless otherwise
directed by the city. The samples shall be obtained with facilities constructed
for metering and recording wastewater flow and for proportional sampling and
preservation of samples. Samples may be split for analysis and preservation by
both the customer and the city. Sample analysis shall be in conformance with
federal guidelines establishing test procedures as set forth in the “Federal
Register”, volume 40, part 136, as amended. The Wastewater Superintendent will
review the submitted data to determine the reasonableness of the customer’s
assignment to a customer class and the reasonableness of the sewerage rate
system allocations and assessments.
      (2)   Any customer may review the sewerage rate system procedures,
accounts and records, including procedures for assigning each customer to a
customer class. In the event that there are unresolved questions or continued
disagreements, the city and the customer shall submit the matter to a qualified
third party arbitrator, said arbitrator to be selected by mutual agreement of
the parties. In the event the arbitrator determines that the customer is
entitled to a change of classification from that determined by the city the
cost for the arbitrator’s services shall be borne equally by the parties, but
if no change of classification is made the cost shall be paid by the customer.
(Ord. C-083, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. C-421, passed 6-21-2005; Ord. D-015, passed
5-20-2014; Ord. D-54, passed 7-2-2019; Ord. D-089, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 8-7-3 GENERAL.
   (A)   The monthly sewage charges, as specified in §
8-7-2 of this chapter, shall be 200% of the base and usage rates listed above.
      (1)   If: a) a property owner’s property is located outside of the city’s
corporate limits, and b) the owner’s property line does not abut the city’s
corporate line, and c) the property owner agrees to petition for voluntary
annexation to the city at any time in the future when the city’s corporate line
abuts the property owner’s property line; then, in exchange for the property
owner’s written signed agreement to annex to the city in the future, the city
may allow the property owner to connect to the city’s sewage system.
      (2)   If: a) a property owner’s property is located outside of the city’s
corporate limits, and b) the owner’s property line abuts the corporate limits
of the city, and, if the property owner wishes to receive city sewer service;
then, in exchange for the property owner’s immediate voluntary annexation to
the city; and, upon completion of annexation process, city may permit the
customer to connect to city’s sewer system.
   (B)   Where, in the opinion of the City Council a contributor assumes a
substantial portion of the sewage works capacity, a contract may be required
between the city and the major user. Such a contract will indicate portions of
this Sewerage Rate System Ordinance which are applicable, establish a maximum
contribution for each waste characteristic (i.e., volume, BOD, suspended solids
and the like), provide for penalties when the maximum is exceeded, and indicate
the means of measuring and sampling the wastewater.
   (C)   (1)   Sampling and analytical laboratory charges may be assessed to
all users that the city is required to sample as part of a state and/or federal
permit or program or that the city monitors for billing purposes.
      (2)   Contracted private laboratory fees will be charged on a direct cost
basis to those users whose waste requires that the city use a private
laboratory for the analytical work.
   (D)   Where a contributor may arrange his or her waste piping system to
provide for discharge of sanitary wastes to the sanitary sewer and clear
uncontaminated water discharged separately to a storm sewer drainageway, the
contributor will be billed for the volume of sanitary sewage only, provided he
or she installs water or sewage meters in the separate systems for determining
waste volumes at his or her own expense. Water meters used may be those
furnished on a rental basis by the waterworks. Privately-owned water or sewage
meters shall be subject to the approval of the waterworks and shall be subject
to inspection and checking by the waterworks to determine accuracy.
   (E)   The sewerage charges may be billed the tenant or tenants occupying the
properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owners, but
such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from liability in the event
payment is not made as herein required.
   (F)   (1)   The City Council hereby delegates the billing of sewerage
charges, except those established under special contract, and the authority to
accept payment of same to the waterworks in accordance with the foregoing
schedule of charges. Said schedule of charges shall be certified to the
waterworks by such official of the city as shall be designated by the City
Council.
      (2)   As part of the duties delegated to the waterworks, an accurate and
complete record of such collections will be maintained and at least once each
month all funds so collected shall be deposited in a bank or banks specified by
the City Treasurer. This fund shall only be used for the purpose of retiring
debt, operating and maintaining the sewage works. At the end of each month the
City Treasurer shall report to the City Council a statement of collections and
deposits for said month.
      (3)   The City Council authorizes that the waterworks shall charge to the
city for its services such amount as may from time to time be mutually agreed
upon, same to be paid by the city on a monthly basis.
   (G)   (1)   For non-monitored contributors, the sewerage charges as provided
in §
8-7-2 of this chapter, shall be applied to the quantity of water as determined
by monthly water meter readings of the waterworks, unless the sanitary sewage
is measured as provided for in division (D) above. In the case of a monitored
contributor, the quantity of wastewater volume and strength of pollutant load
shall be determined from wastewater flow metering station equipped with a
sampling device to collect and preserve composite wastewater samples.
      (2)   When a parcel of real estate, property, building or premises
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other approved waste,
either directly or indirectly into the city sanitary sewer system and the water
used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter, uses water supplied
by the city’s water system, and in addition uses water from another source
which is not measured by a water meter, or is not a user of water supplied by
the city water system, the city shall require such water use to be metered in
order to establish the proper sewerage charge, except single-family residential
contributors with estimated water use of 5,000 gallons, or less, per month. For
such residential contributors, the amount of water used shall be determined by
mutual agreement between the user and the city, or failing to agree, by the
city in such manner as the superintendent may elect in order to establish the
rate of charge as provided in this chapter, or the owner or owners or other
interested party may have a water meter installed by the waterworks on a rental
basis so that the water used on the premises is metered. If a privately owned
meter is used the meter shall be subject to the approval of the waterworks and
shall be subject to inspection and checking by the waterworks to determine
accuracy. If it is necessary to rearrange the plumbing in order to install a
meter, the rearranging shall be at the expense of the owner or other interested
parties and the installation shall be made in a manner meeting the approval of
the waterworks and the Wastewater Superintendent.
   (H)   The Wastewater Superintendent and other authorized representatives of
the waterworks or sewage works shall be entitled to access to the premises of
any contributor for the purpose of reading meters, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing at any reasonable time to such extent as may
be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter. If such access
is denied, the contributor will be assigned and billed as a Class 10 customer
in accordance with §
8-7-2(D) of this chapter.
   (I)   Billings.
      (1)   Due date. All billings under the sewage charges herein established
shall be due and payable at the utility billing office according to the billing
schedule established by the Water Department.
      (2)   Final bills.
         (a)   If an account is not paid by the date due, it shall be
considered delinquent. The city shall have all rights to proceed with
collection of the unpaid charges in any way provided by law for the collection
of a municipal claim.
         (b)   The City Clerk may proceed with collection measures of
delinquent bills, including certification of the bill to the County Treasurer.
Notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than
30 days prior to certification of the lien to the County Treasurer. If the
customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a
written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or
landlord. All associated cost will be attached to the bill for this service.
         (c)   All delinquent bills certified to the County Treasurer or that
the city institutes collection measures upon will include a service charge of
15% of the total bill, but not less than $1. All associated costs will be
attached to the bill for this service.
      (3)   Delinquent bills, owner exempt from property tax. If the owner of a
property, where a delinquent bill has been incurred, is exempt from paying
taxes (i.e., state government, religious organizations or any other
organization or entity that is not required to pay property tax), then
collection of the delinquent bill may proceed as follows:
         (a)   Bills not paid within the time allotted by the billing schedule
shall be delinquent.
         (b)   If a bill is delinquent, the city may collect the delinquent
amount by pursuing any available legal remedy including, but not limited to:
            1.   Terminating the discharge (including severance of the sewer
connection to the property);
            2.   Collection through a collection agency; and
            3.   Collection through the court system.
(Ord. C-083, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. C-119, passed 5-19-1992; Ord. C-382, passed
6-17-2003; Ord. D-089, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 8-7-4 SEWER DEPOSIT.
   There shall be a sewer deposit of $30 payable by all renters of rental units
and chargeable against all rental property; provided, the water and the sewer
utilities are held in said renter’s name. The sewer deposit shall be collected
by the city’s Water Department at the time of the filing of an application for
service.
(Ord. C-425, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 8-7-5 METERING STATIONS, CALIBRATION REPORTS AND INOPERABLE METERS.
   (A)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the waste. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the City Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
   (B)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial waste when required by the Superintendent shall maintain metering
and sampling equipment in continuous, effective operation at the owner’s
expense. Said owner shall have the metering equipment calibrated by a qualified
individual at least once every six months and the Wastewater Superintendent
shall be provided with a copy of the calibration report.
   (C)   If the required metering equipment is inoperable for two consecutive
billing periods (months), then the owner’s sewage bill shall be increased by
taking the average month’s flowage rate for the last six operable months and
increasing that average by 20%. The owner shall then be billed for the average
flowage rate plus 20% for all subsequent months until the metering equipment is
operating properly, has been calibrated by a qualified individual and a copy of
the calibration report has been provided the Wastewater Superintendent.
(Ord. C-083, passed 5-21-1991)
CHAPTER 8: UTILITY WIRES; POLES
Section
   
8-8-1   Regulation
   
8-8-2   Not to endanger private property
   
8-8-3   Restrictions in alleys
§ 8-8-1 REGULATION.
   No person shall set in any of the streets, alleys, avenues or public grounds
any poles and place thereon any wires for electricity, telegraph, telephone,
television or for any other purpose without first having obtained the written
permission of the Council.
(Ord. A-53, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-8-2 NOT TO ENDANGER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Poles or wires shall not be placed on private property without first having
obtained the consent of the property owners.
(Ord. A-53, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 8-8-3 RESTRICTIONS IN ALLEYS.
   No poles or guy wires shall be placed or allowed to remain in the paved
portion of any alley within 20 feet of the paved portion of any paved street.
(Ord. A-53, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 9: TREES
Section
   
8-9-1   “Property owner” defined
   
8-9-2   Responsibility of abutting property owner
   
8-9-3   Removal of interfering trees
   
8-9-4   Violation
   
8-9-5   [Reserved]
   
8-9-6   City Forester
§ 8-9-1 “PROPERTY OWNER” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PROPERTY OWNER means a contract purchaser if there
is one of record, otherwise the record holder of legal title.
(Ord. B-304, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 8-9-2 RESPONSIBILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER.
   The abutting property owner shall maintain and keep in repair and free from
nuisance all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines upon the public streets; except that, the property owners shall not be
required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly-owned property
or right-of-way.
(Ord. B-304, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 8-9-3 REMOVAL OF INTERFERING TREES.
   The property owner shall remove any tree, whether on his or her private
property or outside his or her property line and inside the curb line upon the
public street abutting his or her property, which interferes with travel on or
the improvement of any street or endangers persons or property, and shall also
keep said trees so trimmed that the overhanging branches shall be at least
eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk and 15 feet above the surface of
the street.
(Ord. B-304, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 8-9-4 VIOLATION.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a municipal infraction,
punishable as provided in § 1-4-2 of the code of ordinances.
(Ord. B-304, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 8-9-5 [RESERVED].
§ 8-9-6 CITY FORESTER.
   The Public Works Director is designated the City Forester. The City
Forester’s duties and responsibilities include oversight of the Tree Ordinance,
maintenance of and removal of dead or diseased trees in the city right-of-way,
coordination of an annual tree plan to include tree plantings and maintenance
with the Public Works Department, the Parks Department and the Trees For
Tomorrow Committee. The City Forester will be the city’s representative on the
Trees For Tomorrow Committee.
(Ord. C-179, passed 12-21-1993)
CHAPTER 10: CEMETERIES
Section
   
8-10-1   Location of Oakland Cemetery
   
8-10-2   Location of Old City Cemetery
   
8-10-3   Location of Elmwood Cemetery
   
8-10-4   Location of Sacred Heart Cemetery
   
8-10-5   Spaces/lots
   
8-10-6   Sale of spaces/lots
   
8-10-7   Taxation
   
8-10-8   Perpetual care
   
8-10-9   Fees
   
8-10-10   Cemetery monuments
   
8-10-11   Cemetery foundations
   
8-10-12   Military sections; Oakland Cemetery
   
8-10-13   Rules and regulations
§ 8-10-1 LOCATION OF OAKLAND CEMETERY.
   The following tract of land is hereby dedicated as a city cemetery for the
interment of the dead and shall be known as Oakland Cemetery: commencing at the
southwest corner of the intersection of Avenue L, and 40th Street in the city,
running thence south 873.7 feet; thence west 1308.1 feet; thence north 791.31
feet to the south line of Avenue L; thence east along the south line of Avenue
L to the place of beginning, all located in Fort Madison, Iowa.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-2 LOCATION OF OLD CITY CEMETERY.
   The following tract of land is hereby dedicated as a city cemetery for the
interment of the dead and shall be known as Old City Cemetery: commencing at
the southwest corner of the intersection of Avenue H and 14th Street in the
city, running thence south along the west line of 14th Street to the northwest
corner of the intersection of 14th Street and Avenue I; thence west along the
north line of Avenue I to the northeast corner of the intersection of Avenue I
and 15th Street; thence north along the east line of 15th Street to the
southeast corner of the intersection of Avenue H and 15th Street; thence east
along the south line of Avenue H to the place of beginning, all located in Fort
Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-3 LOCATION OF ELMWOOD CEMETERY.
   The following tract of land is hereby dedicated as a city cemetery for the
interment of the dead and shall be known as Elmwood Cemetery: all of Block 1 of
Allen’s Addition to the City of Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-4 LOCATION OF SACRED HEART CEMETERY.
   The following tract of land is hereby dedicated as a city cemetery for the
interment of the dead and shall be known as Sacred Heart Cemetery: the middle
part of the Northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section Seven,
Township 67 North, Range Four West of the 5th pm. more particularly described
as follows: beginning at a point which is 20 rods south of the northeast corner
of said northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section Seven
running thence south 26 rods; thence west 80 rods to the west line of said
section; thence north 26 rods, thence east 80 rods to the place of beginning,
all located in Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-5 SPACES/LOTS.
   Each of said described tracts shall be laid out in spaces, lots or
subdivision suitable for graves and monuments with suitable walks or paths.
(Ord. C-434, passed 5-1-2006)
§ 8-10-6 SALE OF SPACES/LOTS.
   (A)   The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemeteries shall be
evidenced by a certificate of interment rights (formerly known as a “deed”) or
other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment
upon payment in full of the purchase price. The certificate shall be executed
by the Mayor and Clerk on behalf of the city with the city seal affixed
thereto. The certificate shall disclose all information required by the state’s
Cemetery Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the
Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund.
   (B)   The sale of interment rights shall be sold at prices as may be
prescribed by resolution of the Council. Interment rights may be conveyed by
any owner to any persons not immediately related to such owner, but only upon
the approval of the City Clerk. The intent is not to allow public sale of
interment rights for profit.
(Ord. D-028, passed 2-2-2016; Ord. D-49, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 8-10-7 TAXATION.
   Every cemetery space/lot sold by the city shall be forever exempt from
taxation by the city.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-8 PERPETUAL CARE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Iowa Code § 523I.502, the city acts as the trustee for the
perpetual maintenance of interment spaces at Sacred Heart and Oakland
Cemeteries.
   (B)   A perpetual care trust has been established for Sacred Heart and
Oakland Cemeteries in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 523I, the state’s
Cemetery Act. A restricted fund has been created, to be known and designated as
the “Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund”, which is funded by the deposit of an amount
equal to 20% of the gross selling price, for each sale of interment space
within the cemeteries. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the
purposes and provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 523I. The Perpetual Care Fund is
maintained separate from all operating funds of the cemeteries and the
principal of the fund shall not be reduced voluntarily, except as specifically
permitted by the state’s Cemetery Act and applicable administrative
regulations.
   (C)   A registry of individuals who have purchased interment rights in the
cemeteries subject to the care fund requirements of the state’s Cemetery Act,
including the amounts deposited in the Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund, shall be
maintained by the city.
(Ord. D-028, passed 2-2-2016)
§ 8-10-9 FEES.
   The fees for opening and closing of graves shall be as fixed by resolution
of the Council.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993)
§ 8-10-10 CEMETERY MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Only two markers may be placed upon each space, one headstone and one
footstone and placement shall be determined by cemetery staff.
   (B)   Single space markers shall not exceed 50 inches in height, 36 inches
in width and 26 inches in breadth. Markers for two space lots or larger shall
not exceed 50 inches in height, 26 inches in breadth and shall not exceed
farther than one foot from each side of the total lot.
   (C)   With respect to that portion of Sacred Heart Cemetery referred to and
laid out as the Garden of Eternal Light, markers must be flush with the ground.
No marker may be more than 18 inches in breadth by 30 inches in width for a
single marker, nor more than 18 inches in breadth by 62 inches in width for a
double marker.
   (D)   All markers shall be accompanied with a collar extending not less than
three inches, nor more than five inches beyond the base of the marker.
   (E)   With respect to Babyland in Oakland Cemetery, no marker shall be more
than 24 inches in breadth by 24 inches in length by 24 inches in depth.
(Ord. C-434, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 8-10-11 CEMETERY FOUNDATIONS.
   (A)   Location. Cemetery staff shall mark the location of the lot for each
foundation order in a timely fashion (seven working days from receipt of the
foundation order) and shall approve the location of the foundation on the lot.
The contractor is responsible for the positioning of the foundations as per
order given by monument company/funeral home, so long as that position is not
in conflict with established city guidelines.
   (B)   Size.
      (1)   The size of the foundation is determined by the size of the
monument being placed on the foundation. The monument shall be centered on the
foundation with ten inches on each side of the monument, and four inches on
front and rear of the monument. Floral containers may be placed in this ten-
inch space at each end.
      (2)   Example: a monument that measures 36 inches by ten inches would
need a foundation that measures 56 inches by 18 inches. The maximum width of
the foundation shall be 24 inches. The length of the monument shall not exceed
farther than one foot from each side of the total lot(s) owned by the
individual.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the individual or company selling
the monument to contact the city to assure the size of the lot will accommodate
the foundation.
   (C)   Depth.
      (1)   The foundation shall be dug at a minimum of two feet deep, the full
width of the foundation, with 12-inch postholes another one foot deep. One
posthole for every 20 inches of foundation.
      (2)   Example: 60-inch long foundation will need three postholes.
   (D)   Rerod. Rerod shall be used to tie the postholes together with the rest
of the foundations.
   (E)   Alternative. If the postholes and rerod are not desirable to the
contractor, then the foundations may be dug three and one-half feet deep the
full width of the foundation.
   (F)   Inspection. The cemetery staff shall inspect all foundations prior to
delivery of concrete. If any violations are found, said violations must be
corrected prior to delivery of concrete. All costs associated with the
foundation will be the responsibility of the contractor and not the city.
(Ord. C-386, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. C-434, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. D-95, passed
12-20-2022)
§ 8-10-12 MILITARY SECTIONS; OAKLAND CEMETERY.
   (A)   Government furnished headstones.
      (1)   Headstones, as furnished by the government, shall be set on the
centerline at the head of the grave with the inscription facing the grave. All
headstones shall be set 22 inches above the ground. It being further understood
that no other type except the government regulation headstone shall be allowed.
The spouse’s headstone shall be an exact duplicate of the government headstone.
      (2)   Interment shall be limited to that of the remains of one person on
each space.
      (3)   Each headstone shall only contain information specific to the
individual who is interred there.
   (B)   Ornamentation.
      (1)   Permitted ornamentations. The following are permitted on the
gravesite: one flower arrangement, fresh or artificial, with a diameter not to
exceed the width of the military marker and/or the height of the military
marker. In lieu of a flower arrangement, one living plant, in a pot, not to
exceed the width of the military marker is permissible. This flower arrangement
or potted plant must be placed in front of the military marker. A gravesite may
be allowed more than one flower arrangement or living potted plant under the
following circumstances:
         (a)   Memorial Day: permissible 15 days prior to Memorial Day and must
be removed no later than 15 days after Memorial Day; and
         (b)   Interment: must be removed no later than 21 days after
interment.
      (2)   Yuletide wreaths and flags. Yuletide wreaths are permitted
beginning the Friday after Thanksgiving and must be removed no later than March
1 of each year. Yuletide wreaths do not count as the one permissible flower
arrangement allowed. Only United States flags are to be displayed and may not
exceed 12 inches by 18 inches in size. The flagstaff may not exceed 36 inches.
      (3)   Prohibited ornamentations. The following items are not permitted on
the gravesite: permanent plantings, vigil lights, breakable items (e.g., glass/
ceramic vases), balloons, toys, stuffed animals, shepherd’s hooks, saddle
decorations or similar devices, other similar commemorative items or markers
and/or items degrading to the United States of America and a military burial
site.
   (C)   Military personnel; burial. All soldiers, sailors, marines, coast
guard, air corps, WAVES, WACS, WAFS and marine auxiliary who reside in or have
resided in the city may be buried in the burial grounds as set aside for this
purpose; provided, they qualify under one of the following provisions:
      (1)   If death occurs while in active service;
      (2)   If the person has served in the military or naval forces of the
United States in any war, the dates of which are recognized and retained by the
county’s Commission of Veterans Affairs and stipulated in Iowa Code § 35.1, and
such service was for at least 90 days and received an honorable discharge; and
      (3)   If the person is in service at least 90 days and serves during a
war in which the United States may in the future be engaged and is honorably
discharged.
   (D)   Spouses.
      (1)   The spouse of a deceased qualified person, who is buried in the
area provided in division (C) above may also be buried in a separate grave next
to his or her spouse. In the event the spouse of a qualified person precedes
the qualified person in death, the spouse may be buried in the area reserved
under division (C) above; provided, the qualified person is 60 years of age or
over, and gives assurance that he or she will eventually be buried in the grave
next to where the spouse is buried.
      (2)   The foot of the graves shall be towards the center of the circle.
      (3)   The production of the honorable discharge of the deceased shall be
sufficient for the Cemetery Superintendent to permit the interment.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993; Ord. C-386, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. C-408, passed
11-3-2004; Ord. C-434, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. C-456, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 8-10-13 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A footstone and/or headstone must be placed at each grave. The
character of all footstones and headstones shall be subject to such rules and
regulations and shall conform to such specifications as the Council may by
resolution prescribe.
   (B)   All monuments, footstones and headstones shall be made of one of the
following materials: marble; granite; or monumental bronze. No monuments,
headstones or footstones shall be erected without first securing the approval
of the Cemetery Supervisor.
   (C)   A private vault or mausoleum above the natural surface of the ground
wherein human remains are to be placed for sepulcher, shall not be permitted.
   (D)   All interments in the ground, either in vaults or otherwise, shall be
in graves not less than five feet in depth and covered only with not less than
two feet six inches of earth.
   (E)   No shrubs, plants, trees, curbing or other articles, except flowers or
wreaths or similar unaffixed decorations, shall be placed without the written
permission of the Cemetery Supervisor.
   (F)   Permanent outside receptacles are necessary to encase the casket
either in concrete or metal, with the exception of vaults less than three feet
in length.
   (G)   Permanent outside receptacles are necessary to encase cremated remains
for burial.
   (H)   The city will not be responsible for pouring foundations, except for
government markers and not responsible for setting stones, except for
government markers. All markers shall be accompanied with a collar.
   (I)   A 24-hour notice is to be given the cemetery department regarding
opening a grave and a 48-hour notice be given from December 1 through March 31.
   (J)   Only human remains will be buried in all city cemeteries.
   (K)   The city will not be responsible for installing vaults.
   (L)   An annual cleanup will be set before Memorial Day and one after
Memorial Day.
   (M)   All graves are to be dug by cemetery personnel only.
   (N)   Only two interments of cremated remains will be permitted on each
space.
(Ord. C-167, passed 8-3-1993; Ord. C-386, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. C-434, passed
5-1-2006)
CHAPTER 11: PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTIONS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
   
8-11-1   Definitions
   
8-11-2   General provisions
   
8-11-3   Sewer connection required
   
8-11-4   Private sewage disposal
   
8-11-5   Powers and authority of inspectors
§ 8-11-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   COMBINED SEWERS. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   INFLOW. Any extraneous water resulting from surface runoff, roof drainage,
yard and areaway drainage, cross-connections, faulty manholes, surface runoff
into basements or crawl spaces or any other surface runoff that enters the
sanitary sewer system.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or government entity.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with ground,
surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SHALL; MAY. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface and drainage, but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
(Ord. C-171, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without obtaining a written permit from the Public Works Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The following are prohibited:
      (1)   Introduction of inflow sources to any sanitary sewer;
      (2)   Construction of new combined sewers; and
      (3)   The connection of roof drains and any other storm water connections
to any sanitary sewer in new construction.
   (D)   New construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be
designed to minimize or delay inflow contribution to the combined sewer system.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains or uncontaminated cooling water to any
sanitary sewer.
      (2)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. C-171, passed 9-7-1993; Ord. C-222, passed 10-4-1994)
§ 8-11-3 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city,
is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer is
within 200 feet of the property line.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, private vat, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. C-171, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-11-4 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
8-11-3A of this chapter, the sewer as therein provided shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed without a
permit to so construct, issued by the city.
   (C)   Before issuance of a permit to construct a private sewage disposal
system, the owner or applicant shall submit to the city, plans, specifications
or other information as deemed necessary by the Superintendent and City
Engineer.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health
of the state. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
public sewer or natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private sewage disposal system as provided in §
8-11-3(A) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any Health Officer.
(Ord. C-171, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 8-11-5 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   Any duly authorized employee of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
(Ord. C-171, passed 9-7-1993)
CHAPTER 12: STORM WATER UTILITY SYSTEM
Section
   
8-12-1   Established
   
8-12-2   Charges and fees
   
8-12-3   Collection of charges
   
8-12-4   Review of fees
   
8-12-5   Refunds
§ 8-12-1 ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority of Iowa Code § 384.84, the Council establishes a
storm water utility system in the city. The entire city, as increased from time
to time, shall constitute a single storm water drainage system district.
(Ord. C-422, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 8-12-2 CHARGES AND FEES.
   The Council shall adopt, by resolution, charges, rates and fees for the use
of the city’s storm water utility system, and for services provided by the city
relating to that system. Such charges shall be just and equitable, based upon
the actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension and
replacement of the city’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation,
administration and services of the city’s storm water utility system and
program, and for services of the city.
(Ord. C-422, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 8-12-3 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Charges for use of the city’s storm water utility system are due and
payable as part of a combined service account under the same terms and
conditions as payment for water service as established by the Water Department.
The fee shall be collected with the consumer’s regular monthly water, sewer,
and garbage collection bill and shall be shown as a separate item on the bill.
The owner, or tenant, of any dwelling unit receiving a water service fee only,
a sewer collection fee only, or a garbage collection fee only, or any
combination thereof, will be charged a storm water utility fee.
   (B)   Bills not paid within the time prescribed in the billing schedule
shall be delinquent. If a bill remains delinquent for 30 days, then the Water
Department shall inform the City Clerk of such delinquency. The City Clerk
shall then notify the owner of the property of the existence of the delinquent
bill and shall notify the owner that unless the bill is paid within 30 days
from the date of the notice, it shall be certified by the City Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as other taxes. If, after
the expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice, the bill remains unpaid,
then the City Clerk shall certify the bill to the County Treasurer. All
delinquent bills, so certified, will include a service charge of 15% of the
total bill, but not less than $1.
(Ord. C-422, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 8-12-4 REVIEW OF FEES.
   Storm water utility fees shall be reviewed annually, shall be sufficient to
meet the next year’s projection of costs and shall be established after review
of the enumerated costs as projected.
(Ord. C-422, passed 7-5-2005)
§ 8-12-5 REFUNDS.
   The Water Department shall refund the unused portion of a storm water
utility fee paid in advance for any period when the occupant is also eligible
for a water service refund.
(Ord. C-422, passed 7-5-2005)
CHAPTER 13: PARKS AND PARKS FACILITIES
Section
   
8-13-1   Rules and regulations governing activities
§ 8-13-1 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General park rules and regulations. The following rules and
regulations are hereby adopted for the governing of the activities in the
various parks and recreation areas in the city unless specific restrictions
exist in the following divisions.
      (1)   Park closing hours. Unless otherwise stated in division (B) below,
park areas will close from 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the next day.
      (2)   Camping. Unless otherwise stated in division (B) below, overnight
camping in any park is prohibited.
      (3)   Littering. No littering is allowed in the parks.
      (4)   Hunting. No hunting is allowed in the parks.
      (5)   Fires.
         (a)   All fires. All fires must be in a designated fire area
(fireplaces, rings, grills). Ground fires will be permitted during special
events but only upon prior written approval by the Parks Supervisor or City
Manager.
         (b)   Ground fires.
            1.   Ground fires shall be contained in an area no larger than
three feet in diameter and two feet in height and shall be constantly attended
by a competent person and shall be completely extinguished before being left
alone.
            2.   A minimum clearance of 15 feet shall be maintained between any
vehicle, rubbish, dry grass, weeds, vegetation and any other combustible
material.
            3.   Buckets, shovels, water supply or a fire extinguisher with a
minimum 4-A rating shall be readily available.
      (6)   Dogs. All dogs must be kept on a leash in the parks.
      (7)   Speed limit. Speed limits in all parks will be 20 mph.
      (8)   Alcoholic beverages. Unless otherwise stated in division (B) below,
consumption of all alcoholic beverages, including beer, is prohibited after 8:
00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. the following day. The City Council or its designee may
allow exceptions with such exceptions conveyed through a lease.
   (B)   Specific park rules and regulations.
      (1)   Rodeo Park.
         (a)   Park closing hours.
            1.   Unless otherwise stated in this division (B)(1)(a), Rodeo Park
shall close from 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following day; provided that,
if a scheduled activity is in progress at the time of closing then it may
continue as permitted by the Parks Supervisor or City Manager granting the
permission for the scheduled activity.
            2.   The designated campgrounds in Rodeo Park do not close.
         (b)   Alcoholic beverages. The consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall be allowed in Rodeo Park from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. of the same day.
The City Council or its designee may allow exceptions with such exceptions
conveyed through a lease.
         (c)   Horses and motorized vehicles. Horses and motorized vehicles
must stay on roadway surfaces or in designated parking areas in the park.
Exceptions may be made for groups that show need. Permission will be conveyed
by issuance of a permit by the Park Department stating date, time, location and
the concerned party.
         (d)   Camping. Camping is only allowed in the designated campground,
south of the park maintenance building at Rodeo Park, and the campground north
of the arena, with the exception of one week prior to and during the annual
Tri-State Rodeo.
      (2)   Victory Park.
         (a)   Alcoholic beverages. The consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited in Victory Park at all times.
         (b)   Bicycles. No bicycles will be permitted to enter the fenced
areas of Victory Park, including the tennis courts, ball field and playground
area. Bicycles should not be parked on sidewalks or roadways.
      (3)   Riverview Park/Marina.
         (a)   Alcoholic beverages. The consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall be allowed in Riverview Park from 6:00 a.m. to one minute after 12:01
a.m. of the next day. The City Council or its designee may allow exceptions
with such exceptions conveyed through a lease.
         (b)   Removal of winter stored boats and trailers. Any winter stored
boat or trailer not removed by April 30, shall be towed away and impounded all
at the owner’s expense and may be disposed of as provided in § 9-7-13 of this
code of ordinances.
         (c)   Illegal parking. It shall be illegal to park motor vehicles,
boats or trailers, on or along Riverview Drive between 6th Street to the marina
parking lot and on the north side of the roadway extending along the north side
of the municipal harbor. It shall also be illegal to park on the boat ramp or
adjoining area used for launching boats, being that area lying north of a line
extending from the south side of the paved ramp to the water hydrant.
         (d)   Restricted parking. The Riverview Park main parking lot, located
at the lower end of 6th Street, shall be restricted for parking for park-
related activities only. No overnight parking will be permitted without
permission granted by the Park Supervisor or City Manager.
         (e)   Watercraft, flotation devices and trailers of same.
            1.   General limitation on mooring time. No person shall moor a
watercraft or flotation device within the confines of the Riverview marina
harbor or along the entire river shoreline of Riverview Park, or in the Willow
Patch access area all within the city limits, for a period longer than 48
consecutive hours, unless authorized to do so by the Parks Supervisor or City
Manager.
            2.   General limitation on parking time of trailers. No person
shall park a car or trailer, loaded or unloaded, within the confines of the
parking lot adjacent to the Riverview marina harbor or in the Willow Patch
access area for a period longer than 72 hours unless authorized to do so by the
Parks Supervisor or City Manager.
            3.   Impoundment authorized. Any watercraft, flotation device, and/
or trailer, together with personal property found thereon or therein, which is
found to be moored or parked in violation of this subsection may, upon order of
the Parks Supervisor or City Manager, be removed to a city impoundment area.
            4.   Penalty and costs. The owner of such impounded watercraft,
flotation device or trailer shall pay a $50 fee, plus all costs of removal and
storage before said owner shall be allowed to retrieve the watercraft,
flotation device and/or trailer from the impoundment area. The cost of removal
and storage shall be set by the city.
            5.   Disposal of watercraft, flotation devices, trailers and
personal property. If the owner of the watercraft, flotation devices, trailers
or personal property can be determined, the owner shall be notified of the
removal by the city by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner
cannot be identified, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the personal property was parked or placed is
sufficient to meet all notice requirements as set out in the Code of Iowa. If
the personal property has not been reclaimed by the owner within six months
after notice has been effected, it may be sold by the city at public or private
sale.
            6.   No unauthorized entry to impoundment area. It shall be
unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter an impoundment area. It shall be
unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter upon the premises of the
municipal watercraft, flotation device, and/or trailer impoundment lot without
securing written permission from the city.
            7.   Rules for the maintenance and operation of impoundment area.
The city shall prescribe reasonable rules for the maintenance and operation of
the impoundment area.
            8.   City not liable. Neither the city, nor its employees ,shall be
liable for damages caused to any watercraft, flotation device, trailer and
personal property contained thereon or therein by reason of the removal,
transport, storage, delivery back or sale conducted pursuant to this section.
      (4)   Willow Patch Access. Parking in the Willow Patch Access
recreational area is restricted to use for recreational related activities
only.
(Ord. D-047, passed 11-21-2017; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code Chapter 556B
TITLE 9: TRAFFIC
   Chapter
      
1.   Definitions
      
2.   Traffic Administration
      
3.   Speed
      
4.   Traffic Regulations
      
5.   Turning Regulations and Other Violations
      
6.   [Reserved]
      
7.   Stopping, Standing, Parking
      
8.   Through Streets
      
9.   One-Way Streets
      
10.   Stop, Yield Intersections
      
11.   Size, Weight and Load
      
12.   Controlled Access Facilities
      
13.   Bicycles
      
14.   Snow Emergency Regulations
      
15.   Operation of Golf Carts, ATVs and UTVs
CHAPTER 1: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
9-1-1   Definitions
§ 9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   BUS STOP. The usual place designated and plainly marked by the department
for buses to stop and load and unload passengers.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police or ranking official in charge of the Police
Department.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. All vehicles used for transportation of passengers for
hire and those constructed or used for transportation of merchandise. All
vehicles taller than ten feet in height, wider than eight feet in width or
longer than 22 feet in length shall be considered commercial vehicles. Vehicles
of business ownership that comply with these conditions taken home by employees
shall not be considered COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, however, trailers shall be
included in the length of the vehicle for the purposes of measuring overall
vehicle length. Recreational vehicles, including trailers, shall not be
considered COMMERCIAL VEHICLES if parked wholly on private property.
   CROSSWALK. The part of the highway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections
and such other places as may be indicated for pedestrian crossing by a “limit
line”.
   DAY TIME. The time between 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after
sunset.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Police.
   DOUBLE PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a highway outside of another
vehicle which is parked at the curb.
   FOOD TRUCK. A licensed vehicle or trailer equipped to cook and sell food.
   FRONTAGE OCCUPIED BY BUILDING. The linear measure of the plot of ground upon
which the building is located abutting upon the highway shall be deemed
FRONTAGE OCCUPIED BY THE BUILDING and the phrase “frontage on such highway for
a distance of 300 feet or more” shall mean the total frontage on both sides of
the highway for such distance.
   HIGHWAY. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard or other road, square or
public place open to public travel.
   LIMIT LINES. Any portion of a highway visibly marked to establish bounds for
traffic or pedestrians.
   LOADING. The expeditious taking on or discharging of passengers or
merchandise from vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   NIGHT TIME. The time between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before
sunrise.
   ONE-WAY STREET. A street where vehicular traffic is permitted to move in one
direction only.
   OPERATOR. Any person who is in actual control of a motor vehicle upon a
highway, and with reference to parking provisions, any person parking or moving
a vehicle whether remaining in such parked vehicle or not.
   OWNER. Any person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or any person who
has the exclusive use thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period greater
than 30 days.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway
for the purpose of or while actually engaged in loading and unloading or in
obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). Both motor vehicles and towable trailers
primarily intended for leisure activities such as camping and vacations. A
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE normally includes a kitchen, a bathroom and one or more
sleeping facilities.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not
comprising a business or school district, when 40% or more of the frontage on
such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by dwellings.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway for a
distance of 200 feet in either direction from a school house.
   SIGN. Any suitable department device advising the public of a traffic
regulation.
   STOP STREET. A highway designated by the Council and marked by the
Department, at which vehicles must stop before turning into a crossing.
   SUMMONS. A writing signed by a duly constituted officer of the city
directing an appearance before a magistrate at a specified time.
   TRAFFIC SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually or automatically operated by
which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.
   TRAILER. A vehicle which is not self- propelled, but is designed to be
coupled to or pulled with a self-propelled truck, tractor or other vehicle.
   VEHICLE. Every device or other contrivance used or capable of being used as
a means of transportation on land, except devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-41, passed 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 2: TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
9-2-1   Compliance
   
9-2-2   Enforcement
   
9-2-3   Rules; regulations
   
9-2-4   No parking signs; loading space
   
9-2-5   Traffic devices
   
9-2-6   Police control of traffic
   
9-2-7   Emergency powers
   
9-2-8   Police accident records; reports
   
9-2-9   Signs not to be molested
   
9-2-10   Processions; parades
§ 9-2-1 COMPLIANCE.
   Every person shall comply with, observe and obey, when applicable to him or
her, all the provisions and requirements of this title and the regulations and
orders of the Chief adopted or issued in pursuance hereof. No person shall
disobey or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a
police officer.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-2 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief shall enforce the provisions of this title and the regulations
adopted by him or her hereunder. Subject to the provisions hereof, it shall be
the duty of the Police Department to direct and control traffic, vehicles and
pedestrians.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-3 RULES; REGULATIONS.
   The Chief shall have power, by rules adopted by him or her, to:
   (A)   Close temporarily any highway or portion of same or restrict the use
thereof when required by public safety and convenience;
   (B)   Designate certain intersections that shall be known as special stop
intersections;
   (C)   Designate fire routes and prohibit parking thereon upon certification
to him by the Fire Chief that such highway is specially required for use in
attending fires;
   (D)   Prohibit turns by vehicles at intersections;
   (E)   Cause limit lines to be marked on pavements and sidewalks for
direction of pedestrians and operators;
   (F)   Establish temporarily one-way streets where required by public safety
and convenience;
   (G)   Exclude or restrict parking on designated streets when required by
public safety and convenience; and
   (H)   Designate certain intersections that shall be known as school
crossings.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. B-452, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 9-2-4 NO PARKING SIGNS; LOADING SPACE.
   Any owner or occupant of a building adjacent to a street or alley, desiring
a certain “no parking” loading space immediately in front of an entrance to
such building, shall make application to the Chief for the foot frontage
desired and give all requisite information. The Chief shall submit such
application to the Council, shall have authority to grant the same or a lesser
frontage and shall issue to said applicant a permit. Such permit may at any
time be withdrawn or limited by the Chief and said permit shall immediately
stand withdrawn or limited in accordance with the order of the Chief until the
first meeting of the Council subsequent to such withdrawal or limitation, at
which time the Chief shall submit all the facts pertinent thereto and reasons
therefor to the Council. The Council shall have the power to approve, revoke or
modify the action of the Chief in the withdrawal or limitation of the permit To
aid in enforcing the provisions of such permit, holders of the same shall have
the right to place “no parking” signs on the sidewalk marking the limits of
such “no parking” space. Such signs shall be of exact size, character and
description required by the Chief and shall be provided at the expense of the
holder of the permit and shall bear the number of the permit issued by the
Department. No operator shall park in any such special “no parking” space
except when the building is closed to the occupants or the general public.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-5 TRAFFIC DEVICES.
   To assist in the control of traffic, the Department may employ traffic
signals, signs, safety zones and other necessary devices.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-6 POLICE CONTROL OF TRAFFIC.
   Traffic shall be directed by officers of the Department or by traffic
signals.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-7 EMERGENCY POWERS.
   In case of fire, an emergency, a parade or other concourse of people,
traffic may be directed as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-8 POLICE ACCIDENT RECORDS; REPORTS.
   (A)   In case of any accident, the Department, where the public interest
requires, shall fully investigate the causes of such accident.
   (B)   The Department shall keep records embracing all pertinent accident
information and shall make complete monthly reports, drawn from such records,
to the Council.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-9 SIGNS NOT TO BE MOLESTED.
   (A)   No person shall wilfully move or alter any sign or limit line
established by the Department or by authority thereof.
   (B)   No person shall establish or maintain a sign or limit line, except as
herein provided.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-2-10 PROCESSIONS, PARADES.
   Processions and parades are permitted only by authority of the Council or
the Mayor and as directed by the Chief.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
CHAPTER 3: SPEED
Section
   
9-3-1   General provisions
   
9-3-2   Speed restrictions
   
9-3-3   Speed limits, specific area
   
9-3-4   Complaint
   
9-3-5   Speed limit, Business Highway 61
   
9-3-6   Minimum speed
§ 9-3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, the driver having the right to assume,
however, that all persons using the street will observe the law.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Iowa Code § 321.285
§ 9-3-2 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   Subject to the provisions of §
9-3-1 of this chapter, and except in those instances where a lower speed is
specified in or pursuant to the provisions of this title, it shall be prima
facie lawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to drive the same at a speed not
to exceed the following, but in any case when such speed would be unsafe, it
shall not be lawful to travel at speeds in excess of the following limits:
   (A)   Twenty mph in any business district;
   (B)   Twenty-five mph in any residence district, unless a different speed is
fixed and duly posted;
   (C)   Twenty-five mph in any school zone between 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
days when school is in session;
   (D)   Ten mph in any alley; and
   (E)   Twenty mph in any park.
(Ord. C-175, passed 10-19-1993; Ord. D-002, passed 2-5-2013; Ord. D-62, passed
6-16-2020)
§ 9-3-3 SPEED LIMITS, SPECIFIC AREA.
   The speed limit shall be 35 mph on that part of Avenue A lying between the
west side of the bridge crossing Dry Creek at the intersection with Chalk Ridge
Road and the west limits of the city.
(Ord. C-175, passed 10-19-1993)
§ 9-3-4 COMPLAINT.
   It shall be the duty of every police officer to stop forthwith and make
complaint against every person operating a motor vehicle on any highway at a
speed greater than the foregoing limitations. Such citation may be issued under
the Iowa Code or under the appropriate corresponding chapter and section of
this title.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-3-5 SPEED LIMIT, BUSINESS HIGHWAY 61.
   The maximum lawful speed limit on Business Highway 61 in the city from the
north city limits to the west city limits shall be 30 mph, except for the
following specified speed zones:
   (A)   Fifty mph from the west city limits to a point 850 feet east of 53rd
Street;
   (B)   Forty-five mph:
      (1)   From a point 850 feet east of 53rd Street to a point 3,565 feet
east of 53rd Street; and
      (2)   From the north city limits to a point 1,095 feet south of the north
city limits.
   (C)   Thirty-five mph:
      (1)   From a point 1,095 feet south of the north city limits to a point
1,830 feet south of the north city limits; and
      (2)   From a point 3,975 feet east of 53rd Street to a point 5,030 feet
east of 53rd Street.
(Ord. C-515, passed 4-3-2012)
§ 9-3-6 MINIMUM SPEED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when a reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Iowa Code § 321.294
CHAPTER 4: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
9-4-1   Violation of regulations
   
9-4-2   Vehicles on sidewalks
   
9-4-3   Clinging to vehicle
   
9-4-4   Quiet zones
   
9-4-5   Tampering with vehicle
   
9-4-6   Obstructing view at intersections
   
9-4-7   Milling
   
9-4-8   Traffic on flood control construction
   
9-4-9   Recreational trail
   
9-4-10   Engine brakes and compression brakes
   
9-4-11   Unlawful riding
   
9-4-12   Unlawful driving
   
9-4-13   Penalty
§ 9-4-1 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire and Building Department officer during a
fire, or who shall fail to abide by the provisions of this chapter and the
applicable provisions of the following statutory law relating to motor vehicles
and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are
set forth fully below. These sections shall be referenced in citations issued
pursuant to this title as “city code § 9-4-1(--)”, with the parenthetical
number changed to correspond to the appropriate subsection incorporated by
reference:
Iowa Code Cite Description
Iowa Code Cite Description
321.17         Operating non-registered vehicle
321.20B        Failure to prove security against liability
321.32         Registration card, carried and exhibited
321.34         Registration violation
321.37         Failure to display registration plate
321.38         Failure to maintain registration plate
321.45         Failure to transfer title
321.98         Operation without registration
321.99         Improper use of registration
321.174        Failure to have valid a license or permit while operating a
               vehicle
321.174A       Operation of motor vehicle with expired license
321.180        Violation of instruction permit limitation
321.180B       Violation of graduated driver’s license
321.193        Violation of conditions of restricted license
321.194        Violation of conditions of minors school license
321.216        Unlawful use of license
321.216B       Misuse of license of ID card to acquire alcohol
321.216C       Misuse of license or ID card to acquire tobacco
321.219        Permitting unauthorized minor to drive
321.220        Permitting unauthorized person to drive
321.229        Fail to comply with order of peace officer
321.231        Fail of caution by driver of emergency vehicle
321.232        Radar jamming devices
321.234        Failure to observe seating requirements
321.234A       ATV violation
321.256        Fail to obey traffic control device
321.257        Vehicles fail to respond to steady red signal
321.277        Reckless driving
321.277A       Careless driving
321.284        Open container driver over 21
321.284A       Open container passenger over 21
321.285        Speeding
321.288        Failure to maintain control
321.297        Driving on the wrong side of two-way highway
321.298        Failure to yield half the roadway when meeting a vehicle
321.299        Passing on the wrong side
321.302        Improper overtaking on the right
321.303        Unsafe passing
321.304        Prohibited passing
321.305        Violation of one-way traffic designation
321.306        Improper use of lanes
321.307        Following too closely
321.308        Following too closely (truck and towing vehicles)
321.309        Failure to use approved draw bar
321.310        Unlawful towing of four-wheeled vehicle
321.311        Turning from improper lane
321.312        Making U-turn on curve of hill
321.313        Unsafe starting of a stopped vehicle
321.314        Unsafe turn or failure to give signal
321.315        Failure to give continuous signal
321.316        Failure to stop or rapid deceleration
321.317        Signal light requirement
321.318        Incorrect hand signal
321.319        Failure to yield to vehicle on right
321.320        Failure to yield to vehicle upon left turn
321.321        Failure to yield upon entering through highway
321.322        Failure to obey sign or signal
321.323        Unsafe backing on highway
321.324        Failure to yield to emergency vehicle
321.324A       Funeral processions
321.325        Pedestrian disobeying traffic control signal
321.326        Pedestrians on left
321.327        Failure to yield to pedestrians right-of-way
321.328        Crossing at other than crosswalk
321.332        Unlawful use of white cane
321.333        Failure to yield to a blind person
321.340        Driving in or through a safety zone
321.353        Unsafe entry unto sidewalk or roadway
321.354        Stopping on paved part of highway
321.358        Stopping, standing or parking where prohibited
321.361        Parking too far from curb/parallel parking
321.362        Parking without stopping engine or setting brake
321.363        Driving with obstructed view or control
321.365        Coasting upon downgrade
321.367        Failure to maintain distance from fire vehicle
321.368        Crossing unprotected fire hose
321.369        Depositing or throwing litter
321.370        Failure to remove debris from highway
321.375        Unlawful passing of school bus
321.381        Driving or towing unsafe vehicle
321.382        Operating under powered vehicle
321.383        Failure to display reflective device on slow-moving vehicle
321.384        Failure to use headlamps when required
321.385        Insufficient number of headlamp
321.386        Insufficient number of headlamps on motorcycle
321.387        Improper rear lamps
321.388        Improper registration plate lamp
321.389        Improper rear reflector
321.390        Reflector requirements
321.392        Improper clearance lighting on truck or trailer
321.393        Lighting device color and mounting
321.394        No lamp or flag on rear-projecting load
321.395        Parking on certain highway without parking lights
321.398        Improper light on other vehicle
321.402        Improper use of spotlight
321.403        Improper use of auxiliary driving lights
321.404        Improper brake light
321.409        Improperly adjusted headlamp
321.415        Failure to dim
321.419        Improper headlighting when night driving
321.420        Excessive number of driving lights
321.422        Light of improper color - front or rear
321.423(2)     Unauthorized use of emergency vehicle lighting equipment
321.423(6)     Failure to use flashing signal on slow moving vehicle
321.430        Defective braking equipment
321.433        Unauthorized use of emergency audible warning device
321.436        Defective or unauthorized muffler system
321.437        Failure to meet mirror requirement
321.438(1)     Windshield and window - obstructed vision
321.438(2)     Dark window/windshield
321.438(3)     Windshield and window requirements
321.439        Defective windshield wiper
321.440        Defective tires
321.441        Unauthorized use of metal tire or track
321.441        Unauthorized use of metal projections on wheels
321.444        Failure to use safety glass
321.445        Failure to wear/maintain safety belts
321.446        Failure to secure child under 18 years of age
321.449        Failure to comply with safety regulation rules
321.450        Hazardous materials transportation
321.454        Width violation
321.455        Excessive side projection of load - passenger vehicle
321.456        Excessive height
321.457        Excessive length
321.458        Excessive projection from front of vehicle
321.460        Spilling of loads on highway
321.461        Excessive tow-bar length
321.462        Failure to use required towing equipment
321.463        Fines for overloads on axles
321.466        Gross weight in excess of registered gross weight
 
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-2 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area,
except at a driveway.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-3 CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless all
passengers of the vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or
toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-4 QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of a vehicle, except in an emergency.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-5 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.
   It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with
one or more other persons, willfully to injure or tamper with any vehicle or
break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of
the owner.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-6 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any
obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty
may be abated in the manner provided by the nuisance abatement provisions of
this code of ordinances.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-7 MILLING.
   It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others,
in any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the
interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any
person.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-8 TRAFFIC ON FLOOD CONTROL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The riding of horses or the operation of bicycles or the operation of
motor vehicles or any motor-driven vehicle, including automobiles, scooters,
motorcycles, trucks and snowmobiles, on any dikes, levees and other flood
control construction projects is prohibited, except on roadways designated for
public use.
   (B)   Motor vehicles operated by employees of the city and its commissions
or boards may be operated on the dikes and levees provided they are on official
business, including, but not limited to, maintenance, inspection and operation
of the facility.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-9 RECREATIONAL TRAIL.
   (A)   The operation of motor vehicles or any motor-driven vehicle,
including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mopeds,
scooters, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles on any city-owned or city-
operated recreational trail is hereby prohibited. Authorized vehicles,
including but not limited to emergency vehicles, maintenance vehicles and
public safety vehicles are exempt from the prohibition created in this section.
   (B)   The riding or leading of horses is also prohibited on such
recreational trail(s).
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-10 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate
or cause to be used or operated within the city, any engine brake, compression
brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or
deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or
explosive noise from the vehicle.
   (B)   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute
evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-11 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride in or on any portion of a vehicle that was not
primarily designed, manufactured and intended for use by motor vehicle
passengers. This section shall preclude persons from riding within truck bodies
in space designed, manufactured or intended for hauling goods or merchandise,
unenclosed pickup truck beds, luggage racks and similar devices or areas. This
section shall not apply to employees, 18 years of age or older, actively
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty that requires the employee to ride
within the unenclosed body of a truck or unenclosed bed of a pickup truck; or
upon private property within the city; or while the vehicle is participating in
an organized and permitted parade or special event within the city. This
section shall not apply to riding in the bed of a pickup truck that is enclosed
on all sides, including the roof.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-12 UNLAWFUL DRIVING.
   A driver who operates a motor vehicle while any passenger of the vehicle is
riding the vehicle in violation of §
9-4-11 of this chapter is guilty of unlawful driving.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-4-13 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall have committed a municipal infraction
and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Engine brakes and compression brakes. The scheduled fine for a
violation of §
9-4-10 of this chapter shall be $50.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 5: TURNING REGULATIONS AND OTHER VIOLATIONS
Section
   
9-5-1   U-turns
   
9-5-2   Left turn for parking
   
9-5-3   School signs
   
9-5-4   Hitchhiking
§ 9-5-1 U-TURNS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an
intersection.
   (B)   However, U-turns are prohibited within the business district and at
any intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
this traffic code.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Iowa Code § 321.255
§ 9-5-2 LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
   No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the
street, for the purpose of parking on the street.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 9-5-3 SCHOOL SIGNS.
   At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching the zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet from the approach
side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through the school crossing zone.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Iowa Code § 321.249
§ 9-5-4 HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Ord. D-62, passed 6-16-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Iowa Code § 321.331
CHAPTER 6: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 7: STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING
Section
   
9-7-1   Penalties
   
9-7-2   Traffic control devices
   
9-7-3   Complete stop required
   
9-7-4   Parking in public alley
   
9-7-5   Drop off, pick up area only
   
9-7-6   Stopping, parking prohibited
   
9-7-7   Municipal parking lot restrictions
   
9-7-8   Abandoned vehicles
   
9-7-9   Loading, unloading
   
9-7-10   Parallel parking
   
9-7-11   Continuous parking prohibited
   
9-7-12   Persons with disabilities parking
   
9-7-13   Presumption
   
9-7-14   Fire lanes
   
9-7-15   Avenue G parking restrictions
§ 9-7-1 PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   Violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code, shall
be charged upon a simple notice, which may be placed in a conspicuous manner on
an unattended vehicle, of a fine payable at the Office of the City Clerk at
City Hall. The fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking
permit is two hundred dollars ($200.00). The fine for illegal parking in a fire
lane is one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fine for all other parking
violations shall be in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00). If a fine is not
paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by twenty five percent
(25%).
      (2)   Failure to pay said fine within the above time may result in the
information charging said violation to be filed with the Iowa District Court,
Magistrate Division, in Fort Madison, Iowa, or the City may choose to collect
the fine through other means.
      (3)   A violation may also be charged by issuance of a uniform traffic
citation as provided by the Code of Iowa, said citation to be conspicuously
affixed to the vehicle and citing the operator to answer to the charge on the
date, time and place specified in the citation.
   (B)   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed
a vehicle from public property, including a public street, alley, public
parking lot, or highway, to a place or places designated by the City of Fort
Madison, under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Disabled Vehicle: When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury or otherwise incapacitated to such an extent as to
be unable to provide for the vehicle’s custody or removal.
      (2)   Illegally Parked Vehicle: When any vehicle is left unattended and
is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to
traffic.
      (3)   Fire Lanes: When a vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking in a fire lane set in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   In Violation: When a vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter
and chapter 14 of this title.
      (5)   Failure To Pay Parking Fines: When any vehicle has accumulated
three (3) or more unpaid parking fines. For the purposes of this section, an
unpaid parking fine is any parking fine that has not been fully paid within
thirty (30) days after notice was issued.
   (C)   In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or operator
of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable costs of towing and storage.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-2 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and
maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and
zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading
zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones
other than the above, truck routes, load limits, school stops, stop
intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets and streets to
be laned for traffic. The Council shall also have the power to designate and
indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns
shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other
indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning at the intersections.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-3 COMPLETE STOP REQUIRED.
   Any operator approaching a highway hereinafter designated as a through
street shall come to a complete stop before turning into or starting to cross
such street, provided that this regulation shall not apply at intersections
where traffic is being directed by a traffic officer or an electrically
controlled traffic signal.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-4 PARKING IN PUBLIC ALLEY.
   No operator shall park in a public alley, provided, that a commercial
vehicle may load and unload in a public alley but shall not obstruct other
vehicles from passing.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-5 DROP OFF, PICK UP AREA ONLY.
   Areas designated as drop off, pick up areas only, in which spaces, when
clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or
stopped except in receiving or discharging passengers, and then only for such
length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-6 STOPPING, PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk.
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway.
   (C)   Within an intersection.
   (D)   Within five feet (5') of any point on the traveled portion of a street
perpendicular to a fire hydrant adjacent to said street.
   (E)   On a crosswalk.
   (F)   Within ten feet (10') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street.
   (G)   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing,
except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
   (H)   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
   (I)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (J)   On the street of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of
a street.
   (K)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicles on any street in
the City for a period longer than two (2) hours between the hours of ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. It shall also be unlawful to
transfer freight or merchandise or the load of one commercial vehicle to
another while parked on the streets of the City except in case of the breakdown
or disablement of a commercial vehicle, which necessitates such transfer.
   (M)   At any place where official signs or yellow painted curbs prohibit
stopping or parking.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-7 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT RESTRICTIONS.
   Parking of motor vehicles on the City lot at the southwest corner of the
intersection of 8th Street and Avenue D shall be restricted for use of City
employees and City owned vehicles only.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the Pen City parking lot located
on the northeast corner of 8th Street and Avenue H and the Municipal parking
lot located on the southeast corner of 8th Street and Avenue F for a continuous
period of more than twenty four (24) hours.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the Fort Madison Library parking
lot located on the southwest corner of the intersection of 19th Street and
Avenue E and the parking lot located on the southeast corner of the
intersection of 20th Street and Avenue E for a continuous period of more than
twenty four (24) hours.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-8 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   General Limitation On Parking Time: No person shall park a vehicle on
any public roadway in the City for a period longer than forty eight (48) hours,
except that this limitation shall not apply to those specific areas in which a
different parking limitation is by ordinance now or hereafter provided.
   (B)   Impoundment Authorized: Any vehicle found to be parked in violation of
this or any other chapter regulating parking may, upon order of the Police
Department, be towed to a Municipal car impounding lot or other designated
place. The owner of such vehicle shall pay a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee, plus
all fines, towing and storage costs, before the vehicle shall be released by
the Police Department. The storage charge shall be set at fifteen dollars
($15.00) per day for inside storage and ten dollars ($10.00) per day for
outside storage. Said impounding, towing and storage charges shall be in
addition to any fines or penalties.
   (C)   Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles: Unclaimed vehicles shall be disposed
of pursuant to chapter 321 of the 1975 Code of Iowa and amendments thereto.
   (D)   Permission To Enter Lot: It shall be unlawful for any person other
than a police officer to enter upon the Municipal car impounding lot without
first securing written permission from the police judge or a police officer for
any purpose whatsoever, and any person violating the provisions of this section
may be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or may
be imprisoned until such fine and court costs are paid, but not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
   (E)   Rules For The Maintenance And Operation: The Chief of Police shall
prescribe reasonable rules for the maintenance and operation of the Municipal
car impounding lot and shall be charged with the enforcement of said rules.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-9 LOADING; UNLOADING.
   No person shall drive, load or back any vehicle on or along any sidewalk in
any public street or public place except in such points designated for such
purposes by the lowering of the curb or except where it is otherwise
impractical to load or unload merchandise.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-10 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon any street where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb, except that on a one-way street,
such parallel parking shall be permitted with the left hand wheels adjacent to
and within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-11 CONTINUOUS PARKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on any public street for a
continuous period of more than forty eight (48) hours.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a trailer, uncoupled to a vehicle, on a
City street.
   Exceptions:
      (1)   A trailer may be parked on a City street for not more than eight
(8) hours for loading and/or
unloading purposes only and shall be moved promptly upon completion of loading
and/or unloading.
      (2)    A trailer used for construction purposes may be parked on a City
street for not to exceed thirty (30) days provided construction is actively
being performed throughout this period and a permit to block right-of-way has
been issued in the same manner as dumpsters on streets with the Public Works
Department. (Ord. A-234, 2-7-1967; Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-12 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
      (1)   Establishment: Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661.18.
      (2)   Signage: Each space shall be clearly and prominently designated as
a space for persons with disabilities by displaying a painted international
symbol of accessibility on the surface of the space if paved and displaying a
persons with disabilities parking sign listing the amount of the penalty,
provided that such signage designating each space is in accordance with chapter
321L of the Code of Iowa.
      (3)   City-Owned Properties And Streets: The City Manager and Police
Chief shall designate persons with disabilities parking spaces for City-owned
properties and streets. A listing of all such designated spaces shall be kept
in the Office of the City Clerk.
      (4)   Downtown Business District: An area defined for purposes of this
section, as follows: that area between the midline of Avenue H on the south
side, the south edge of Avenue F on the north side, the midline of 6th Street
on the east side, and the midline of 10th Street on the west side.
      (5)   Private Property: A business may set aside persons with
disabilities parking spaces on the business property (see subsection 9-7-18(A)
(2) of this section).
      (6)   Improper Use: The following uses of a persons with disabilities
parking space, located on either public or private property, shall constitute
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a
violation of this Code:
         (a)   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
         (b)   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with section 321L.2(1b) of the Code of Iowa;
         (c)   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa;
      (7)   Wheelchair Parking Cones: No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
         (a)   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
         (b)   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone
which is properly placed under the provisions of section 321L.2A(1) of the Code
of Iowa.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-13 PRESUMPTION.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of law or regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time
of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-14 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in any place designated by the Fire
Department as a fire lane which is posted as hereinafter provided, whether such
fire lane be upon publicly owned property or upon privately owned property.
   (B)   A fire lane shall be posted at least every fifty (50) linear feet
thereof with signs which comply with the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices” and which at a minimum contain the following language:
   “FIRE LANE - NO PARKING”.
   A fire lane shall be deemed to encompass that area within a twenty five foot
(25') radius of any fire lane signposted pursuant to this section.
   (C)   When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided in subsection B of
this section, a presumption shall arise that said area was designated a fire
lane by or with the authority of the Fire Department.
   (D)   In addition to enforcement by the Police and Fire Departments, special
policemen may be empowered to enforce the provisions of this Code.
   (E)   Any violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor and constitutes
a Municipal infraction.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 9-7-15 AVENUE G PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   For the purpose of loading or unloading freight, goods or merchandise, a
commercial vehicle may park on the traveled portion of the roadway on Avenue G
from the west side of 6th Street to the east side of 10th Street between the
hours of ten thirty o’clock (10:30) A.M. and two thirty o’clock (2:30) P.M.
These restrictions do not apply to emergency vehicles or U.S. postal vehicles.
(Ord. D-101, passed 7-5-2023)
CHAPTER 8: THROUGH STREETS
Section
   
9-8-1   Streets designated
§ 9-8-1 STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The following streets and parts thereof, are hereby designated as through
streets:
Commencing at the intersection of Business Highway 61 and the north city
limits, thence southwesterly on said Business Highway 61 to the south line of
Avenue H, thence west on Avenue H to the west line of 18th Street; thence south
on 18th Street to the south line of Avenue L; thence west on Avenue L to the
west line of 35th Street; thence southwesterly on Business Highway 61 to the
west city limits
Avenue H from the west line of 18th Street to the east line of 20th Street and
from the west line of 20th Street to the east line of 23rd Street and from the
west line of 24th Street to the east line of 27th Street
Avenue G from the west line of 2nd Street to the east line of 20th Street and
from the west line of 20th Street to the east line of 23rd Street and from the
west line of 23rd Street to the west line of 27th Street
Avenue E from the west line of 2nd Street to the west line of 24th Street
Avenue F from the west line of 4th Street to the east line of 15th Street and
from the west line of 15th Street to the east line of 18th Street and from the
west line of 18th Street to the east line of 20th Street and from the west line
of 20th Street to the east line of 23rd Street
Avenue I from the west line of 27th Street to the east line of 33rd Street
Avenue O from the west line of 18th Street to the east line of 20th Street
15th Street from the north city limits to the north line of Avenue E
18th Street from the north city limits to the north line of Avenue E and from
the south line of Avenue E to the north line of Avenue H and from the south
line of Avenue H to the south line of Avenue L
20th Street from the south line of Avenue E to the north line of Avenue G and
from the south line of Avenue G to the north line of Avenue L and from the
south line of Avenue L to the railroad tracks running parallel with the platted
Avenue P
23rd Street from the south line of Avenue A to the north line of Avenue E and
from the south line of Avenue E to the north line of Avenue G and from the
south line of Avenue G to the north line of Avenue I and from the south line of
Avenue I to the north line of Avenue L
27th Street from the north line of Avenue G to the north line of Avenue L and
from the south line of Avenue L to the alley south of Avenue O, which runs
parallel with the railroad tracks
30th Street from the south line of Richards Drive to the north line of Avenue I
and from the south line of Avenue I to the north line of Avenue L
31st Street from the south line of Avenue L to the Avenue P
33rd Street from the south line of Avenue E to the north line of Avenue J and
from the south line of Avenue J to the north line of Avenue L
35th Street from the south line of Avenue H to the north line of Avenue L and
from the south line of Avenue L to the immediately south of 1717 35th
 
(Ord. A-180, passed 5-22-1962; Ord. A-198, passed 11-19-1963; Ord. B-210,
passed 10-21-1975; Ord. C-225, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. C-515, passed 4-3-2012;
Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
CHAPTER 9: ONE-WAY STREETS
Section
   
9-9-1   Direction designated
   
9-9-2   One-way traffic
§ 9-9-1 DIRECTION DESIGNATED.
   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall
be driven only in the direction designated. The streets or parts of streets
enumerated in this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets upon which
vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated.
§ 9-9-2 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.
Street/Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street/Location                                                             Ord. Date
                                                                            No.  Passed
Westbound Traffic
   The alley between Avenue G and Avenue H from 6th Street to 11th StreetB-   4-16-
                                                                            462  1985
   Avenue F from 3rd Street to 23rd Street                               B-   4-17-
                                                                            135  1973
   1900 block alley (Pat’s Alley) from 19th Street to 20th Street      C-   9-4-
                                                                            065  1990
Eastbound Traffic
   Avenue D from the east line of 23rd Street to the west line of 3rd    A-   5-22-
Street                                                                      180  1962
   The alley between Avenue G and Avenue F between 6th Street and 10th   A-35 12-28-
Street                                                                           1953
   Avenue G from 2nd Street to 18th Street                               A-   5-22-
                                                                            180  1962
   1900 block of Avenue C which extends from 20th Street to the swimming C-   9-4-
pool                                                                        065  1990
   The alley between Avenue L and Avenue J between 33rd and 34th Street  C-   11-19-
                                                                            271  1996
Northbound Traffic
   From Avenue N to Avenue O on 36th Street                              B-   8-7-
                                                                            447  1984
 
(Ord. D-022, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 10: STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Section
   
9-10-1   Designation
§ 9-10-1 DESIGNATION.
   At the intersections hereinafter enumerated, when vehicles are traveling in
the direction indicated, the driver of such vehicle shall stop or yield as
indicated and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered
the intersection or are approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard, and
having so yielded to vehicles not so obliged to stop or yield, may proceed
cautiously and with due care enter said intersection. The driver of a vehicle
approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions or shall stop if necessary.
   (A)   Northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound.
Northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic shall stop at:
Northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic shall stop at:
15th Street and Avenue E
18th and Avenue H
20th and Avenue G
23rd and Avenue G
23rd and Avenue I
23rd Street and Avenue H
24th and Avenue E
24th and Avenue G
24th and Avenue H
 
   (B)   Northbound, southbound.
Northbound and southbound traffic shall stop at:
Northbound and southbound traffic shall stop at:
3rd and Avenue E
3rd Street and Avenue F
4th and Avenue E
4th and Avenue F
4th and Avenue G
5th and Avenue E
5th and Avenue F
5th and Avenue G
6th and Avenue D
6th and Avenue E
6th and Avenue F
6th and Avenue G
6th Street and Avenue H
7th and Avenue D
7th and Avenue E
7th and Avenue F
7th and Avenue G
8th and Avenue D
8th and Avenue E
8th and Avenue F
8th and Avenue G
9th and Avenue E
9th and Avenue F
9th and Avenue G
10th and Avenue D
10th and Avenue E
10th and Avenue F
10th and Avenue G
10th and Avenue H
11th and Avenue D
11th and Avenue E
11th and Avenue F
11th and Avenue G
11th and Avenue H
12th and Avenue D
12th and Avenue E
12th and Avenue F
12th and Avenue G
12th and Avenue H
13th and Avenue D
13th and Avenue E
13th and Avenue F
13th and Avenue G
13th and Avenue H
14th and Avenue D
14th and Avenue E
14th and Avenue F
14th and Avenue G
14th and Avenue H
16th and Avenue D
16th and Avenue E
16th and Avenue F
16th and Avenue G
16th and Avenue L
17th and Avenue D
17th and Avenue E
17th and Avenue F
17th and Avenue G
17th and Avenue H
18th and Avenue F (see westbound traffic)
18th and Avenue G (see eastbound traffic)
19th and Avenue D
19th and Avenue E
19th and Avenue F
19th and Avenue G
19th and Avenue H
19th and Avenue L
19th and Avenue M
20th and Avenue D
20th and Avenue E
21st and Avenue D
21st and Avenue E
21st and Avenue F
21st and Avenue G
21st and Avenue H
21st and Avenue L
22nd and Avenue D
22nd and Avenue E
22nd and Avenue F
22nd and Avenue G
22nd and Avenue H
23rd and Avenue E
23rd and Avenue L
24th and Avenue A
25th and Avenue L
26th and Avenue D
26th and Avenue G
26th and Avenue H
26th Street and Avenue I
28th Place and Avenue C
28th and Avenue I
28th and Avenue L
29th and Avenue I
29th and Avenue N
30th and Avenue I
30th and Avenue L
31st and Avenue I
31st and Avenue L
32nd and Avenue I
32nd and Avenue L
32nd and Avenue N
34th and Avenue H
34th and Avenue L
35th and Avenue L
37th and Business Highway 61
38th and Business Highway 61
39th and Business Highway 61
 
   (C)   Southbound.
Southbound traffic shall stop at:
Southbound traffic shall stop at:
Chalk Ridge Road and Bluff Road
Cherokee Lane and Avenue A
Grand View Lane and River Valley Road (both ends)
Green Oak Court and Avenue E (both ends)
Ivahoe Park and Avenue L
Oak Drive at Richards Drive
Sunnyside and Avenue C
Vica Lane and Avenue E
1st and Avenue G
3rd and Avenue G
4th and Avenue H
5th and Avenue H
7th and Avenue H
8th and Avenue H
9th and Avenue H
11th and Avenue I
16th and Avenue G
16th and Avenue H
18th and County Road J40
22nd and Avenue L
25th and Avenue A
26th and Avenue E
29th and Avenue L
33rd Street and the railroad tracks lying immediately south of 1641 - 33rd
Street
37th Street and Avenue Q
40th and Avenue O
 
   (D)   Northbound.
Northbound traffic shall stop at:
Northbound traffic shall stop at:
Crescent Lane and Bluff Road
Oak Drive and Avenue A
1st and Business 61
2nd and Business 61/Avenue H
4th and Avenue D
5th and Avenue D
16th Avenue and Avenue G
18th and Avenue L
18th and J40
19th and Avenue C Alley (Pat’s)
22nd and Avenue A
22nd and Avenue I
23rd and Avenue A
26th and Avenue A
26th and Avenue L
27th and Avenue G
28th and Richards Drive
28th Place and Avenue A
29th and Richards Drive
33rd and Bluff Road
35th and Avenue H
36th and Avenue N
37th and Avenue L
38th and Avenue L
39th and Avenue L
40th and Avenue L
41st and Avenue O
48th and Bluff Road
 
   (E)   Eastbound, westbound.
Eastbound and westbound traffic shall stop at:
Eastbound and westbound traffic shall stop at:
Richards Drive and Crescent Lane
2nd and Avenue E
2nd and Avenue G
9th and Avenue C
14th and Avenue I
15th Street and Avenue C
18th and Avenue I
18th and Avenue J
18th and Avenue M
19th and Avenue C alley
19th Street and Avenue I
19th Street and Avenue J
20th and Avenue G
20th and Avenue H
20th and Avenue I
20th and Avenue J
20th and Avenue M
21st and Avenue C
21st and Avenue I
21st and Avenue J
22nd and Avenue I
22nd and Avenue J
22nd Street and Avenue C
23rd and Avenue B
23rd and Avenue C
23rd and Avenue F
24th and Avenue D
24th and Avenue I
24th and Avenue J
26th and Avenue E
27th and Avenue I
27th and Avenue N
28th and Avenue J
28th and Avenue K
28th Street and Avenue N
29th and Avenue K
30th and Avenue H
30th and Avenue J
30th and Avenue K
30th Street and Avenue N
31st and Avenue N
31st and Avenue J
32nd and Avenue K
33rd and Avenue H
33rd and Avenue J
33rd and Avenue N
34th and Avenue E
34th and Avenue N
35th and Avenue N
35th and Avenue O
35th and Avenue Q
36th and Avenue O
38th and Avenue N
38th and Avenue O
48th and Avenue L
 
   (F)   Eastbound.
Eastbound traffic shall stop at:
Eastbound traffic shall stop at:
Airport Road and 303rd Avenue
Alta Drive at Crescent Lane
Avenue C Alley (Pat’s) and 18th Street
Avenue E and Crescent Lane
Florence Drive at Crescent Lane
River Valley Road and 48th Street
Storms Court and 24th (both exits)
1st and Avenue E
2nd and Business Highway 61
2nd and Avenue C
2nd and Avenue F
6th Street and Avenue G
7th and Avenue G
8th and Avenue G
9th and Avenue D
9th and Avenue G
10th and Avenue I
15th Street and Avenue B
15th Street and Avenue D
15th Street and Avenue G
18th and Avenue D
18th and Avenue G (see northbound and southbound)
20th and Avenue C
21st and Avenue B
21st and Avenue C
23rd and Avenue D
24th and Avenue D
27th and Avenue I
27th and Avenue J
27th and Avenue K
27th and Avenue M
29th and Avenue N
33rd and Avenue E
33rd and Avenue G
33rd and Avenue H
33rd Street and Avenue D
36th Street and Avenue L
37th Street and Avenue O
 
   (G)   Westbound.
Westbound traffic shall stop at:
Westbound traffic shall stop at:
Avenue A and Denmark Road
Crabtree Lane and 330th Avenue
7th and Avenue F
15th Street and Avenue F
18th and Avenue B
18th and Avenue F
18th and Avenue L (see northbound)
20th and Avenue F
20th and Avenue O
20th and Avenue C Alley (Pat’s)
21st and Avenue C
24th and Avenue B
24th and Avenue C
24th and Avenue F
27th and Avenue H
27th and Avenue O
33rd and Alta Drive
33rd Street and Avenue E
33rd and Avenue H
33rd and Avenue I
33rd and Avenue K
33rd and Richards Drive
35th and Avenue P
37th and Avenue O
48th and Avenue J
 
   (H)   Northbound, southbound.
Northbound and southbound traffic shall yield at:
Northbound and southbound traffic shall yield at:
12th and Avenue C
13th and Avenue C
13th and Avenue I
14th and Avenue C
21st and Avenue N
32nd and Avenue J
33rd and Avenue Q
 
   (I)   Northbound.
 
Northbound traffic shall yield at:
18th Street where it intersects with Avenue O
20th and Avenue C
 
   (J)   Southbound.
 
Southbound traffic shall yield at:
Sunset Lane at Richards Drive
34th and Avenue D
34th Place and Avenue D
34th Place at Avenue H
 
   (K)   Eastbound, westbound.
Eastbound and westbound traffic shall yield at:
Eastbound and westbound traffic shall yield at:
24th and Avenue M
28th and Avenue M
29th and Avenue H
29th and Avenue J
31st and Avenue M
31st and Avenue O
31st and Avenue P
 
   (L)   Westbound.
 
Westbound traffic shall yield at:
14th and Avenue J
 
   (M)   Eastbound.
 
Eastbound traffic shall yield at:
Avenue C and Oak Drive
Both ends of Cindy Drive at Oak Drive
 
   (N)   Official traffic controls.
Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official
traffic control signals at the following intersections:
Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official
traffic control signals at the following intersections:
15th and Avenue H
18th and Avenue H
20th and Avenue H
20th and Avenue L
24th and Avenue L
27th and Avenue L
33rd and Avenue L
48th and Avenue O
53rd and Avenue O
 
(Ord. B-60, passed 5-19-1970; Ord. B-92, passed 10-5-1971; Ord. B-94, passed
10-12-1971; Ord. B-95, passed 10-12-1971; Ord. B-172, passed 9-17-1974; Ord. B-
210, passed 10-21-1975; Ord. B-241, passed 6-7-1977; Ord. B-250, passed 10-4-
1977; Ord. B-289, passed 7-17-1979; Ord. B-295, passed 9-4-1979; Ord. B-305,
passed 1-2-1980; Ord. B-322, passed 7-15-1980; Ord. B-341, passed 2-3-1981;
Ord. B-375, passed 7-6-1982; Ord. B-389, passed 11-16-1982; Ord. B-376, passed
7-20-1983; Ord. B-414, passed 8-2-1983; Ord. B-442, passed 5-1-1984; Ord. B-
454, passed 10-2-1984; Ord. B-457, passed 12-4-1984; Ord. B-458, passed 12-18-
1984; Ord. B-476, passed 2-18-1986; Ord. B-482, passed 5-20-1986; Ord. B-484,
passed 6-2-1986; Ord. B-494, passed 12-2-1986; Ord. B-502, passed 6-2-1987;
Ord. B-506, passed 8-4-1987; Ord. B-507, passed 8-4-1987; Ord. B-508, passed 8-
4-1987; Ord. B-510, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. C-008, passed 8-16-1988; Ord. C-063,
passed 9-4-1990; Ord. C-096, passed 11-19-1991; Ord. C-141, passed 11-17-1992;
Ord. C-142, passed 11-17-1992; Ord. C-146, passed 1-5-1993; Ord. C-190, passed
4-19-1994; Ord. C-191, passed 4-19-1994; Ord. C-195, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. C-
197, passed 5-17-1994; Ord. C-206, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. C-217, passed 9-6-
1994; Ord. C-225, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. C-329, passed 8-15-2000; Ord. C-331,
passed 12-5-2000; Ord. C-375, passed 3-4-2003; Ord. C-287, passed 8-19-1997;
Ord. C-346, passed 8-21-2001; Ord. C-383, passed 8-5-2003; Ord. C-454, passed
9-4-2007; Ord. C-476, passed 1-6-2009; Ord. C-488, passed 11-17-2009; Ord. D-
003, passed 2-5-2013; Ord. D-019, passed 10-7-2014; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-
2020; Ord. D-79, passed 11-1-2021; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. D-123,
passed 6-17-2025)
CHAPTER 11: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
Section
   
9-11-1   Width of vehicles
   
9-11-2   Height of vehicles; permits
   
9-11-3   Maximum length
   
9-11-4   Compliance required
   
9-11-5   Loading beyond front
   
9-11-6   Application; moving large vehicle
   
9-11-7   Spilling loads on highways
   
9-11-8   Maximum gross weight
   
9-11-9   Flag, light at end of load
   
9-11-10   Weight limits on certain streets
§ 9-11-1 WIDTH OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The total outside width of any vehicle or the load thereon shall not
exceed eight feet; except that, a motor home or bus having a total outside
width not exceeding eight feet six inches, exclusive of safety equipment, is
exempt from the permit requirements of Iowa Code Chapter 321E and may be
operated on the public highways of the state. However, if hay, straw or stover
moved on any implement of husbandry and the total width of load of the
implement of husbandry exceeds eight feet in width, the implement of husbandry
is not subject to the permit requirements of Iowa Code Chapter 321E. If hay,
straw or stover is moved on any other vehicle subject to registration, the
moves are subject to the permit requirements for transporting loads exceeding
eight feet in width as required under said Iowa Code Chapter 321E. The vehicle
width limitations imposed by this division (A) only apply to the public
highways of the state not subject to the width limitations imposed under
division (B) below.
   (B)   The total outside width of any vehicle and load shall not exceed eight
feet six inches, exclusive of safety equipment determined necessary for safe
and efficient operation by the Secretary of the United States Department of
Transportation, on highways designated by the Transportation Commission. The
Commission shall adopt rules to designate the highways. The rules adopted under
this division (B) are exempt from Iowa Code Chapter 17A.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.454
§ 9-11-2 HEIGHT OF VEHICLES; PERMITS.
   A vehicle laden or with load shall not exceed a height of 13 feet six
inches, except by permit as provided in this section. This section shall not be
construed to require any railroad or public authorities to provide sufficient
vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle upon the highways of
this state. Any damage to highways, highway or railroad structures or under
passes caused by the height of any vehicle provided for by this section shall
be borne by the operator or owner of the vehicle. Vehicles unladen or with load
exceeding a height of 13 feet six inches, but not exceeding 14 feet may be
operated with a permit issued by the state or jurisdictional local authorities.
The permits shall be issued annually, with fees set by resolution of the City
Council, and subject to rules adopted by the state. The state or a political
subdivision shall not be liable for damage to any vehicle or its cargo if
changes in vertical clearance of a structure are made subsequent to the
issuance of a permit during the term of the permit.
(Ord. D-045, passed 10-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.456
§ 9-11-3 MAXIMUM LENGTH.
   (A)   A combination of four vehicles is not allowed on the highways of this
state, except for power units saddle mounted on other power units which shall
be restricted to a maximum overall length of 65 feet.
   (B)   The maximum length of any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles
operated on the highways of this state, unless subject to the maximum length
provisions of division (C) below, are as follows.
      (1)   A single truck, unladen or with load, shall not have an overall
length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 40 feet.
      (2)   A single bus, unladen or with load, shall not have an overall
length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 40 feet; except that,
buses constructed so as to contain a flexible part allowing articulation shall
not exceed 61 feet.
      (3)   Except for combinations of vehicles, provisions for which are
otherwise made in Iowa Code Chapter 321, no combination of a truck tractor and
a semi-trailer coupled together or a motor truck and a trailer or semi-trailer
coupled together unladen or with load, shall have an overall length, inclusive
of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 60 feet.
      (4)   However, a mobile home not in excess of 48 feet in length may be
drawn by any motor vehicle, except a motor truck; provided that, the mobile
home and its towing unit are not in excess of an overall length of 60 feet. For
the purposes of this division (B)(4), a light delivery truck, panel delivery
truck or “pickup” is not a motor truck. A portable livestock loading chute not
in excess of a length of 13 feet including its hitch or tongue may be drawn by
any vehicle or combination of vehicles; provided that, the vehicle or
combination of vehicles drawing the loading chute is not in excess of the legal
length provided for such vehicles or combinations.
      (5)   Combinations of vehicles coupled together which are used
exclusively for the transportation of passenger vehicles, light delivery
trucks, panel delivery trucks, pickup trucks, recreational vehicle chassis, and
boats shall not exceed 65 feet in overall length. However, the load carried on
a truck semi-trailer combination may extend up to three feet beyond the front
bumper and up to four feet beyond the rear bumper.
      (6)   A combination of three vehicles coupled together, one of which is a
motor vehicle, unladen or with load, shall not have an overall length,
inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 60 feet.
      (7)   A motor vehicle or combination of vehicles may be operated upon the
highways of this state, irrespective of the length and weight limitations
imposed by the laws of this state, if the motor vehicle or combination of
vehicles is operated within the corporate limits of a city abutting a border of
this state and such operations have been approved by ordinance of the City
Council and if the length and weight of the motor vehicle or combination of
vehicles is in conformity with the laws relating to length and weight of the
abutting state on 7-1-1974. If a City Council has authorized such operation
upon highways within the corporate limits, then the limit of travel for such
motor vehicles or combination of vehicles within the state is extended to the
commercial zones as described by federal regulations concerning interstate
commerce, 49 C.F.R. §§ 1048.10, 1048.38 and 1048.101, as they exist on 7-1-
1974.
      (8)   A semi-trailer shall not have a distance between the kingpin and
the center of its rearmost axle in excess of 40 feet, except a semi-trailer
used principally for hauling livestock, a semi-trailer used exclusively for
hauling self-propelled industrial and construction equipment, or a semi-trailer
used exclusively for the purposes described in division (B)(5) above. A semi-
trailer which is a 1980 or older model having a distance between the kingpin
and center of the rearmost axle of more than 40 feet may be operated on the
highways of this state if a special overlength permit is obtained from the
department for the vehicle. The special overlength permit shall be valid until
the semi-trailer is inoperable.
   (C)   The maximum length of any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles
operated on the highways of this state which are designated by the
Transportation Commission shall be as follows.
      (1)   A trailer or semi-trailer, laden or unladen, shall not have an
overall length in excess of 53 feet when operating in a truck tractor-semi-
trailer combination.
      (2)   A trailer or semi-trailer, laden or unladen, shall not have an
overall length in excess of 28 feet six inches when operating in a truck
tractor- semi-trailer-trailer combination or truck tractor-semi- trailer-semi-
trailer combination. When the semi- trailers in a truck tractor-semi-trailer-
semi-trailer combination are connected by a rigid frame extension including a
fifth-wheel connection point attached to the rear frame of the first semi-
trailer, the length of the frame extension shall not be included when
determining the overall length of the first semi-trailer.
      (3)   Power units designed to carry cargo, when used in combination with
a trailer or semi-trailer shall not exceed 65 feet in overall length for the
combination.
      (4)   In a combination of vehicles used principally for hauling livestock
or a stinger-steered automobile transporter operating under this division (C)
(4) and § 9-11-1(B) of this chapter, the combination of vehicles used
principally for hauling livestock or the stinger-steered automobile transporter
may depart from the designated highway system by the most direct route to
points of pickup and delivery. Vehicles operating under this division (C)(4)
are not exempt from posted size and weight restrictions on highway structures.
      (5)   A stinger-steered automobile transporter shall not have an overall
length exceeding 75 feet; except that, the load may extend up to three feet
beyond the front bumper and up to four feet beyond the rear bumper.
   (D)   Firefighting apparatus and vehicles operated during daylight hours
when transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects of a structural
nature which cannot be readily disassembled when required for emergency repair
of public service facilities or properties are not subject to the limitations
on overall length of vehicles and combinations of vehicles imposed under this
section. However, for operation during nighttime hours, these vehicles and the
load being transported shall be equipped with a sufficient number of clearance
lamps on both sides and marker lamps at the extreme ends of the projecting load
to clearly mark the dimensions of the load. A member of the state highway
safety patrol shall also be notified prior to the operation of the vehicle.
   (E)   The state may adopt rules to designate highways, in addition to those
designated under division (C) above, to which the overall length limitations
imposed under division (C) above for vehicles and combinations of vehicles
shall be applicable. However, rules adopted under this subsection are subject
to Iowa Code Chapter 17A.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.457
§ 9-11-4 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Except for offenses punishable under the provisions of §
9-11-8 of this chapter, it is a misdemeanor for any person to drive or move or
for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway
any vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in
this chapter, and the maximum size and weight of vehicles herein specified
shall be lawful throughout this state, and local authorities shall have no
power or authority to alter said limitations except as express authority may be
granted in Iowa Code Chapter 321.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.452
§ 9-11-5 LOADING BEYOND FRONT.
   The load upon any vehicle operated alone, or the load upon the front vehicle
of a combination of vehicles, shall not extend more than three feet beyond the
front wheels of such vehicle or the front bumper of such vehicle if it is
equipped with such a bumper.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.458
§ 9-11-6 APPLICATION; MOVING LARGE VEHICLE.
   Any person desiring to move any vehicle of greater size than that permitted
by this chapter shall make application to the Public Works Director who may lay
out a route and specify the time of day of travel.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. D-045, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 9-11-7 SPILLING LOADS ON HIGHWAYS.
   A vehicle shall not be driven or moved on any highway by any person unless
such vehicle is so constructed or loaded or the load securely covered as to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
or its load covering from dropping from the vehicle, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles loaded with hay or
stover.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.460
§ 9-11-8 MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT.
   (A)   An axle may be divided into two or more parts; except that, all parts
in the same vertical transverse plane shall be considered as one axle.
   (B)   The gross weight on any one axle of a vehicle, or of a combination of
vehicles, operated on the highways of this state, shall not exceed 20,000
pounds on an axle equipped with pneumatic tires, and shall not exceed 14,000
pounds on an axle equipped with solid rubber tires. The gross weight on any
tandem axle of a vehicle, or any combination of vehicles, shall not exceed
34,000 pounds on an axle equipped with pneumatic tires.
   (C)   A group of two or more consecutive axles of any vehicle or combination
of vehicles, shall not carry a load in pounds in excess of the overall gross
weight determined by application of the following formula:
      W equals 500 (LN/N-1 + 12N +36).
      “W” equals the overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, “L” equals the distance in feet,
rounded to the nearest whole foot, between the extreme of any group of two or
more consecutive axles, and “N” equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. The following are exceptions to applications of the formula.
      (1)   Two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of
34,000 pounds each providing the overall distance between the first and last
axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (2)   On highways not part of the inter-state system, a vehicle or
combination of vehicles having:
         (a)   Four axles where the extreme axles are 18 feet apart may carry a
gross load of 53,000 pounds;
         (b)   Five axles where the extreme axles are 32 feet apart may carry a
gross load of 67,500 pounds; and
         (c)   Six or more axles where the extreme axles are 41 feet apart may
carry a gross load of 78,000 pounds.
   (D)   For every foot of distance between extreme axles less than the above
axle spacings, the overall gross weight of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles shall be determined by deducting 1,000 pounds from the gross loads
specified in divisions (C)(2)(a), (C)(2)(b) and (C)(2)(c) above. All
measurements between extreme axles shall be rounded to the nearest whole foot.
   (E)   The maximum gross weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
   (F)   The weight on any one axle, including a tandem axle, of a vehicle
which is transporting livestock on highways not part of the interstate system
may exceed the legal maximum weight given in this chapter providing that the
gross weight on any particular group of axles on such vehicle does not exceed
the gross weight allowable under this chapter for such groups of axles.
   (G)   In addition, the weight on any one axle, including a tandem axle, of a
vehicle which is transporting raw materials which are removed from a road under
construction, may exceed the legal maximum weight otherwise allowed under this
chapter by 10% if the gross weight on any particular group of axles on the
vehicle does not exceed the gross weight allowed under this chapter for that
group of axles. However, if the vehicle exceeds the 10% tolerance allowed for
any one axle or tandem axle under this division (G) the fine to be assessed for
the axle or tandem axle shall be computed on the difference between the actual
weight and the 10% tolerance weight allowed for the axle or tandem axle under
this division (G). This division (G) applies only to vehicles operating along a
route of travel approved by the state.
   (H)   A person who operates a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this
section, and an owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing
the operator of a vehicle, who requires or knowingly permits the operation of a
vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined according
to the following schedule:
Axle, Tandem Axle and Group of Axles Weight Violations
Pounds Overloaded Amount of Fine
Axle, Tandem Axle and Group of Axles Weight Violations
Pounds Overloaded                               Amount of Fine
Up to and including 1,000 pounds                $10, plus $0.005 per pound
Over 1,000 pounds to and including 2,000 pounds $15, plus $0.005 per pound
Over 2,000 pounds to and including 3,000 pounds $80, plus $0.03 per pound
Over 3,000 pounds to and including 4,000 pounds $100, plus $0.04 per pound
Over 4,000 pounds to and including 5,000 pounds $150, plus $0.05 per pound
Over 5,000 pounds to and including 6,000 pounds $200, plus $0.07 per pound
Over 6,000 pounds                               $200, plus $0.10 per pound
 
   (I)   Fines for gross weight violations for vehicles or combinations of
vehicles shall be assessed at one-half of the fine rate schedule for axle,
tandem axle and groups of axles weight violations.
   (J)   Except as otherwise provided, the amount of the fine to be assessed
shall be computed on the difference between the actual weight and the maximum
legal weight specified in this section by applying the appropriate rate in the
preceding schedule for the total amount of overload.
   (K)   The schedule of fines may be assessed in addition to any other
penalties provided for in this chapter.
   (L)   Overloads on axles and tandem axles and overloads on groups of axles
or on an entire vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be considered as
separate violations of the provisions of this section.
   (M)   A person who issues or executes, or causes to be issued or executed, a
bill of lading, manifest or shipping document of any kind which states a false
weight of the cargo set forth on such bill, manifest or document, which is less
than the actual weight of the cargo, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.463
§ 9-11-9 FLAG, LIGHT AT END OF LOAD.
   Whenever the load of any vehicle shall extend more than two feet to the rear
of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed on the end of such load in
such a position as to be plainly visible at all times, a red flag not less than
12 inches in both length and width during the day time; and during the night
time, a red light, so displayed as to be plainly visible at least 200 feet to
the rear of such vehicle.
(Ord. A-35, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-11-10 WEIGHT LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle weighing five tons or more, when loaded or empty,
having no fixed terminal within the city or making no scheduled or definite
stops within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over
or upon the following streets within Fort Madison and none other:
      (1)   Business Highway 61 from the east limits to the intersection of 2nd
Street and Avenue H and from the intersection of 2nd Street and Avenue H to the
west limits of the city;
      (2)   X32 from the north limits of the city to 15th Street, and following
15th Street south to the junction of Business Highway 61 at 15th Street and
Avenue H; and
      (3)   J40 from the north limits of the city to the junction of Business
Highway 61 at 18th Street and Avenue H.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle weighing five tons or more, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal or making a scheduled or definite stop within the city
for the purpose of loading or unloading, shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled
or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return by the
most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route.
   (E)   Exception: recreational vehicles may be driven on residential streets
for the purposes of storage on private property.
   (F)   Any operator of a motor vehicle violating this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
   (G)   The owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the
driver of any vehicle and requiring or knowingly permitting the operation of
such vehicle in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (H)   Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. B-177, passed 10-22-1974; Ord. C-515, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. D-41, passed
3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 12: CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITIES
Section
   
9-12-1   Definition
   
9-12-2   Unlawful use
§ 9-12-1 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, a CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITY shall mean a
highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to
which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have only a
controlled right of easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled-access facility or for any
other reason.
(Ord. A-218, passed 3-1-1966)
§ 9-12-2 UNLAWFUL USE.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing
section or other separation or dividing line on such controlled-access
facilities;
   (B)   Make a left turn or a semi-circular or U-turn, except through an
opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or
line;
   (C)   Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose
and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb,
separation section or line; and/or
   (D)   Drive any vehicle into the controlled-access facility from a local
service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the
dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service
road from the controlled-access facility property.
(Ord. A-218, passed 3-1-1966)
CHAPTER 13: BICYCLES
Section
   
9-13-1   Light required
   
9-13-2   Warning devices
   
9-13-3   Parking bicycles
   
9-13-4   Riding on sidewalks
   
9-13-5   Rights of pedestrians
   
9-13-6   Brakes
   
9-13-7   Single file riding
   
9-13-8   Observance of traffic rules
   
9-13-9   Towing prohibited
   
9-13-10   Carrying extra passengers
   
9-13-11   Illegal height
   
9-13-12   Improper riding forbidden
   
9-13-13   Violation; impounding
   
9-13-14   Disposition of unclaimed bicycles
   
9-13-15   Skateboards; in-line roller skates; coasting devices
§ 9-13-1 LIGHT REQUIRED.
   (A)   All bicycles used within the city shall during the hours from one-half
hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise display a headlight on the
forward part of the bicycle visible for a distance of at least 300 feet, said
headlight to be affixed to bicycle and with an illuminating power to equal that
produced by a 1.25-volt electric bulb and battery.
   (B)   There shall also be displayed on the rear part of the bicycle a red
reflector or red light not smaller than one and one-half inches in diameter.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-2 WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   All bicycles shall be equipped with either a suitable horn or bell.
   (B)   The use of sirens on bicycles shall be unlawful.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-3 PARKING BICYCLES.
   Bicycles parked in public places in the business district shall be parked
only at special parking places designated by the Police Department or in racks
provided for bicycles located at suitable and safe places approved by the
Police Department.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-4 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Bicycles may be operated upon the sidewalks in residential districts, but
not in a business district or school district, except for the purpose of
crossing sidewalks in such districts.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-5 RIGHTS OF PEDESTRIANS.
   Pedestrians upon sidewalks shall have the right of way at all times over
persons using or operating bicycles upon any sidewalks and any person using or
operating bicycles upon any sidewalks shall turn off the said sidewalk or stop
whenever meeting or passing a pedestrian or pedestrians.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-6 BRAKES.
   All bicycles shall be equipped with brakes sufficient to stop said bicycle
within 20 feet when traveling at a speed of ten mph upon dry concrete free from
base material and where the grade does not exceed 20%.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-7 SINGLE FILE RIDING.
   Bicycles shall be ridden single file on sidewalks in residential districts,
but may be ridden not over two abreast elsewhere where riding of bicycles is
allowed. Said bicycles when ridden in the street shall be operated as near the
right curb as possible at all times on two-way streets and as near either the
right or left curb as possible on one-way streets, with travel in the
designated direction only.
(Ord. A-197, passed 10-1-1963)
§ 9-13-8 OBSERVANCE OF TRAFFIC RULES.
   All persons using or operating bicycles upon any street or sidewalk within
the city shall observe all traffic rules including those concerning traffic
lights, highway stop signs, one-way streets, traveling on right-hand side of
street on two-way streets, yielding right-of-way and shall signal any change of
direction or course of travel in the same manner as such signals are required
under the law governing the use of motor vehicles upon streets and highways,
and shall not turn left in traffic, except at regular intersections or streets
or alleys and shall not weave in and out of traffic.
(Ord. A-197, passed 10-1-1963)
§ 9-13-9 TOWING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to
tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the city.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to follow a
fire truck or other fire equipment closer than 500 feet at any time.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-10 CARRYING EXTRA PASSENGERS.
   No number of passengers in excess of that number for which the bicycle is
patently designed shall at any time ride the same within said city.
(Ord. A-197, passed 10-1-1963)
§ 9-13-11 ILLEGAL HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful to operate on that part of the city streets and alleys
used for vehicular traffic a bicycle with a frame inverted or otherwise altered
so as to increase the height of the rider thereof beyond that which he would be
if not so inverted or altered.
(Ord. A-197, passed 10-1-1963)
§ 9-13-12 IMPROPER RIDING FORBIDDEN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in an irregular or
negligent manner such as zig-zagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise riding
with disregard for either the operator’s safety or the safety of others.
(Ord. A-36, passed 12-28-1953)
§ 9-13-13 VIOLATION; IMPOUNDING.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined accordingly or shall suffer his or
her bicycle to be impounded for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and
impoundment.
(Ord. A-197, passed 10-1-1963)
§ 9-13-14 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED BICYCLES.
   The Chief of the Police Department is authorized to dispose of at auction or
to release to any charitable organization for disposition, other than by
resale, any bicycles which are lost, abandoned, stolen or otherwise come into
the possession of the Police Department and remain unclaimed for a period of 30
days.
(Ord. C-058, passed 8-7-1990; Ord. C-292, passed 12-2-1997)
§ 9-13-15 SKATEBOARDS; IN-LINE ROLLER SKATES; COASTING DEVICES.
   No person shall coast, slide, roller skate, in-line roller skate, skateboard
or use any other such coasting or wheeled device upon any public sidewalk,
public street, or public parking lot within the business district. For the
purposes of this chapter, BUSINESS DISTRICT shall mean that area bordered by
6th Street on the east and 10th Street on the west, Avenue F on the north and
Avenue H (or Business Highway 61) on the south.
(Ord. C-246, passed 8-15-1995; Ord. D-063, passed 8-4-2020)
CHAPTER 14: SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
Section
   
9-14-1   Short title
   
9-14-2   Definitions
   
9-14-3   Snow emergency procedures
   
9-14-4   Parking during snow emergency procedures
   
9-14-5   Duration of prohibition
   
9-14-6   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence
   
9-14-7   Notice of declarations
   
9-14-8   Termination of parking prohibition by Director
   
9-14-9   Stalled vehicles
   
9-14-10   Removal and impounding of vehicles
   
9-14-11   Citations on illegally parked or left vehicles
   
9-14-12   Evidence with respect to illegally parked or left vehicles
§ 9-14-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Snow Emergency Ordinance”.
(Ord. B-1261, passed 1-2-1973)
§ 9-14-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or, in hor her is absence, his or her
duly designated representative.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives, controls or operates a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner or who is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm of shoulder.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported over, on or upon a street.
(Ord. B-1261, passed 1-2-1973; Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-3 SNOW EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Parking shall be permitted adjacent to even numbered properties
commencing at 8:00 p.m. on odd numbered days and continuing until 8:00 p.m. the
following day. Parking on the opposite side of the street during said period
shall be prohibited; except that, from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on said even
numbered day parking shall be permitted on either side of the street.
   (B)   Parking shall be permitted adjacent to odd numbered properties
commencing at 8:00 p.m. on even numbered days and continuing until 8:00 p.m.
the following day. Parking on the opposite side of the street during said
period shall be prohibited; except that, from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on said
odd numbered day parking shall be permitted on either side of the street.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, properties on the east or easterly
side and the south or southerly side of a street shall be deemed to be the even
numbered properties and properties on the west or westerly and on the north or
northerly side of a street shall be deemed to be the odd numbered properties.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-4 PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing
rain, or on the basis of a forecast of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that
weather conditions will make it necessary that vehicle traffic be expedited and
that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and
other purposes, he or she shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts
of or all the roadways of the city streets system as necessary by declaring it
in a manner prescribed in this chapter. While the prohibition is in effect, no
person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of
roadway which is contrary to the snow emergency procedure. However, nothing in
this section permits parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any
other provision of law.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-5 DURATION OF PROHIBITION.
   Once in effect, a prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by
announcement of the Director in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-6 PROVISIONS TEMPORARILY EFFECTIVE TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
   Any provision of this Chapter which becomes effective by declaration of the
Director takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in
effect; except that, it does not take precedence over provisions of law
relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized vehicles or
emergency traffic directions by a police officer.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-7 NOTICE OF DECLARATIONS.
   The Director shall cause each declaration made by him or her under this
chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts from
stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and he may cause such
declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when
feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the Director,
including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the
streets or areas affected. A parking prohibition declared by the Director shall
not go into effect until at least two hours after it has been announced in the
news media, which announcement shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., in
accordance with this section. The Director shall keep a record of the time and
date when each declaration is announced to the public in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-8 TERMINATION OF PARKING PROHIBITION BY DIRECTOR.
   Whenever the Director finds that some or all of the conditions which give
rise to a parking prohibition in effect under this chapter no longer exist, he
or she may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective
immediately upon announcement.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-9 STALLED VEHICLES.
   Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, while there is a parking
prohibition in effect, the persons operating that vehicle shall take immediate
action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway (if it is located
contrary to snow emergency procedure) route. No person shall abandon or leave
his vehicle in a location prohibited by the snow emergency procedure, except
for a reasonable time necessary to receive assistance.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-10 REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove or have
removed a vehicle when:
      (1)   The vehicle is parked contrary to the snow emergency procedure;
      (2)   The vehicle is stalled in a location contrary to the snow emergency
procedure and the person who was operating such vehicle does not appear to be
removing it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or
      (3)   The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking ordinance or
provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal
operations.
   (B)   Removal and impounding of vehicles shall be in accordance with §
9-7-13 of this chapter.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-11 CITATIONS ON ILLEGALLY PARKED OR LEFT VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to cause,
allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by
such person to be parked or left in violation of any provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. B-302, passed 12-4-1979)
§ 9-14-12 EVIDENCE WITH RESPECT TO ILLEGALLY PARKED OR LEFT VEHICLES.
   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in
a condition in violation of any provision of this chapter, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation
of a provision of this chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time the registered owner of that vehicle, is
presumptive evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or left the
vehicle in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. B-126, passed 1-2-1973)
CHAPTER 15: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS, ATVS AND UTVS
Section
   
9-15-1   Purpose
   
9-15-2   Definitions
   
9-15-3   Operation of golf carts, ATVs and UTVs permitted
   
9-15-4   Unlawful operation
   
9-15-5   Equipment
   
9-15-6   Operation regulations
   
9-15-7   Hours of operation
   
9-15-8   Speed
   
9-15-9   Penalties
   
9-15-10   Accident reports
   
9-15-11   Registration requirements
§ 9-15-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts, ATVs
and UTVs on the streets in the city, as authorized by the Iowa Code, chapter
321, as amended.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms GOLF CART, ATV, and UTV shall have the definitions set forth in
Iowa Code, chapter 321.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-3 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS, ATVS AND UTVS PERMITTED.
   Golf carts, ATVs, and UTVs may be operated upon the city streets of Fort
Madison by persons possessing a valid operator’s license, and who is at least
eighteen (18) years of age, or any person with a valid, state issued
“instructional permit” and accompanied by an adult possessing a valid driver’s
license in accordance with Iowa law(s). All golf cart, ATV and UTV operators
shall observe all state and local traffic control regulations and devices.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-4 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   No golf cart, ATV or UTV shall be operated on or parked upon city sidewalks
or any city park property (except park roadways and parking areas). No golf
cart, ATV, or UTV shall be operated while under the influence of intoxicating
beverage, narcotics, or habit-forming drugs, and open alcoholic beverage
containers are not permitted in or on such vehicles. No person shall operate a
golf cart, ATV, or UTV in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner which
endangers the person of another or causes injury or damage to same. No golf
cart, ATV, or UTV shall be operated upon that portion of the street located
between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line, referred to as the
“right-of-way”, except for the purpose of crossing the same to a public street
upon which operation is authorized by this chapter. No golf cart, ATV, or UTV
shall be operated upon private property without the express consent of the
owner thereof. No golf cart, ATV, or UTV shall be operated in a manner which
violates chapter 23 of the Iowa Code, which shall be, and is adopted as
applicable to the operation of golf carts.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-5 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Golf Carts operated upon city streets shall be equipped with a minimum
of the following safety features:
      (1)   A safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five feet
(5') from ground level and/or a standardized slow-moving vehicle placard.
      (2)   Adequate brakes and operational brake lights.
   (B)   ATVs and UTVs operated upon city streets shall be equipped with:
      (1)   All parts, lamps, and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required under chapter 321.234A for motor vehicles, including but
not limited to the parts, lamps, and equipment required under sections 321.386,
321.387, 321.404, 321.432, and 321.437.
      (2)    Two headlamps, having at least one on each side of the front of
the vehicle.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-6 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations apply to the operation of a golf cart, ATV or UTV
within the city limits of the City of Fort Madison:
   (A)   Any operator of a golf cart, ATV, or UTV must have a valid operator’s
license and be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   (B)   All riders in the golf cart, ATV or UTV must remain seated at all
times.
   (C)   No more than two (2) adult persons may ride in the front seat of a
golf cart, ATV, or UTV and not more than two (2) adult persons may ride in the
back seat of a golf cart, ATV, or UTV, if said seat exists.
   (D)   While operating a golf cart, ATV, or UTV, any rider must be seated on
the seat and no part of the body of any rider will extend beyond the sides of
the vehicle.
   (E)   Children must be accompanied by an adult driver and must follow all
the requirements of this subsection except the capacity limits as long as all
children are seated on the seat and no part of the body of the child extends
beyond the sides of the golf cart, ATV or UTV.
   (F)    Notwithstanding the forgoing, no golf cart, ATV, or UTV shall be
operated upon a city street which is a primary road extension through the city,
including but not limited to Business Route 61 and Highway 2. Said vehicles are
permitted to cross a city street which is a primary road extension through the
city, if necessary to reach city roads where legal operation is permitted.
   (G)   The owner of each golf cart, ATV or UTV shall be required to have
liability insurance with the minimum coverage of $50,000 bodily injury per
person, $100,000 bodily injury per accident and $50,000 property damage
insurance.
   (H)   ATVs or UTVs shall display lighted headlamps as provided in section
321.415 at all times while the vehicle is operated on a highway.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-064, passed 8-4-2020; Ord. D-109, passed
3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-7 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Golf carts may only be operated on city streets only from sunrise to sunset
(Iowa Code 321.247(B)).
(Ord. D-064, passed 8-4-2020; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-8 SPEED.
   No golf cart, ATV, or UTV shall be operated on any street at a speed greater
than the posted speed limit, but in no event exceed a maximum speed of 35 mph.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-9 PENALTIES.
   A person who violates this chapter commits a municipal infraction, which
shall be a scheduled violation.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-10 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever a golf cart, ATV, or UTV is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone, or property damage amounting to two hundred dollars
($200) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall
immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report
within forty eight (48) hours, in accordance with state law, under Iowa Code
section 321G.10.
(Ord. D-55, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 9-15-11 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Individuals who operate on roadways in Fort Madison must register the
ATV or UTV with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. (IDNR). The following
conditions apply:
      (1)   The owner of each ATV or UTV shall be required to provide proof of
ownership including but not limited to, bill of sale, IDNR registration or
registration from appropriate out-of-state authority and proof of liability
insurance with the minimum coverage of $50,000 bodily injury per person,
$100,000 bodily injury per accident and $50,000 property damage.
      (2)   ATV’s and UTV’s shall be required to be properly registered with
the IDNR and display their current registration decal. The current registration
certificate shall be carried on board.
      (3)   All permits shall be issued to a specific ATV/UTV and receive a
specific decal for that vehicle. The decal shall be affixed to the rear of the
vehicle along with the current DNR decal so that it is clearly visible.
(Ord. D-064, passed 8-4-2020; Ord. D-109, passed 3-19-2024)
TITLE 10
ZONING
      Title; Purpose; Liability   
1
      Definitions   
2
      Use Districts   
3
      General Provisions   
4
      Nonconforming Buildings And Uses   
5
      R-1 One-Family Dwelling District   
6
      R-2 One-Family Dwelling District   
7
      R-3 One-Family Dwelling District   
8
      R-4 One-Family Dwelling District   
9
      R-5 Two-Family Dwelling District   
10
      R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District   
11
      B-1 Business District, Limited Retail   
12
      B-2 Business District, General Retail   
13
      B-3 Service And Wholesale District   
14
      B-4 Highway Business District   
15
      I-1 Limited Industrial District   
16
      I-2 General Industrial District   
17
      Signs   
18
      Off Street Parking And Loading   
19
      Administration   
20
      Amendments   
21
      Special Uses   
22
      Interpretation; Fees; Violations   
23
      Bed And Breakfast Establishments   
24
      Floodplain Management   
25
      Airport Tall Structure Regulations   
26
      Swimming Pool Regulations   
27
      Commercial Communication Towers And Antennas   
28
      AR-1 Agricultural/Residential District   
29
      MA-1 Airport District   
30
      Hunting Grounds   
31
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; LIABILITY
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Intent; Purpose
10-1-3: Liability
10-1-4: Cooperation Of Other Officials And Officers
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING
ORDINANCE to the same effect as if the full title were stated. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-1-2: INTENT; PURPOSE:
The prime tool of the planning is land use control, most commonly referred to
as zoning. The purposes of zoning are many, but foremost include the following:
   A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
general welfare of the people;
   B.   To divide the City into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing
and other specified uses;
   C.   To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business
and manufacturing areas within the City, and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
   D.   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   E.   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air and to protect the public health;
   F.   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
   G.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein;
   H.   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
   I.   To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder;
   J.   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
   K.   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
   L.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, as far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them;
   M.   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
City;
   N.   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings
and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district; and
   O.   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-1-3: LIABILITY:
The Code official, or designee, Board of Adjustment members, and Planning and
Zoning Commission members, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in
good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties described in this
Code, shall not be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the
discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the Code official, employee,
or board or commission member in the enforcement of any provision of such codes
or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of
this Code or enforced by the enforcement agency shall be defended by the
jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgement
resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the jurisdiction.
This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility
of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or parcel of land
from any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the
enforcement agency or its jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the reviews or permits issued under this Code. (Ord. D-51, 3-19-
2019)
10-1-4: COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS:
The Code official shall be authorized to request, and shall receive so far as
is required in the discharge of the duties described in this Code, the
assistance and cooperation of other officials of the jurisdiction. (Ord. D-51,
3-19-2019)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words used to explain land use regulations require special usage. Other
words and terms must be defined as to the manner in which they relate to
zoning. The following words are defined as suggested for the purpose of clarity
and understanding of the recommendations of this Title:
ABANDONMENT: Any action overt or by default to give up one's rights or
interests in property.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or USE: An "accessory structure" or accessory use" is one
which:
   A.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or principal use;
   B.   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal structure or
principal use served;
   C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal structure or principal use served;
   D.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or
principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served;
   E.   An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   A children's playhouse, garden house, and private greenhouse.
      2.   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
      3.   Incinerators incidental to residential use.
      4.   Storage or merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
      5.   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
      6.   Swimming pool, private, for use by the occupants and his guests.
      7.   Off-street motor car parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities.
      8.   Signs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 18.
      9.   Carports.
      10.   Public utility facilities such as telephone, electric, gas, water
and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which
has not heretofore been subdivided or platted.
AGRICULTURE: All the processes of planting, growing, harvesting of crops in the
open and the raising and feeding of livestock and poultry; including farming,
farm buildings and farm dwellings, truck gardens; flower gardens, apiaries,
aviaries, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, dairying,
greenhouses and commercial vegetables.
AIRPORT: An area of land or water which is used, or intended for use, for the
landing and take off of aircraft; and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use as airport buildings or other airport structures or rights of
way together with all airport buildings and structures located thereon.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land, which obstructs the air
space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented.
ALLEY: A public way, not more than thirty feet (30') wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL: Any change affecting the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon or
wherein three (3) or more dogs, cats and other domestic animals are kept or
maintained and which is operated by, or the treatment therein is under direct
supervision of, a veterinarian licensed to practice by the State of Iowa.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, with
kitchen facilities, which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used,
as a single housekeeping unit.
AUDITORIUM: A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school,
recreation building or other building assigned to the gathering of people as an
audience, to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (AUTOMATIC): A building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles, using production-line
methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other
mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (SELF-SERVICE): A building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles, using self-service
mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or
damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body frame or
fender straightening, or repair, and painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA: An open area, other than a street, used for the display
or sale of new or used automobiles, and where no repair work is done except for
minor incidental repair of automobiles to be displayed and sold on the
premises.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease for operation of automobiles are
offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor
accessories and servicing of automobiles; but not including major automobile
repairs, and including washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower
or steam-cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the
premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations
shall not include open sales lots for automobiles or trailers (new or used).
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles, not
in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any
used farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and
not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial
salvaging of vehicles. The open storage of any type of mechanical equipment
from which parts can be salvaged shall be classified as salvaging.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of
a building and overhangs.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2)
its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a basement
shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisement used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include
bulletin boards used to announce church services, or to display court or other
public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets,
by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shore
lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the City.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are
provided for compensation to four (4) or more persons, but not more than twelve
(12), who are not members of the keeper's family.
BOATHOUSE: Any structure designed for the purpose of protecting or storing of
boats used in conjunction with a residence for noncommercial purposes, and
located on the same lot as the principal building and not for human habitation.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space available for building on a zoning lot after the
minimum open space requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.
Any structures with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such
as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil
cracking towers and other similar structures are not considered as buildings.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat or slant roof, to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set
back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot,
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a
building or structure and the street right-of-way line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
zoning lot on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this Title.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and location of same with respect to one another and including the
following:
   A.   Size and height of buildings.
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or to other buildings.
   C.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area.
   D.   All open spaces allocated to the building.
   E.   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit.
   F.   Required parking areas.
BUS LOT: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger
buses or motor coaches.
CARPORT: A roofed-over area attached to the principal building for vehicle
storage, which may be open on three (3) sides.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) its height below the curb level
or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
CITY: That area lying within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Madison,
Iowa, and that area lying without the City limits within a two (2) mile
distance to which unincorporated areas of the City may from time to time extend
its zoning powers by ordinance.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: An establishment where patients are admitted
for special study and treatment by two (2) or more licensed physicians and
their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being generally restricted to members and
their guests.
COMMISSION, PLANNING AND ZONING: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City
of Fort Madison, Iowa.
COTTAGE BUSINESS: Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the premises for the dwelling and which is carried on
wholly within the dwelling unit. A cottage business may also be permitted in an
accessory building, attached or detached; provided, the accessory building has
been in existence two (2) years prior to the date of application. The owner, or
renter of said dwelling, together with any immediate family members operating
said business must live in the dwelling. The exterior appearance of the
dwelling shall not be altered, enlarged or changed by the business so as to
alter the outer appearance from a dwelling to that of a business. The said
cottage business cannot occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the main floor
area of the dwelling, but can be located anywhere within the dwelling. If in an
accessory building, a cottage business may occupy up to fifty percent (50%) of
said accessory building. Cottage business permits must be renewed yearly unless
extended by the Board of Adjustment.
COURT, OUTER: An open, unoccupied space opening onto a street, alley or yard.
COVERED PATIO: A roof system built over a hard surface level floor of concrete,
brick or other, at grade attached to a primary structure.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street,
the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
of the front of each street.
DAY NURSERY: A building or portion thereof used for the daytime care of
preschool age children.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound
level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels". (Ord. B-39, 1969)
DECK: A structure built above grade without a roof attached to the primary
structure.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: Any place or premises used for sale,
dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages in automobiles
including those drive-in establishments where customers may serve themselves
and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on the premises.
DUPLEX DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE: A two-family dwelling in which living quarters
are arranged side by side having separate access, utilities and sewer, which
may exist on a lot or parcel which is divided into two (2) parcels to allow
separate ownership of each parcel; provided, that the division of the parcel is
in such a manner as to result in one single-family dwelling unit being located
on either side of the common boundary line, with the common wall between the
two (2) laterally joined single-family dwelling units being on said common
boundary line, and further subject to the recording of restrictive covenants,
prior to division, which provide that the owners thereof are jointly and
severally liable and responsible for the maintenance and repair of the common
wall, as well as all other common aspects, including but not limited to
utilities, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, easements and driveways, all to
the point of division. A duplex shall meet all other requirements pertaining to
a two-family dwelling. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to allow the
separate other use of one or both of the resulting two (2) parcels of real
estate in the event the laterally joined two- family dwelling unit is partially
or totally damaged or destroyed.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or
mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, board or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A two-family dwelling in which the living quarters are
arranged side by side but not one over the other.
DWELLING GROUP: Two (2) or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on one zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof, designed or altered
for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and
occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, ROW (PARTY-WALL): A row of two (2) to eight (8) attached one-family,
party-wall dwellings, not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height,
nor more than two (2) rooms in depth, measured from the building line.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units
for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential structure which are arranged,
designed, used or intended for use by one family, plus not more than four (4)
lodgers, for living or sleeping purposes, and which includes complete kitchen
facilities permanently installed.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior
college, college or university, other than trade or business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: Public or private enclosures designed to protect people from
aerial, radiological, biological or chemical warfare, fire, flood, windstorm,
riots and invasions.
FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING: A factory-built structure designed for residential use.
For the purpose of these regulations, factory-built housing may consist of
three (3) types: modular homes, mobile homes, and manufactured homes.
FACTORY-BUILT STRUCTURE: Any structure which is wholly or in substantial part,
made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
installation, or assembly and installation, on a building site.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group
of not more than four (4) persons (excluding servants), who need not be related
by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common
household but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, and for the packing or storage of the
products produced on the premises, as well as for the raising thereon of the
usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses and cattle, as secondary to
crop raising, subject to distance limitations from residential property, and
not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals, the commercial feeding of animals on open lots where no feed is raised
on the premises, or the commercial feeding of poultry broilers, or laboratory
animals, such as mice, rats, rabbits, etc.
FIFTH-WHEEL TRAVEL TRAILER: A type of travel trailer which is towed by a pickup
by a connecting device known as a fifth wheel. However, this type of travel
trailer may have an overall length which shall not exceed forty feet (40').
FILLING STATION: Building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where, in addition the following services may be rendered and sales made, and
no others:
   A.   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and distributors and
distributor parts;
   B.   Tire service and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
   C.   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
   D.   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
   E.   Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing
materials;
   F.   Greasing and lubrication;
   G.   Provision and repair of fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines;
   H.   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
   I.   Emergency wiring repairs;
   J.   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
   K.   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase
or racing the motor;
   L.   Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar convenience
goods for filling station customers as accessory and incidental to the
principal operations;
   M.   Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers;
provision of restroom facilities.
Uses permissible at a filling station do not include major mechanical and
bodywork, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of
automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found
in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
FLOOD PLAIN: The relatively flat lowlands adjoining a watercourse or other body
of water subject to overflow therefrom during flood periods.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the stream or body of water and that portion of the
flood plain that is inundated by a flood and used to carry the flow of the
flood.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the
pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the nearest
intersecting streets or between a street and a right of way, waterway or other
similar barrier.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of three
(3) or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles
of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business,
service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles
is carried on; provided that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be
rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises, except
that all the space in a garage of one or two (2) car capacity may be so rented.
Such a garage shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle and the
load capacity of such vehicle shall not exceed two (2) tons.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, truck-trailers and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GRADE:
   A.   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of
the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
   B.   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average
of the elevations of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls adjoining the
streets.
   C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of
the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a
street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk
exists the grade shall be established by the city engineer.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the premises for the dwelling and which is carried on
wholly within the dwelling unit. A home occupation may not be permitted in any
accessory building detached from the dwelling. The owner, or renter, of said
dwelling, together with any immediate family members, operating the business
must live in the dwelling. The exterior appearance of the dwelling shall not be
altered, enlarged or changed by the business. No article can be sold or offered
for sale, except such as may be produced on the premises by members of the
immediate family. No items made available for sale may be displayed on the
premises. Teaching, tutoring or babysitting five (5) children or less at any
one time, mail ordering, art studio, desktop publishing (resumes, etc.) and
clothing alterations, can all be deemed as home occupations. Offices, clinics,
doctor's offices, hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, dress shops,
millinery shops, real estate offices, tearooms, restaurants, tourist homes,
animal hospitals, kennels, shall not be deemed to be home occupations.
HOTEL, MOTEL, INN OR AUTO COURT: An establishment containing lodging
accommodations designed for use by transients or travelers or temporary guests.
Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the
premises, restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, telephone and
secretarial or desk service.
HOUSEHOLDER: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee
thereof.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment for public use.
JUNKYARD, INCLUDING AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AND STORAGE: Any lot, building,
structure, enclosure, premises or parts thereof used for the storage, keeping
or abandonment of any worn out, cast off or discarded or abandoned article,
material, vehicle, automobile and machinery or parts thereof, which is ready
for destruction or sale, or has been collected or stored for salvage or
conversion to some use, including scrap metal, paper, wood, cordage or other
waste or discarded materials, articles, vehicles, automobiles and machinery or
parts thereof, of vehicles or automobiles without a valid current state
registration and license plate issued to said vehicle or automobile, and to the
occupant, owner, purchaser, lessor, lessee or tenant of any lot, building or
structure therein or thereon situated.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: A lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon
or wherein dogs or cats are maintained, boarded, bred, kept or cared for, in
return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale, or are groomed,
trained or handled for others.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing
and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly, or packaging of products is not
included within this definition.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE OR BERTH, OFF-STREET: An open, hard-surfaced area
of land other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for
the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers,
to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Such space shall
not be less than twelve feet (12') in width, thirty five feet (35') in length,
and shall have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14'), exclusive of access
aisles and maneuvering space.
LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging only is
provided for three (3), but not more than twenty (20) persons. Such lodging is
provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open on a
daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by vertical planes containing
the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of
a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public
street; for a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the front
lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends to the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most
remote from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot
lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds of Lee County, Iowa, or
a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the county
recorder of Lee County prior to the adoption of this title.
LOT REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street
lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
within the lot boundaries, or the minimum distance between the side lot lines
within the buildable area.
MANUFACTURE: The making of anything by any agency or process.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory-built structure built under authority of 42 USC
section 5403, that is required by federal law to display a seal from the United
States department of housing and urban development, and was constructed on or
after June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets
and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the
vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but
shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor
vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home is not built to a mandatory building code,
contains no state or federal seals, and was built before June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME PARK (RESIDENTIAL): A site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which
three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer, or septic, and electrical services available.
The term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include mobile homes,
buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual,
educational institution, or company on their own premises and used exclusively
to house their own labor or students.
MODULAR HOME: A factory-built structure which is manufactured to be used as a
place of human habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa state
building code for modular factory- built structures, and must display the seal
issued by the state building code commissioner.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached living or sleeping
rooms with individual bathrooms and designed for use by transients. Customary
services such as maid service telephone, linen and desk service, and the use
and upkeep of furniture, are provided.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building in which freight, brought to said building
by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and
interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle designed as an integral unit to be used as a
conveyance upon the public streets and highways and for use as a temporary or
recreational dwelling and having at least four (4), two (2) of which shall be
systems specified in subsection A, D, or E of this definition, of the following
permanently installed systems which meet American national standards institute
and national fire protection association standards in effect on the date of
manufacture:
   A.   Cooking facilities.
   B.   Icebox or mechanical refrigerator.
   C.   Potable water supply including plumbing and a sink with faucet either
self-contained or with connections for an external source, or both.
   D.   Self-contained toilet or a toilet connected to a plumbing system with
connection for external water disposal, or both.
   E.   Heating or air-conditioning system or both, separate from the vehicle
engine or the vehicle engine electrical system.
   F.   A 110-volt/115-volt alternating current electrical system either with
its own power supply or with a connection for an external source, or both, or a
liquefied petroleum system and supply.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE: A three- or more family dwelling in which
living quarters are arranged side by side having separate access, utilities and
sewer, which may exist on a lot or parcel which is divided into three (3) or
more parcels to allow separate ownership of each parcel; provided, that the
division of the parcel is in such a manner as to result in one single-family
dwelling unit being located on either side of the common boundary line, with
the common wall between the three (3) or more laterally joined single-family
dwelling units being on said common boundary line and further subject to the
recording of restrictive covenants, prior to division, which provide that the
owners thereof are jointly and severally liable and responsible for the
maintenance and repair of the common wall, as well as all other common aspects,
including, but not limited to, utilities, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
easements and driveways, all to the point of division. A zero lot line dwelling
shall meet all other requirements pertaining to a multi-family dwelling.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to allow the separate use of any of
the resulting parcels of real estate in the event the laterally joined multi-
family dwelling unit is partially or totally damaged or destroyed.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of
an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this title, which was designed, erected or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of
the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use
lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this title or amendments
hereto, which does not conform after the passage of this title, or amendments
hereto, with the use regulations hereof.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the
psychological, social or economic well being of human beings.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution providing daycare service for children from four
(4) to six (6) years of age.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged
or infirm or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders.
OBSTRUCTION: An obstacle, impediment or hindrance.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in
order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer, designed according to
standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals (American Standards for Sound Level Meters, ASA no. 244.3-1944).
OPEN SALES LOT: Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
new or secondhand passenger cars or trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats,
trailers, aircraft, monuments, farm machinery and equipment, and for the
storage of same prior to sale.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private
passenger automobiles only, or occupants of the building or buildings for which
the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, and available
to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients
or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not
less than one hundred eighty square feet (9' x 20'), exclusive of access aisles
or drives, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one- half (11/2) tons
capacity.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended or discharged into the
atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure
and temperature.
PATIO: An open, uncovered (no walls or roof) surfaced outdoor living area, at
grade, abutting and accessible from a dwelling.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is planned as a whole for
development under single ownership or control and which, by virtue of such
unified planning and development, provides greater amenities, convenience or
other benefits than normally would be had through the development of diverse
smaller tracts under multiple ownership. In the case of residential planned
development, adequate provision shall be made for basic community facilities
such as schools, parks, playgrounds and churches, among others. The minimum
area for a planned development shall be:
 
A. For residential       4 acres
B. For business          5 acres
C. For industrial        10 acres
D. For governmental      2 acres
E. For mobile home parks 10 acres
 
PORCH: A structure built above grade with a roof attached to a primary
structure.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area including, but not limited to,
the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches, waterways,
parkways and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or Municipal department duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, transportation or water.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land with tracks, and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including depot loading platforms, stations, train
sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, water towers, etc.
RECREATIONAL CAMP: An establishment consisting of a permanent building or group
of permanent buildings used periodically by an association of persons where
seasonal accommodations for recreational purposes are provided only to members
of such association and not to anyone who may apply.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee
shops, lunchroom, drive-in stand, tearoom and dining room; and including the
serving of alcoholic beverages when served with and incidental to the serving
of meals.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of
grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of smoke emission.
ROADSIDE STAND: A farm building used or intended to be used solely by the owner
or tenant of the farm on which such building is located, for the sale of the
farm products raised on said farm.
SAND AND GRAVEL PITS: The term "sand or gravel pit" shall include the removal
of sand or gravel deposits from the land for commercial purposes, regardless of
whether or not such operation results in the creation of a depression in the
ground.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: A building consisting of individual, small,
self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and
household goods or contractors supplies. No commercial or individual sales will
be permitted from such facilities.
SIDEWALK CAFE: A restaurant that provides outdoor seating on public property
for the purpose of serving food and/or beverages.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, tree, rock or other object, or piece of land, and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business.
However, a sign shall not include any display or official court or public
office notices nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. A sign shall not include a sign
located completely within an enclosed building unless the context shall be
exposed to view from a street. Each display surface of a sign shall be
considered to be a sign.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD: A sign attached to the exterior of a church or
located elsewhere on the church premises, used to indicate the services or
activities of the church and including its name, if desired.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such
sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, any revolving, illuminated sign
shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: A sign shall be the entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case
passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such
perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside
the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A structure, building wall or other outdoor surface used
to display and identify the name of the individual, business, profession,
organization or institution occupying the premises upon which it is located.
SINGLE DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED: An individual dwelling unit structure with all
rooms and/or accessory areas physically attached or interconnected by means of
a common wall(s) or by roofed, enclosed corridors or spaces of not less than
eight feet (8') in width. The length of any interconnecting area shall not be
more than one and one-half (1.5) times its width. All portions or segments of a
single dwelling unit shall be accessible by means of interior doorways or
corridors.
SMOKE UNITS: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann
numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this chart,
Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period
of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during
which it is observed; and the various products are added together to give the
total number of "smoke units" observed during the total period under
observation.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American standards
association for measurement of intensity of sound.
SPECIAL USE: A use permitted by special zoning certificate in accordance with
the provisions of
chapter 22 of this title.
STACKING REQUIREMENTS: The number of cars that must be accommodated in a
reservoir space while awaiting ingress or egress to specified business or
service establishments.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story
exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: A half-story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or
mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior
walls are not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor
of each story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half-story
in a sloping room shall not be counted as a story.
STREET: A public way other than an alley, which affords a primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET LINE: A line separating a lot, piece or parcel from a street.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground,
or attached to something with a fixed location on the ground, including a fence
or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached
or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: Any structure which does not conform to the
regulations of this title prescribing the maximum floor area ratio, required
yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum required spacing between
structures on a single lot, and minimum required usable open space for the
district in which such structure is located.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors and/or beer are sold to be consumed
on the premises, but not including restaurants where the principal business is
serving food.
TINY HOMES: Residential structures that do not normally comply with district
lot and structure requirements, but are allowed due to the unique nature and
need for specialized housing assistance. Tiny homes are of such unique
characteristics that they are allowed only by special use permit if listed
within the district and all the criteria are met as listed in
10-22-11 of this code.
TOURIST COURT, MOTOR LODGE, MOTEL: A group of attached or detached buildings
containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used
temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels,
motor lodges or other similar type uses.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for
transient guests.
TOXIC MATERIALS: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which by reason of a
deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power used, manufactured, or
constructed to permit its use as a conveyance upon the public streets and
highways and designed to permit its use as a place of human habitation by one
or more persons. The vehicle may be up to eight feet six inches (8'6") in width
and its overall length shall not exceed forty feet (40'). The vehicle shall be
customarily or ordinarily used for vacation or recreational purposes and not
used as a place of permanent habitation.
TRUCK PARKING AREA OF YARD: Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, truck-trailers, truck-tractors and including any
other commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, which exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons in capacity.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are
displayed in the open for sale or trade.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group
of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a
lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between
the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the
rear yard.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: To be appointed by the city council.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the
time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. Therefore a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a
lot of record.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part hereof,
designating zoning districts. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-129, 3-6-1973; Ord.
B-453, 12-4-1984; Ord. C-085, 6-4-1991; Ord. C-154, 4-6-1993; Ord. C-170, 9-7-
1993; Ord. C-229, 11-15-1994; Ord. C-254, 1-16-1996; Ord. C-278, 6-3-1997; Ord.
C-334, 3-20-2001; Ord. C-412, 2-15-2005; Ord. D-30, 4-5-2016; Ord. D-39, 1-17-
2017; Ord. D-046, 11-21-2017; Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
CHAPTER 3
USE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Districts
10-3-2: Zoning Maps
10-3-3: Zoning Of New Or Annexed Land
10-3-4: Zoning Of Public Ways
10-3-5: Boundary Lines
10-3-1: DISTRICTS:
For the purposes and provisions herein, the city of Fort Madison has been
organized into zoning districts, as follows:
R-1  One-family dwelling district
R-2  One-family dwelling district
R-3  One-family dwelling district
R-4  One-family dwelling district
R-5  Two-family dwelling district
R-6  Multiple-family dwelling district
B-1  Business district, limited retail
B-2  Business district, general retail
B-3  Service and wholesale district
B-4  Highway business district
I-1  Limited industrial district
I-2  General industrial district
AR-1 Agricultural/residential district
MA-1 Airport district
 
(Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004; Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-3-2: ZONING MAPS:
The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown on
the zoning map which is a part of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-3-3: ZONING OF NEW OR ANNEXED LAND:
Prior to the annexation of any territory to the city, a plan for zoning the
area to be annexed shall be forwarded to the city council by the planning and
zoning commission. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city
shall be automatically classified in the R-1 one-family dwelling district until
otherwise changed by ordinance after public hearing. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-3-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same use district as the
property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and
railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas,
unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as
that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-3-5: BOUNDARY LINES:
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown
on the zoning district map incorporated herein, the following rules are
applicable:
   A.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar right of way, they shall be construed as following the
centerlines thereof.
   B.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   C.   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date
of this title, is divided by a district boundary, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district, provided that this
construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted
portion of the lot by more than twenty percent (20%). (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Scope Of Regulations
10-4-2: Permits
10-4-3: Building Height, Bulk And Lot Coverage
10-4-4: Lot Dimension And Area
10-4-5: Supplementary District Regulations
10-4-6: Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards
10-4-7: Division Of Zoning Lots
10-4-8: Number Of Buildings On Zoning Lot
10-4-9: Building Construction In Floodway Areas
10-4-10: Accessory Buildings
10-4-11: Trailers And Mobile Homes
10-4-12: Uses Not Specifically Permitted In Districts
10-4-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed
or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose
other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is
located. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-4-2: PERMITS:
A permit shall be required for each building project, or work on a structure,
as specified in these regulations, except as to changes in the interior of a
building, where no building permit is required under any other provision of
this code. The application form shall be submitted to, and approved by, the
zoning administrator in order to conform with these regulations, before a
permit is issued. Said permit may be combined on one form with a building
permit required under any other provision of this code. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-4-3: BUILDING HEIGHT, BULK AND LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally
altered so as to have a greater height or bulk, a higher percentage of lot
coverage or smaller open space about it than is permissible under the
limitations set forth herein for the district in which the building is located,
except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height limit.
   B.   No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of
complying with the side, rear or front yard, or court or other open space, or
lot area requirements shall thereafter be used to satisfy the yard, court, open
space or lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group. (Ord.
B-39, 1969)
10-4-4: LOT DIMENSION AND AREA:
   A.   When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area
and dimensions to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one
ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
   B.   Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership, which was of
record at the effective date hereof, that does not meet with the requirements
for minimum lot width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided
that yards, courts or usable open space are not less than seventy five percent
(75%) of the minimum required dimensions or areas. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-4-5: SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Visibility At Intersection In Residential Districts: On a street corner
in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the center
line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines
of such street corner and a line joining points along the street lines fifty
feet (50') from the point of the intersection.
   B.   Fences, Walls, And Hedges: Except as otherwise required by this
section, fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or
along the edge of any yard, provided:
      1.   No fence, wall, or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front
yard shall be over two and one-half feet (21/2') in height, except that a fence
which does not materially impede vision may be up to four feet (4') in height
in a front yard.
      2.   No fence, wall, or hedge along any side or rear yard shall be over
six feet (6') in height.
      3.   No fence shall be closer to any alley right-of-way line than five
feet (5').
      4.   On reversed corner lots, fences in side yards abutting neighboring
front yards shall comply to the requirements for front yards to the same
dimension as the neighboring front yard.
   C.   Erection Of More Than One Principal Structure On A Lot: In any
district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal
use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements
of this section shall be met for each structure as though it were on an
individual lot.
   D.   Exceptions To Height Regulations: The height limitations contained in
this title do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks,
ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed
above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
   E.   Structures To Have Access: Every building hereafter erected or moved
shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with permanent access to an
approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required
off street parking.
   F.   Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked
or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed
buildings. (Ord. B-374, 7-6-1982)
   G.   Satellite Dishes Located On The Ground:
      1.   Units cannot be located in utility easements, public rights of way,
or block light into a neighboring house. The zoning administrator's office is
to be contacted to ensure placement compliance. Total height should not exceed
twelve feet (12').
      2.   Satellite receivers shall be located in the rear yard, but in the
event of obvious signal impediment due to natural geographic features, trees or
other obstructions, a side yard location can be selected. In the event a proper
side yard location does not allow signal reception, the receiver can be placed
in the front yard, subject only to the granting of a special use permit. (Ord.
C-254, 1-16-1996)
   H.   Satellite Dishes Located On Roof Or Along Wall: Lot line setback
regulations apply with consideration given to clearances aboveground, over
sidewalks and driveways. Closest possible distance of dish to the lot line will
determine compliance. Small dishes are treated as existing roof mounted
television antennas. (Ord. B-466, 5-7-1985)
   I.   Satellite Dish Not In Use: Any satellite dish not in use or rendered
useless through technology or legal regulation shall be removed within thirty
(30) days. (Ord. B-374, 7-6-1982; amd. Ord. B-466, 5-7-1985; Ord. C-254, 1-16-
1996; Ord. D-58, 1-7-2020)
10-4-6: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS:
The following obstructions, when located in the minimum area required for
specified yards shall be permitted:
   A.   In all yards:
      1.   Chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard;
      2.   Flagpoles;
      3.   Ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, and
ornamental features projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into a yard;
      4.   Ornamental light standards;
      5.   Steps which are necessary for access to permitted buildings or for
access to lots from streets and required exterior fire escapes;
      6.   One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the
yard;
      7.   Air conditioning condenser units;
      8.   Arbors and trellises;
      9.   Balconies of no more than five feet (5') into the required yard;
      10.   Overhanging roof eaves and gutters, provided those on accessory
buildings are not less than two feet (2') from a lot line;
      11.   Open, uncovered patios.
   B.   In front yards:
      1.   Fuel pumps and air and water outlets in conjunction with automobile
service stations, provided they shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15')
from the front lot line;
      2.   Signs and nameplates as regulated herein;
      3.   Fences conforming to subsection
10-4-5B1 of this chapter.
   C.   In rear yards:
      1.   Breezeways;
      2.   Private garages and sheds;
      3.   Fences;
      4.   Playground and laundry drying equipment;
      5.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
   D.   In side yards:
      1.   Breezeways;
      2.   Private garages and sheds;
      3.   Fences;
      4.   Open accessory off street parking spaces;
      5.   Playground and laundry drying equipment;
      6.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts. (Ord. C-254, 1-16-1996)
10-4-7: DIVISION OF ZONING LOTS:
No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning
lots and no portion of any improved zoning lot shall be sold, unless all
improved zoning lots resulting from each such division or sale shall conform
with all the bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-4-8: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON ZONING LOT:
Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principal
detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot, nor shall a
principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with
any other principal building. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-4-9: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION IN FLOODWAY AREAS:
No construction (building or structure) is permitted in or adjacent to the
floodway or floodplain of any river, stream or tributary 1 . (Ord. B-39, 1969)
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 455A.35.
10-4-10: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
      1.   Exception: One accessory structure may be constructed on a vacant
lot provided the proposed structure and lot comply with the following
conditions as depicted in the drawing shown hereafter:
         a.   The vacant lot is part of a corner lot that has been divided for
a period of at least ten (10) years.
         b.   A house must be located on the lot abutting the vacant lot.
         c.   A house must be located on the lot with which this lot is
combined.
         d.   The vacant lot and the abutting lot with a house located on it
must have together, comprised one corner lot, prior to their separation.
         e.   The legal description of the vacant lot and the lot directly
across the alley must both be contained in a single deed that has been recorded
with the Lee County recorder.
         f.   The single deed containing both legal descriptions must: a) be
submitted to the Fort Madison zoning administrator for approval, prior to
recording, and b) contain the following language on the face of the deed:
RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER. The two lots described in this deed can only be
transferred together as one parcel. The two lots cannot be separated, one from
the other, without first obtaining written approval of the proposed transfer
from the Fort Madison Zoning Administrator.
 
This restriction on transfer is approved this          day of
                    , 2        .
 
                                                   
Fort Madison Zoning Administrator
         g.   Once the deed is recorded, the two (2) properties cannot, later,
be separated without approval of the zoning administrator.
         h.   The buildable area for the accessory structure must be located
within the rear fifty feet (50') of the lot.
         i.   There must be a setback of ten feet (10') from the line dividing
the corner lot into two (2) lots.
         j.   All other bulk regulations apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c2ee55c8db21d487eee7bd7164ccdbc2eb246e6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3004.png]
 
(Ord. C-510, 2-7-2012)
   B.   Location: An accessory building shall only be located in the side or
rear yard, and must be a minimum of five feet (5') from the rear property line,
and a minimum of three feet (3') from the interior lot line.
   C.   Height Of Accessory Buildings: No detached accessory building shall
exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, measured from the floor to the highest
point of the roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c2ee55c8db21d487eee7bd7164ccdbc2eb246e6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3006.png]
 
   D.   On Reversed Corner Lots: On a reversed corner lot in a residential
district, no accessory building shall be located beyond the front yard required
on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet (5') to
the side lot line of the adjacent lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c2ee55c8db21d487eee7bd7164ccdbc2eb246e6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3008.png]
 
(Ord. C-395, 3-16-2004)
   E.   On A Corner Lot: On a corner lot in a residential district, an
accessory building located in a side or rear yard shall be located not closer
than ten feet (10') to the adjacent street right of way line. (Ord. C-413, 2-
15-2005)
10-4-11: TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Trailers and mobile homes shall not be permitted in any district as
accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   B.   A fifth wheel travel trailer, or a motor home, or a travel trailer may
be parked or occupied for lodging purposes on a vacant lot or on the same lot
as a dwelling, but not for more than seventy two (72) hours in any consecutive
thirty (30) day period. (Ord. C-335, 3-20-2001)
   C.   Trailers or mobile homes may be used as temporary offices or storage
space incidental to construction of a building development for the period of
time such construction is actively undertaken, provided the trailer or mobile
home is located on the same or contiguous lot as the building development.
(Ord. C-336, 3-20-2001)
   D.   The zoning administrator is hereby authorized to approve temporary
permits to allow trailers and mobile homes in industrial districts only.
Appeals to the decision of the zoning administrator shall be made to the board
of adjustment and appeals and in the same manner as specified in subsection 10-
20-5E of this title. (Ord. C-337, 3-20-2001)
10-4-12: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS:
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted
uses, it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless
by a written decision of the planning and zoning commission it is determined
that such use is similar to and not more objectionable than uses listed. Such
uses may then be permitted. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 5
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Continuance Of Use
10-5-2: Discontinuance Of Use
10-5-3: Termination And Removal
10-5-4: Repairs And Alterations
10-5-5: Damage And Destruction
10-5-6: Additions And Enlargements
10-5-7: Conversion To Special Use
10-5-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
   A.   Any lawfully established use of a building or land that does not
conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located shall be
deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as herein
otherwise provided. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   B.   Any legal nonconforming use of a building or structure may be
continued, provided there are no physical changes other than necessary
maintenance and repair. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same
classification or of a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming
use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. (Ord. C-138, 11-3-
1992)
   C.   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is
started within ninety (90) days and prosecuted to completion within six (6)
months. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established
building. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-5-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
   A.   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a conforming use, such premises
shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use even though the
building may have been originally designed and constructed for the prior
nonconforming use.
   B.   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof
has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or
whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a
nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned,
be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity
with the regulations of the district.
   C.   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment,
and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-5-3: TERMINATION AND REMOVAL:
The period of time during which the following nonconforming uses of buildings,
structures or land may continue or remain shall be limited from the effective
date of this title or amendment thereto which causes the use to be
nonconforming. Every such nonconforming use shall be completely removed from
the premises at the expiration of the period of time specified below:
   A.   Any nonconforming use of a building or structure having an assessed
valuation not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be removed
after two (2) years.
   B.   All nonconforming signs, billboards and outdoor advertising structures
shall be removed after ten (10) years.
   C.   Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved,
or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such use,
or where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building, shall
be removed after a period of two (2) years. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   D.   (Rep. by Ord. C-339, 3-20-2001)
   E.   Any use of land which was in violation of ordinance A-143, on file in
the city clerk's office, shall not become a valid use unless it is a conforming
use under this title, nor shall such continued use become a valid nonconforming
use under this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-5-4: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   B.   No structure alteration shall be made in a building or other structure
containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law.
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in elimination of the
nonconforming use.
      3.   When a building in a residential district containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no
structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of
dwelling units or the bulk of the building. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-5-5: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is
involuntarily damaged or destroyed by any means, the building may then be
restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such building
may be continued which existed at the time of such destruction.
Restoration or repair of the building or other structure shall be started
within a period of six (6) months from the date of damage or destruction, and
completed within twelve (12) months of the date of such damage. (Ord. B-117,
10-3-1972)
10-5-6: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
   A.   A building, nonconforming in use, may be enlarged or extended one time
during the existence of said nonconforming use by no more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the existing floor area. Such building will not need to become
a conforming use. Applicant will be required to go through the special use
application process as provided in
chapter 22 of this title. However, a building may be enlarged or extended by
more than twenty five percent (25%) only if the entire building is thereafter
devoted to a conforming use. In both cases, the building must conform to all
other regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. C-152, 2-2-
1993)
   B.   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use.
   C.   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed on the effective date of this title, or to displace
any conforming use in the same building or on the same premises. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
   D.   A building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards or
any other specific element of bulk may be altered or expanded, provided the
degree of the nonconformity is not increased, and provided no other code
requirement or bulk regulation, for the district in which it is located, is
violated. (Ord. B-338, 1-6-1981)
   E.   No building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards
or any other specific element of bulk can be expanded by more than thirty
percent (30%) of its existing gross floor area whenever such expansion
increases the actual amount of a structure's nonconformity and nonconforming
area, nor can any alteration be effected that involves replacement of more than
thirty percent (30%) of the structure's existing framework. An expansion or
alteration in accordance with this section, involving no more than thirty
percent (30%) of the existing floor area or structural framework, can occur
only one time unless specifically permitted thereafter by special use. An
expansion or alteration of more than thirty percent (30%) of existing floor
area or structural framework replacement of more than thirty percent (30%) can
also occur through issuance of a special use permit. (Ord. C-430, 11-15-2005)
   F.   In the event of involuntary destruction or substantial damage, the
building or structure may be restored or reconstructed "as was" or may be
expanded in accordance with subsection E of this section. Reconstruction or
expansion must be completed within twelve (12) months of the occurrence of the
destruction or substantial damage. (Ord. C-418, 5-3-2005)
10-5-7: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
   A.   Any nonconforming use may be made a special use by granting of a
special use permit, as authorized in
chapter 22 of this title.
   B.   Any nonconforming use of a building or structure which has been vacant
for more than twelve (12) months and lost its nonconforming classification as
required by subsection 10-5-2B of this chapter, may be made a special use by
granting of a special use permit, as authorized in
chapter 22 of this title, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The building or structure must be of such nature that conversion to
an allowable use would be impossible, financially impractical (improvements to
convert would cost in excess of 50 percent of the value of the structure), or
nonconducive to the structure.
      2.   The proposed use is suitable for the subject structure and site.
      3.   The use proposed must be similar or more restrictive than previous
uses of the property with evidence showing previous uses in legal operation.
      4.   The structure will not be structurally altered or enlarged in such a
way as to enlarge the special use beyond the space previously used for
nonconforming uses.
      5.   Any special use approved using this subsection B is approved for the
use only. Any change in use is not allowed under the previous special use.
(Ord. C-497, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 6
R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Permitted Uses
10-6-2: Special Uses
10-6-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-6-4: Height of Buildings
10-6-5: Lot Requirements
10-6-6: Yard Areas
10-6-7: Lot Coverage
10-6-8: Dwelling Standards
10-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District:
One-family detached dwellings.
Agricultural uses such as field crops, truck gardening, berry or bush crops,
tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries, orchards, aviaries and apiaries
including a greenhouse but not including a salesroom, roadside stand or
conducting a retail or wholesale business from the premises.
Parks, playgrounds, libraries or community theaters, when publicly owned and
operated.
Golf course, country clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses
provided that such uses are not operated primarily for commercial gain.
Home occupations.
Temporary real estate office in conjunction with a new housing development,
limited to the selling or renting of new units in such developments and in no
case to be operated for more than one year following completion of construction
of said housing development.
Permitted accessory uses, including off-street parking facilities, in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 19 of this Title.
Schools, public denominational or private, elementary and high, including
playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious
institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
completion date of such construction.
Signs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 18 hereof. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
Transient merchandising 1 . (C-099, 11-19-91)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  title 4, chapter 4 of this code.
10-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 22 hereof:
Private schools, nursery schools and child nurseries.
Rest homes, nursing homes, hospitals and sanitariums for human beings only.
Railroad right of way and trackage but not including reclassification yards,
terminal or maintenance facilities.
Hospitals.
Airports or aircraft landing fields.
Radio and television stations and towers.
Public service uses, including filtration plants, pumping station and water
reservoir; sewage treatment plant; police and fire stations; telephone
exchanges, electric substations, and other similar public service uses.
Cemeteries.
Planned developments, residential, as defined and as approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
Off-street parking areas when serving a permitted use. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
Cottage business. (Ord. B-424, 10-4-83)
10-6-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
Chapter 19 of this Title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-6-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
   A.   One-family detached dwellings - twenty five feet (25') or two and one-
half (21/2) stories.
   B.   Churches - forty five feet (45') for the main structure and seventy
five feet (75') for towers or steeples. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-6-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
and the minimum lot width shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') at the
building line; provided each individual lot is served by public sewer and water
supply.
   B.   On lots where septic tanks are proposed to be used, the soil condition
of the site shall be reviewed by the City Engineer prior to granting approval
for the installation of septic tanks.
   C.   All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this
Section shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, with a minimum width of one hundred feet
(100') at the established building line and shall be served by public sewer and
water supply.
   D.   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized. All such uses shall
be served by a public sewer and water supply. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-6-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed there shall be a
side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the lot width, but not less than ten feet (10'). The combined total of
side yards for interior lots shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard on the street
side of not less than fifteen feet (15'), and in the case of a reversed corner
lot there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear
of such corner lot, but such setback need not exceed twenty five feet (25'). No
accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front
yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five
feet (5') to the side lot line of said adjacent lot.
      3.   On lots upon which a permitted nonresidential use is erected or
enlarged, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on each
side of the main structure, and a combined total of side yards of not less than
twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-6-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-6-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any R-1 one- family
dwelling district shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, measured from the outside of the
exterior walls, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or
during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   B.   Every dwelling of more than one-story hereafter erected in any R-1 one-
family dwelling district shall have a total floor area, measured from the
outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements,
garages, open porches, breezeways and other spaces that are not used frequently
or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that
enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
   C.   Every dwelling erected in any R-1 one-family dwelling district shall
have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340, 3-20-
2001)
CHAPTER 7
R-2 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Permitted Uses
10-7-2: Special Uses
10-7-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-7-4: Height Of Buildings
10-7-5: Lot Requirements
10-7-6: Yard Areas
10-7-7: Lot Coverage
10-7-8: Dwelling Standards
10-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 one-family dwelling district, as provided by
section
10-6-1 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
Any special use allowed in the R-1 one-family dwelling district, as provided by
section
10-6-2 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family
dwelling district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, and
a minimum lot width of not less than sixty feet (60') at the building line.
(Ord. C-350, 10-2-2001)
   B.   On lots where septic tanks are proposed to be used, the lot size shall
conform to the standards set forth in subsection 10-6-5B of this title.
   C.   All nonresidential principal uses as permitted in this chapter shall be
located on a tract of land having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet with a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') at the
established building line. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-6: YARD AREAS:
The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the R-1 one-family
dwelling district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-7-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings
and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. C-350, 10-2-2001)
10-7-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any R-2 one- family
dwelling district shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet, measured from the outside of the exterior walls,
including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   B.   Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected in any R-2 one-
family dwelling district shall have a total floor area, measured from the
outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or
during extended periods for living, eating and sleeping purposes, except that
enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
   C.   Every dwelling erected in any R-2 one-family dwelling district shall
have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340, 3-20-
2001)
CHAPTER 8
R-3 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Permitted Uses
10-8-2: Special Uses
10-8-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-8-4: Height Of Buildings
10-8-5: Lot Requirements
10-8-6: Yard Areas
10-8-7: Lot Coverage
10-8-8: Dwelling Standards
10-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District as provided by
section
10-6-1 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Any special uses allowed in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District, as provided
by section
10-6-2 of this title.
Planned mobile home parks. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 One-Family
Dwelling District. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and
a minimum lot width at the established building line of not less than eighty
feet (80').
   B.   On lots where septic tanks are proposed to be used, the lot size shall
conform to the standards as set forth in subsection 10-6-5B of this title.
   C.   All nonresidential principal uses as permitted in this section shall be
located on a tract of land having an area of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet with a minimum width of ninety feet (90') at the
established building line. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: On every zoning lot a front yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25') in depth shall be provided. However, where lots within the same
block and comprising forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same street are
already developed with front yards with an average depth of less than twenty
five feet (25'), then such average depth shall be the required front yard depth
for such frontage in said block.
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed there shall be a
combined total of side yards of not less than fifteen feet (15') with a minimum
side yard requirement of six feet (6'). Note: If rear yard is currently reduced
to less than thirty feet (30'), confirm proposed structure will comply with
subsection C of this section before approval of said proposed structure.
      2.   On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard on the street
side of not less than ten feet (10'), and in the case of a reversed corner lot
there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear
of such corner lot, but such setback need not exceed twenty five feet (25'). No
accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front
yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five
feet (5') to the side lot line of said adjacent lot.
      3.   On lots upon which a permitted nonresidential use is erected or
enlarged, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on each
side of the main structure, and a combined total of side yards of not less than
twenty feet (20').
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
Exception: A rear yard setback may be reduced to fourteen feet (14') if:
      1.   Any of the following statements are true:
         a.   If the property has no access from public rights-of-way to the
rear or side of the property. A side yard of ten feet (10') or more is
considered access from the front street. Sheds ten feet (10') by twelve feet
(12') and under are considered mobile structures and are not considered a
barrier for access. Fences and trees, bushes and other growth are not
considered a barrier for access.
         b.   The property already has a garage with a minimum of twenty feet
(20') wide and a minimum of twenty feet (20') deep with a single sixteen foot
(16') wide door or a minimum of two (2) 8-foot wide doors side by side serving
separate stalls.
         c.   The property has space available for the proposed structure to
the rear as well as a future garage twenty four feet (24') wide and deep
accessible to the side with access from the street including setbacks for
proposed structure and garage as required by this Code.
      2.   This exception is intended for decks, porches and covered patios
built after construction of a new residence. This exception may not be used to
reduce the rear yard setback for construction of the principal structure. (Ord.
D-046, 11-21-2017)
10-8-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-8-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any R-3 One- Family
Dwelling District shall have a total ground floor area of not less than nine
hundred (900) square feet, measured from the outside of the exterior walls,
including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended period for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   B.   Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected in any R-3 One-
Family Dwelling District shall have a total floor area, measured from the
outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or
during extended periods for living, eating and sleeping purposes, except that
enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
   C.   Every dwelling erected in any R-3 One-Family Dwelling District shall
have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340, 3-20-
2001)
CHAPTER 9
R-4 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Permitted Uses
10-9-2: Special Uses
10-9-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-9-4: Height Of Buildings
10-9-5: Lot Requirements
10-9-6: Yard Areas
10-9-7: Lot Coverage
10-9-8: Dwelling Standards
10-9-9: Variances; Yards
10-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 one-family dwelling district as provided in
section
10-6-1 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Any special uses allowed in the R-1 one- family dwelling district, as provided
by section
10-6-2 of this title.
Planned mobile home parks.
Temporary shelter for the homeless.
Tiny Homes, provided they comply with
10-22-11. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-132, 9-1-1992; Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
10-9-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-9-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family
dwelling district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-9-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet,
and a minimum lot width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the established
building line. (Ord. C-350, 10-2-2001)
   B.   All nonresidential principal uses as permitted in this chapter shall be
located on a tract of land having an area of not less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet with a minimum width of seventy five feet (75') at the
established building line. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-9-6: YARD AREAS:
The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the R-3 one-family
dwelling district. (Ord. B-117, 10-3-1972)
10-9-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-9-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any R-4 one- family
dwelling district shall have a total ground floor area of not less than eight
hundred (800) square feet, measured from the outside of the exterior walls,
including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   B.   Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected in any R-4 one-
family dwelling district shall have a total floor area, measured from the
outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100)
square feet, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or
during extended periods for living, eating and sleeping purposes, except that
enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
   C.   Every dwelling erected in any R-4 one-family dwelling district shall
have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340, 3-20-
2001)
10-9-9: VARIANCES; YARDS:
Whenever a lot of record at time of passage of this title has a width of less
than fifty feet (50'), the side yard on each side of a building may be reduced
to a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but in
no instance shall it be less than four feet (4') and with the restriction of
one foot (1') overhang. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 10
R-5 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Permitted Uses
10-10-2: Special Uses
10-10-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-10-4: Height Of Buildings
10-10-5: Lot Requirements
10-10-6: Yard Areas
10-10-7: Lot Coverage
10-10-8: Dwelling Standards
10-10-9: Variances; Yards
10-10-1: PERMITTED USES:
Except as permitted by special use permit, no use of property in an R-
5 District shall be carried on except the following:
Uses permitted in the R-4 District.
Golf course, country clubs, tennis courts and similar recreational uses
provided that any such use be not operated primarily for commercial gain.
Home occupations.
Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds or community theaters when operated by
the City.
Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries.
One-family dwellings converted to a two-family dwelling.
Public schools and churches.
Signs, as permitted or required in
chapter 18 of this title.
Temporary buildings for real estate office or construction purposes when used
in conjunction with a new housing development.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-10-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Cemeteries.
Cottage business.
Planned developments, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Private schools, nursery schools and child nurseries.
Public service uses.
Radio and television towers.
Railroad right-of-way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards,
terminal and maintenance facilities.
Rest homes.
Tiny Homes, provided they comply with
10-22-11. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-424, 10-4-1983; Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
10-10-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-10-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling
District. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-10-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet,
and a minimum width at the established building line of not less than seventy
feet (70'); provided, each individual lot is served by a public sewer and water
supply. Lots where either public sewer or water is not provided shall be a
minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area and have a minimum
width of one hundred feet (100') at the established building line.
   B.   Every two-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet and
a minimum width at the established building line of not less than sixty feet
(60'); provided, each individual lot is served by a public sewer and water
supply. Lots where either public sewer or water is not provided shall be a
minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area and have a minimum
width of one hundred feet (100') at the established building line.
   C.   An existing one-family dwelling located on a lot of less than required
herein may be converted to a two-family dwelling without increasing the lot
size; provided, that the building is not enlarged beyond its present outside
dimensions and that all other regulations of this title are complied with.
Additions may be made to an existing building only when lot size and yard
requirements of this chapter can be complied with.
   D.   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized. All such uses shall
be served by a public sewer and water supply. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-10-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement: (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   A.   Regulations Applicable: The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-3 One-Family Dwelling District. (Ord. D-046, 11-21-2017)
   B.   Zero Lot Line Dwellings:
      1.   "Zero lot line dwellings" are defined as:
         a.   A two-family dwelling in which the dwelling units are joined by a
common party wall standing part upon each of the two (2) adjoining lots; or
         b.   Three (3), or more, one-family attached dwellings located on two
(2) or more individual lots joined by a common party wall.
      2.   The required lot area for a zero lot line dwelling unit shall be:
         a.   In case of a two-family dwelling at least one-half (1/2) the
minimum lot area for a two-family detached dwelling unit.
         b.   In the case of three (3), or more, family dwellings, at least
one-half (1/2) the minimum lot area for a two-family detached dwelling unit.
      3.   a. Every lot upon which there is erected a two-family zero lot line
dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of seventy feet (70') and a minimum
depth of one hundred feet (100').
         b.   Every lot upon which there is erected a three (3), or more,
family zero lot line dwelling shall have a lot width of at least twenty five
feet (25') or a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100') for each interior
unit. Any dwelling unit that is not an "end unit" is classified as an "interior
unit".
      4.   Every zero lot line dwelling shall have a front and rear yard of not
less than twenty five feet (25'). Each end unit in a zero lot line dwelling
arranged as townhouses or row houses shall have a side yard of not less than
ten feet (10'). On corner lots, side yard requirement on the intersecting
street side shall not be less than fifteen feet (15').
      5.   Zero lot line dwellings are governed by the height and lot coverage
restrictions of the zoning district. (Ord. C-211, 8-2-1994; amd. Ord. D-046,
11-21-2017)
      6.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with separate building access
and with separate utility service. No portion of the wall, roof or appurtenance
on the zero yard side shall project over the lot line. Openings in the wall
shall be prohibited. (Ord. C-238, 4-4-1995; amd. Ord. D-046, 11-21-2017)
      7.   This subsection shall apply to zero lot line dwellings erected after
January 1, 1994. (Ord. C-211, 8-2-1994; amd. Ord. D-046, 11-21-2017)
10-10-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings or structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-10-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected shall have a minimum total
floor area of nine hundred (900) square feet, measured from the outside of the
exterior walls, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or
during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   B.   Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected shall have a minimum total
floor area of nine hundred (900) square feet per dwelling unit, measured from
the outside of the exterior walls, including utility rooms, but excluding
cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are
not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping
purposes. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   C.   Every dwelling erected in any R-5 Two-Family Dwelling District shall
have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340, 3-20-
2001)
10-10-9: VARIANCES; YARDS:
Whenever a lot of record at time of passage of this title has a width of less
than fifty feet (50'), the side yard on each side of a building may be reduced
to a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but in
no instance shall it be less than four feet (4') and with the restriction of
one foot (1') overhang. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 11
R-6 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Permitted Uses
10-11-2: Special Uses
10-11-3: Off-Street Parking Facilities
10-11-4: Height Of Buildings
10-11-5: Lot Requirements
10-11-6: Yard Areas
10-11-7: Lot Coverage
10-11-8: Dwelling Standards
10-11-1: PERMITTED USES:
Except as permitted by special use permit, no use of property in an R-
6 District shall be carried on except the following:
Uses permitted in the R-5 District.
Apartment houses, row houses and similar multiple-family dwellings up to twelve
(12) dwelling units per building.
Boarding and rooming houses.
Hotels.
Nursery and nursery schools.
Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges except when operated primarily
for commercial gain.
Rest and retirement homes.
Signs, as permitted in
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-11-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Special uses permitted in the R-5 District.
Apartment houses over twelve (12) units per structure.
Cottage business.
Planned developments, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Public service uses.
Tiny Homes, provided they comply with
10-22-11. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-424, 10-4-1983; Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
10-11-3: OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-11-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
   A.   For one-family detached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings and
churches, the same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-
1 One-Family Dwelling District.
   B.   For multiple-family dwellings, apartments and one-family row dwellings,
thirty five feet (35') or three (3) stories. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-11-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot
having an area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet and a
minimum width at the established building line of seventy feet (70').
   B.   Every two-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet and
a minimum width at the established building line of sixty feet (60').
   C.   Every multiple-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot having a minimum area in accordance with the schedule below. A
minimum lot width of eighty feet (80') at the established building line must be
provided:
 
2 to 4 family  2,500 square feet per unit
5 to 8 family  2,000 square feet per unit
9 to 12 family 1,500 square feet per unit
 
   D.   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized. All such uses shall
be served by a public sewer and water supply.
   E.   No zoning lot shall be built upon unless the lot is served by both
public sewer and water supply approved by the City. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-11-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement: (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   A.   Front Yard: On every zoning lot, a front yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25') in depth shall be provided. However, where lots within the same
block and comprising forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same street are
already developed with front yards with an average depth of less than twenty
five feet (25'), then such average depth shall be the required front yard depth
for such frontage in said block. (Ord. D-046, 11-21-2017)
   B.   Side Yards: Ten percent (10%) of the lot width on either side, but not
less than ten feet (10') required for single story and two story dwellings.
Where multi-story construction is used there shall be a side yard of ten
percent (10%) of the lot width plus one additional foot for each story above
the second floor, but not less than ten feet (10').
On corner lots, the side yard on the intersecting street side shall be not less
than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Rear Yard: In the R-6 District, there shall be provided and maintained
the following rear yards:
      1.   For one- and two-family dwellings, a rear yard of not less than
thirty feet (30').
      2.   For row dwellings, a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25').
      3.   For multiple-family dwellings and apartments, a rear yard of not
less than twenty five feet (25').
      4.   For nonresidential buildings, a rear yard of not less than thirty
feet (30').
Detached accessory buildings may be located in required rear yards as allowed
in section
10-4-10 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   D.   Zero Lot Line Dwellings:
      1.   "Zero lot line dwellings" are defined as:
         a.   A two-family dwelling in which the dwelling units are joined by a
common party wall standing part upon each of the two (2) adjoining lots; or
         b.   Three (3), or more, one-family attached dwellings located on two
(2) or more individual lots joined by a common party wall.
      2.   The required lot area for a zero lot line dwelling unit shall be:
         a.   In case of a two-family dwelling at least one-half (1/2) the
minimum lot area for a two-family detached dwelling unit.
         b.   In the case of three (3), or more, family dwellings, at least
one-half (1/2) the minimum lot area for a two-family detached dwelling unit.
      3.   a. Every lot upon which there is erected a two-family zero lot line
dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of seventy feet (70') and a minimum
depth of one hundred feet (100').
         b.   Every lot upon which there is erected a three (3), or more,
family zero lot line dwelling shall have a lot width of at least twenty five
feet (25') or a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100') for each interior
unit. Any dwelling unit that is not an "end unit" is classified as an "interior
unit".
      4.   Every zero lot line dwelling shall have a front and rear yard of not
less than twenty five feet (25'). Each end unit in a zero lot line dwelling
arranged as townhouses or row houses shall have a side yard of not less than
ten feet (10'). On corner lots, side yard requirement on the intersecting
street side shall not be less than fifteen feet (15').
      5.   Zero lot line dwellings are governed by the height and lot coverage
restrictions of the zoning district. (Ord. C-211, 8-2-1994)
      6.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with separate building access
and with separate utility service. No portion of the wall, roof or appurtenance
on the zero yard side shall project over the lot line. Openings in the wall
shall be prohibited. (Ord. C-238, 4-4-1995)
      7.   This subsection shall apply to zero lot line dwellings erected after
January 1, 1994. (Ord. C-211, 8-2-1994)
10-11-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings
or structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-11-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
   A.   For one-family dwellings, the same regulations shall apply as required
in the R-4 One-Family Dwelling District.
   B.   Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected shall have a minimum total
floor area of six hundred (600) square feet per unit, measured from the outside
of the exterior walls, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars,
basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used
frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   C.   Every multiple-family dwelling hereafter erected shall have a minimum
total floor area of four hundred (400) square feet per unit, measured from the
outside of the exterior walls, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars,
basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used
frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
   D.   All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by parking lots and
service drives with adequate provisions for exit, entry and turning movements.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
   E.   Every dwelling erected in any R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
shall have a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in building width. (Ord. C-340,
3-20-2001)
CHAPTER 12
B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT, LIMITED RETAIL
SECTION:
10-12-1: Business Districts; General
10-12-2: General Requirements
10-12-3: Permitted Uses
10-12-4: Special Uses
10-12-5: Conditions Of Use
10-12-6: Height Of Buildings
10-12-7: Yard Areas
10-12-8: Signs
10-12-9: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
10-12-10: Sidewalk Cafe
10-12-1: BUSINESS DISTRICTS; GENERAL:
Business district regulations govern the development and use of the full range
of business and commercial establishments needed to provide service to the
citizens of the city and its trading area. The various business district
regulations provide for the grouping of compatible business and commercial
establishments in accordance with their functions and extent of services. (Ord.
B-39, 1969)
10-12-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All goods produced or serviced on the premises shall be sold or
serviced at retail.
   B.   All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, except for off street parking or loading, and
establishments of the drive-in type.
   C.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products, shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-1 limited industrial
district, provided that performance standards shall, in every case, be applied
at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activity takes place.
   D.   Parking of trucks in the open, within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
a residence district boundary line, shall be limited to vehicles of not over
six thousand (6,000) pounds' empty weight. Trucks in excess of six thousand
(6,000) pounds' empty weight used in conjunction with operation of any business
permitted in this district shall not be parked in the open within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of a residence district, except during normal business hours.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-12-3: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   The following retail business and service uses are permitted, provided
they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street parking and
loading facilities:
Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
Antique shops.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries and studios.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products, when
prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops, beauty parlors, chiropody, massage or similar personal service
shops.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sales.
Candy and ice cream shops.
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.
China and glassware stores.
Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), private, fraternal or religious institutions. It
shall be permissible for a private club or lodge to serve food and meals on
such premises provided that adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities
are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests
shall be allowed in conjunction with the operation of a dining room, for the
purpose of serving food and meals, though such beverages may be served in a
separate room or rooms, and provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is
in compliance with the applicable federal, state and county laws.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Coin operated amusement devices, as an accessory use.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair shops, when conducted
for retail sales on the premises only.
Dance studios, exercise studios, self- defense classes, tutoring and similar
uses.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishments, processing to be done
elsewhere.
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing facilities for the
cleaning and pressing of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) pounds of dry
goods per day, and when using perchlorethylene or other similar nonflammable
solvents approved by the fire department.
Dry cleaning establishments, coin operated, self-service.
Dry goods stores.
Dwellings provided that no dwelling units are located on the ground floor of
the structure. Dwelling units on the ground floor at the time of passage hereof
shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use.
Educational facilities: public or private facility that provides teaching and
learning. Uses include elementary, junior, senior high schools, college, and
university where the primary activity is classroom learning for the purpose of
required curriculum, exclusive of the ground floor space in the B-1 Business
District, limited retail. Educational facilities do not include locations
providing learning activities in connection with extra-curricular activities.
Examples include but are not limited to dance studios, exercise studios, self-
defense classes, tutoring.
Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including appliance assembly
or manufacture.
Employment agencies.
Exterminating shops.
Florist shops and conservatories, for retail trade on the premises only.
Food, meat and fruit stores.
Frozen food stores and food lockers.
Furniture stores, and upholstery when conducted as a part of the retail
operations and secondary to the main use.
Furrier shops, including accessory uses such as the storage and conditioning of
furs.
Garages, public, for storage of private passenger automobiles and commercial
vehicles under one and one- half (11/2) tons.
Garden supply and seed stores.
Gift shops.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hobby stores, for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises.
Hotels and motels.
Household appliance stores and repair.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies,
slipcovers and other similar articles when conducted as a part of the retail
operations and secondary to the main use.
Jewelry store, including watch repair shops.
Laboratories, medical and dental.
Laundries, automatic self-service type, or hand.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Libraries.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Meeting halls.
Millinery shops.
Music stores, sheet music and phonograph record sales.
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
Newspaper distribution agencies, for house delivery and retail trade.
Newsstand.
Office supply stores.
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics and public.
Optician, optometrist.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including assembly or
manufacture of such articles.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Parking lot, public for the storage of private passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one- half (11/2) tons.
Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals.
Photo developing and processing.
Photography studios, including development of film and pictures when done as a
part of the retail business on the premises.
Physical culture and health services, gymnasiums, reducing salons, masseurs and
public baths.
Picture framing, when conducted on the premises for retail trade.
Plumbing and heating, sales and shops for residential and commercial
installations only.
Postal substations.
Public utility and public service uses, including: public art galleries and
museums; public libraries; telephone exchanges; repeater stations; microwave
relay towers and stations; mobile transmitting towers and stations, antenna
towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation of the exchange
in the interest of public convenience and necessity; bus terminal or other
public transportation terminal facilities and other similar uses.
Public utility collection offices.
Publishing establishments.
Radio and television service and repair shops.
Recording studios.
Restaurants, tearooms or cafes, provided no dancing or entertainment.
Savings and loan associations.
Sewing machine sales and service, household machines only.
Shoe and hat stores, and repairing when done as a part of the retail business.
Signs, as regulated by
chapter 18 of this title.
Sporting goods stores.
Telegraph offices.
Telephone booths, public.
Theaters, indoor.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Transient merchandising.
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices.
Typewriter and adding machine sales and services.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops.
Accessory uses, including off street parking and loading facilities, as
permitted or required in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 19 of this title.
   B.   The following uses are also permitted except in the area bordered by
6th Street on the east, 10th Street on the west, the alley between Avenues G
and F on the north, and Avenue H on the south:
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious
institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those required
in the R-4 one-family dwelling district.
Educational facilities: public or private facility that provides teaching and
learning. Uses include elementary, junior, senior high schools, college, and
university where the primary activity is classroom learning for the purpose of
required curriculum.
Home occupations.
One-family detached dwellings, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply
with those required in the R-4 one-family dwelling district.
Two-family dwellings, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with
those required in the R-5 two-family dwelling district.
Permitted accessory uses, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with
those required in the R-4 one-family dwelling district. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd.
Ord. B-66, 7-21-1970; Ord. B-380, 8-17-1982; Ord. C-099, 11-19-1991; Ord. C-
243, 7-5-1995; Ord. C-250, 11-21-1995; Ord. C-252, 12-5-1995; Ord. C-353, 11-5-
2001; Ord. C-419, 5-17-2005; Ord. C-492, 7-20-2010; Ord. D-56, 11-4-2019; Ord.
D-58, 1-7-2020)
10-12-4: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance
with the provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Other retail business uses not specifically listed above when found to have
economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining property.
Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium and other similar places of
public events.
Automobile laundry (automatic and self-service) facilities.
Coin operated amusement device establishments as a principal use.
Daycare centers or day nurseries.
Dwellings located on the ground floor provided that the street frontage facing
the avenue right of way must remain entirely used for commercial use to a depth
of fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the building and all dwellings on the
ground floor must be designed to be ADA compliant at the time of development.
Establishments licensed for the on premises consumption of beer and liquor,
however, such businesses in existence prior to July 1, 1994, are exempt and
will not be required to obtain a special use permit.
Planned business developments.
Police and fire stations.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Vehicle sales and service. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-330, 10-7-1980; Ord.
B-380, 8-17-1982; Ord. C-215, 9-6-1994; Ord. C-244, 7-5-1995; Ord. C-353, 11-5-
2001; Ord. C-477, 1-20-2009; Ord. C-509, 2-7-2012)
   B.   The following special uses may be allowed by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of
chapter 22 of this title, except in the area bordered by 6th Street on the
east, 10th Street on the west, the alley between Avenues G and F on the north,
and Avenue H on the south: (Ord. C-492, 7-20-2010)
Apartment houses, row houses and similar multiple-family dwellings, provided
the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those required in the R-6 multiple-
family dwelling district.
Boarding or rooming houses, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply
with those required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district.
Lodging rooms, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those
required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district. (Ord. C-250, 11-21-1995)
10-12-5: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district except residential district uses, shall be
retail establishment dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to
the following conditions: (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   A.   (Rep. by Ord. C-157, 4-28-1993)
   B.   Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods or service directly
to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, are not permitted except for
drive-in banks.
   C.   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail
business conducted on the premises.
   D.   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or other similar causes.
   E.   Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted
within the building. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-12-6: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45') except
as provided herein. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-12-7: YARD AREAS:
   A.   Transitional Yards: Where a B-1 district adjoins a residential
district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
      1.   When lots in a B-1 district front on the street and at least eighty
percent (80%) of the frontage directly across the street between two (2)
consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district, the front yard
regulations for the residential district shall apply to the said lot in the
business district.
      2.   In a B-1 district, where a side lot line coincides with a side or
rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be
provided along such side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the
minimum side yard which would be required herein for a residential use on the
adjacent property in a residential district.
      3.   In a B-1 district, where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot
line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided
along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum
side yard which would be required herein for a residential use on the adjacent
property in the residential district.
      4.   In a B-1 district, where the extension of a front or side lot line
coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential
district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front yard required herein on
such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be provided along such
front or side lot line for a distance of at least twenty five feet (25'),
including the width of any intervening alley, from the lot in the residential
district.
Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from lowest level to sky.
   B.   Side Yards: If an interior side yard is provided, it shall be not less
than ten feet (10') wide.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
   D.   Exception: In the case of an enlargement of an already existing
building the front and rear yards of the enlarged building need not exceed the
front and rear yards as already exists with respect to the existing building.
(Ord. B-80, 2-16-1971)
10-12-8: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, other advertising
structures, marquees and awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-12-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as permitted or
required in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-12-10: SIDEWALK CAFE:
   A.   Sidewalk Cafe License: No person or entity shall operate a restaurant
which provides outdoor seating on public property for the purpose of serving
food or beverages without a valid sidewalk cafe license. Sidewalk cafes are
permitted in the public right of way only in the B-1 (downtown) zoning
district.
      1.   Application For License: A sidewalk cafe license shall be granted
only to the operator of a restaurant that is in conformance with the city of
Fort Madison zoning ordinance. An application for a sidewalk cafe license shall
be on a form provided by the city clerk. The application shall require the
following information:
         a.   Name, mailing address, phone number and e-mail address of the
applicant and the owner.
         b.   A detailed drawing to scale of the proposed site indicating the
following: the building facade location and the width of the sidewalk from the
building facade to the curb; the location and dimensions of the proposed
sidewalk cafe area, the points of ingress and egress, the proposed location of
the tables, chairs, fencing, serving equipment, planters, borders, awnings,
umbrellas, or other facilities to be included in the outdoor seating area. The
drawings must also include the location of existing improvements and features
on the public property, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, valves,
manholes, street signs, curbs (including the distance from the top of curb to
the abutting street), streetlights, traffic signals, trees, benches, fire
escapes or other overhead obstructions and the proposed clear width of the
public walking area that will remain after the establishment of the outdoor
seating area.
         c.   A schedule of business hours and a schedule of outside dining
open hours.
      2.   Application Fee: The original application fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), with an annual yearly renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
The original application fee must be submitted with the application.
      3.   Insurance: All applications, original and renewals, shall require
the operator to provide a certificate of insurance covering the entire outdoor
area and naming the city as an additional named insured in the minimum amount
of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence with a one
million dollar ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate. The operator shall, by signing
the application, agree to indemnify the city and to hold the city harmless
against any and all liability arising from or relating to the operation of the
sidewalk cafe, or the location of the cafe on the public right of way,
including, but not limited to, all claims arising from occurrences or accidents
within the sidewalk cafe area, including the walkway through the cafe.
   B.   Application Approval: The zoning director, or designee, shall grant the
application within thirty (30) days of the application being filed, provided
the application is in compliance with all applicable requirements of this code.
   C.   Operation Of Sidewalk Cafe:
      1.   The operation of any sidewalk cafe shall be in conformity with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.
      2.   Outdoor keeping or storage of food or beverages shall be permitted
during business hours only. All furnishings associated with keeping or storage
of food or beverages shall be stored indoors except when in use. No open
keeping or storage of dishes, utensils or food scraps shall be permitted. All
disposal of trash must occur in the adjacent business premises and not in the
outdoor area.
      3.   Operation of sidewalk cafes shall be permitted only:
         a.   Between April 1 and November 15;
         b.   Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.;
         c.   Sidewalk cafes shall be open at least fifty percent (50%) of the
total weekly business hours from May 1 to October 15;
         d.   When the restaurant kitchen is open.
      4.   All furnishings, including, but not limited to, fencing, tables,
chairs, planters, umbrellas and signage, must be completely removed from public
right of way when outdoor dining is not in seasonal operation.
      5.   Furnishings must be substantially weighted so as to prevent
accidental relocation due to weather. Insufficient weighting shall be grounds
for license revocation.
      6.   Smoking is prohibited in the area governed by this license, and
licensee shall place a "No Smoking" sign that complies with Iowa Code 142D.6 at
the front entrance of the sidewalk cafe area.
      7.   Amplified sound equipment shall not be permitted.
      8.   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor
seating area shall be restricted by the liquor license governing the
restaurant. No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the outdoor seating
area, except to the interior of the restaurant. An employee shall monitor the
area at all times during the hours alcohol is consumed and shall dispense any
alcoholic beverages in compliance with state and local laws.
      9.   For all sidewalk cafe areas, fencing is required. Fencing design
shall be approved by the city. Fencing shall be not less than thirty inches
(30") nor more than forty two inches (42") in height. Areas serving alcohol
must be adjoining the building with the passable portion of the sidewalk on the
street side of the dining area.
         a.   Design approval shall be at the discretion of the zoning director
or designee, after soliciting input from the zoning commission and Fort Madison
Main Street and city staff.
      10.   The use of public sidewalks or right of way for a sidewalk cafe
shall be permitted only when incidental to the operation of a restaurant on
private contiguous property and only along the frontage of said restaurant.
      11.   Sidewalk cafes must be adjacent to the building.
      12.   The operation of a sidewalk cafe shall not interfere with the
passage of pedestrians or reduce the open passable portion of the public
sidewalk to less than five feet (5') clear of all obstructions.
         a.   Exceptions: Passable portion of the sidewalk may be reduced to
four feet (4') if:
            (1)   The total sidewalk width is less than ten feet (10'), and
            (2)   The overall length of the reduced sidewalk shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25') in any fifty foot (50') distance.
      13.   In no event shall the placement of furnishings or the operation of
the sidewalk cafe obstruct access to any crosswalk, curb cut, fire hydrant,
fire escape or fire door, ingress and egress of the business, manhole, valve or
obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign.
Parking spaces may be utilized for a sidewalk cafe only if expressly permitted
by the city council.
      14.   The licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of
the public right of way used for the sidewalk cafe and the replacement of
damaged public property.
      15.   When notified by the city to do so, the licensee shall promptly
remove all furnishings and obstructions from the public right of way to
accommodate special events permitted by the city or to accommodate city repair
or maintenance as needed.
      16.   No special sales on alcoholic beverages specific only to the
outdoor seating area are allowed in the sidewalk cafe.
      17.   All licensed features of the sidewalk cafe must be removed no later
than November 21 of each year through and including March 31 of the succeeding
year.
   D.   Public Right Of Way Agreement; Appeals: No licensed sidewalk cafe may
be operated without the execution of an agreement with the city clerk. Said
agreement will allow use of the public right of way for the exclusive purposes
of the license, and no property right is to be conferred by this agreement.
      1.   If the application is granted, the city clerk is authorized to enter
into a public right of way agreement that incorporates some of the information/
terms of this application.
      2.   If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal to the board
of adjustment and appeals by filing a written appeal with the board of
adjustment. Appeals shall be filed in accordance with subsection 10-20-5E of
this title.
   E.   License Renewal: Each sidewalk cafe license shall be valid for a term
not to exceed eight (8) months, beginning on March 21 and ending on November 21
and may be renewed annually thereafter. A renewal application shall provide all
the same information as an original application, but copies of the previous
year's site plan may be used if there are no changes from the last submission.
   F.   License Revocation: Sidewalk cafe licenses may be suspended or revoked
by the city clerk for any violation of the license requirements as described
herein. Grounds for termination of the agreement shall include, but not be
limited to, repeated violations of the state and local liquor control laws,
violations of the agreement, and creating a safety hazard, health hazard and/or
public nuisance under state or local law. Additionally, the agreement may be
terminated if there is a substantial and reasonable need for use of the public
right of way for a valid public purpose. The owner has the right to appeal a
decision to terminate the agreement to the board of adjustment and appeals.
(Ord. D-30, 4-5-2016)
CHAPTER 13
B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT, GENERAL RETAIL
SECTION:
10-13-1: Permitted Uses
10-13-2: Special Uses
10-13-3: Conditions Of Use
10-13-4: Height Of Buildings
10-13-5: Yard Areas
10-13-6: Signs
10-13-7: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
10-13-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following retail and service uses are permitted provided they are operated
entirely within a building, except for off street parking or loading
facilities, and except for establishments of the drive-in type offering goods
and services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles:
Any use permitted in the B-1 business district.
Ambulance service.
Auction rooms.
Auto accessory store, where there is no driveway entrance across the sidewalk
into the main building.
Automobile and truck sales and service shops, including painting and repairing.
Bicycle sales and repair.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Catering establishments.
Costume rental shops.
Cutting of glass and glazing establishments.
Dry cleaning establishments, retail, with equipment for dry cleaning not to
exceed one unit of sixty (60) pounds' capacity or standard coin operated, self-
service dry cleaning equipment.
Exterminating shops.
Garages, public, for storage of private passenger automobiles and commercial
vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons.
Hand laundries.
Laboratories (medical, dental, research, experimental and testing), provided no
production or manufacturing of products takes place and provided the
performance standards of the I-1 district are complied with.
Loan offices, when located above the first floor.
Mirror and glazing shops.
Monument sales, but not including the cutting or grinding of stones or other
material, on an open lot or within a building.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as permitted or required in
accordance with the provisions of
chapter 19 of this title.
Pawnshop.
Physical culture and health services.
Printing and publishing of newspapers, periodicals, books and including letter
process work.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Silver plating and repair shops.
Telephone exchange, repeater stations, microwave relay towers and stations,
mobile transmitting towers and stations, antenna towers and other outdoor
equipment essential to the operation of the exchange in the interest of public
convenience and necessity, and including business offices in conjunction
therewith.
Theater, indoor.
Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors or mortuaries.
Accessory uses. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-426, 10-4-1983)
10-13-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Amusement establishments, bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, swimming
pools, skating rinks and coin operated amusement device establishments.
Apartment houses, row houses and similar multiple-family dwellings, provided
the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those required in the R-6 multiple-
family dwelling district.
Automobile laundry (automatic and self-service) facilities.
Automobile service stations.
Banks – drive-in.
Boarding or rooming houses, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply
with those required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district.
Churches, temples and synagogues – on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Establishments licensed for the on premises consumption of beer and liquor,
however, such businesses in existence prior to July 1, 1994, are exempt and
will not be required to obtain a special use permit.
Health centers, public.
Laboratories, research and testing.
Lodging rooms, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those
required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district.
Outdoor merchandise display of machinery or equipment to take orders, but no
regular delivery of large or heavy items.
Parking lots.
Self-service facilities. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-380, 8-17-1982; Ord. B-
426, 10-4-1983; Ord. C-215, 9-6-1994; Ord. C-223, 10-4-1994; Ord. C-243, 7-5-
1995; Ord. C-250, 11-21-1995; Ord. C-477, 1-20-2009)
10-13-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district, except residential district uses, shall be
retail establishments only and shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Any conditions of use applicable to permitted uses in the B-1 district
shall apply in the B-2 district.
   B.   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail
business conducted on the premises.
   C.   Not more than five (5) persons, exclusive of manager, clerk and
drivers, shall be engaged in said manufacturing, processing or treatment of
products, including catering, cleaning, laundering, plumbing, upholstering and
other similar permitted uses.
   D.   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or other similar causes. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-13-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the B-1 limited
retail business district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-13-5: YARD AREAS:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
   B.   Side Yards: Side yards of not less than six feet (6') on any one side
with total combined side yards of not less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. C-417,
5-3-2005)
10-13-6: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, other advertising
structures, marquees and awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-13-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as permitted or
required in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 14
B-3 SERVICE AND WHOLESALE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-14-1: Permitted Uses
10-14-2: Special Uses
10-14-3: Height Of Buildings
10-14-4: Yard Areas
10-14-5: Signs
10-14-6: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
10-14-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following business uses and service establishments, provided they are
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for off street parking or
loading facilities and except for establishments of the drive-in type, offering
goods and services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, and
except where specified below as permitted on an open lot:
Any use permitted in the B-2 business district.
Agricultural implement sales and services, on an open lot or within a building.
Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors, blowers and
steam cleaning devices.
Battery and tire service stations.
Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing.
Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
Book binding.
Building materials sales, when conducted wholly within a building.
Contractors' offices and shops, where no fabrication is done on the premises
and where all storage of materials and equipment is within a building.
Feed and seed stores, wholesale.
Greenhouses.
Heating and air conditioning (fabricating and assembly) shops.
Pet shops, or animal hospitals when conducted wholly within an enclosed
building.
Plumbing and heating and roofing supply shops.
Printing, publishing and issuing of periodicals, books, stationery and other
reading matter.
Processing or assembly limited to the following, provided that space occupied
in a building does not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet of total floor
space and basement space, and not including stairwells or elevator shafts; and
provided such processing or assembly can be conducted without noise, vibration,
odor, dust or any other condition which might be disturbing to occupants of
adjacent buildings. When manufacturing operations of the same or similar
products demand space exceeding six thousand (6,000) square feet, they shall
then be located in the I-1 industrial district.
Advertising displays.
Awnings, venetian blinds and window shades.
Bakeries, wholesale.
Brushes and brooms.
Cosmetics, drugs and perfumes.
Electrical equipment appliances.
Food processing, packaging and distribution.
Jewelry.
Medical and dental supplies.
Optical goods and equipment.
Pattern making.
Products from finished materials such as bone, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, plastic, precious or semiprecious
stones, paper, rubber, shell or yarn.
Scientific and precision instruments.
Taxidermist shops.
Tinsmiths.
Trailer sales or rental (house trailers) business on an open lot or within a
building, not including occupancy of trailers.
Undertaking establishments.
Warehousing and wholesale establishments.
Accessory uses. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-170, 9-7-1993)
10-14-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-2 general retail
business district.
Apartment houses, row houses and similar multiple-family dwellings, provided
the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those required in the R-6 multiple-
family dwelling district.
Boarding or rooming houses, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply
with those required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district.
Dog kennels (commercial).
Lodging rooms, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those
required in the R-6 multiple-family dwelling district. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd.
Ord. C-243, 7-5-1995; Ord. C-250, 11-21-1995)
10-14-3: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The same regulations shall apply as required in the B-1 limited retail business
district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-14-4: YARD AREAS:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side Yards: Side yards of not less than ten feet (10').
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. C-417,
5-3-2005)
10-14-5: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, other advertising
structures, marquees and awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-14-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as permitted or
required in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 15
B-4 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-15-1: Permitted Uses
10-15-2: Special Uses
10-15-3: Conditions of Use
10-15-4: Height of Buildings
10-15-5: Yard Areas
10-15-6: Signs
10-15-7: Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities
10-15-1: PERMITTED USES:
No permitted uses shall be provided in this B-4 Highway Business District 1 .
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-12-1 of this Title.
10-15-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses are permitted in accordance with the provisions of
this Section and
Chapter 22 of this Title:
Automobile service stations.
Restaurants.
Gift shops.
Places of entertainment.
Confectionaries.
Drugstores.
Utilities, provided all principal structures and uses are not less than fifty
feet (50') from any residential district lot line.
Public passenger transportation terminals, such as heliports, bus and rail
depots, but not including airports, airstrips and landing fields; provided all
principal structures and uses are not less than one hundred feet (100') from
any residential district boundary.
Drive-in establishments serving food or beverages for consumption outside the
structure.
Motels.
Undertaking establishments, provided all principal structures and uses are not
less than twenty five feet (25') from any lot line.
Drive-in banks.
Tourist homes, provided such use is located on a State, trunk or U.S. numbered
highway.
Vehicle sales, service, washing and repair stations, garages, taxi stands and
public parking lots, provided any gas pumps are not less than thirty feet (30')
from the side or rear lot lines and twenty feet (20') from any existing or
proposed street line.
Any development within five hundred feet (500') of the existing or proposed
right of way of freeways, expressways, interstate and controlled access
trafficways and within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of their
existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights of way shall be deemed
to be special uses and no structures shall be erected closer than one hundred
feet (100') to these rights of way. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
Liquor store. (Ord. C-180, 12-27-93)
10-15-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All special uses permitted in this District shall be retail establishments
dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   There shall be no processing or treatment of products other than that
which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail use as permitted.
   B.   Outside storage of refuse material is not permitted.
   C.   At least ten percent (10%) of the area shall be landscaped and
maintained as open space. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-15-4: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed forty feet (40') in height.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-15-5: YARD AREAS:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Side Yards: No requirement except where abutting upon residential use
or street lines, there shall be a side yard of fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. C-108,
2-18-92)
10-15-6: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, other advertising
structures, marquees and awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
Chapter 18 of this Title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-15-7: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as permitted or
required in
Chapter 19 of this Title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 16
I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-16-1: Permitted Uses
10-16-2: Conditions Of Use
10-16-3: Yard Areas
10-16-4: District Regulations (Performance Standards)
10-16-1: PERMITTED USES:
The I-1 District is intended and designed to provide for increased flexibility
in the location of certain manufacturing and industrial uses while maintaining
protection for nearby residential districts. It allows selected industries of a
non- nuisance character to locate in areas near residential uses. The I-
1 District is characterized by large lots with landscaped ground and ample
provision for off-street parking and loading spaces and structures generally
one or two (2) stories in height. No use shall be permitted in the I-1 District
except the following:
Uses permitted in the B-3 District, except transient merchandising.
Advertising novelty manufacturers, assemblers or wholesalers.
Assembly of small electrical appliances, small industrial and electrical
instruments and devices, radios, phonographs and television sets, including the
manufacture of small accessory parts, such as coils, condensers, transformers,
crystal- holders and small products.
Commercial trade schools and business colleges including dormitory facilities.
Compounding and packaging of drugs, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, perfumes and
toiletries.
Employee cafeterias or other food concessions in conjunction with the uses
permitted in this District.
Laboratories, research, experimental and testing.
Manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging or other comparable
treatment of the following:
Assembly of products from the following previously prepared materials: Bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, rope, twine, feather, felt, fibre, fur, glass,
hair, horn, leather, paper, cardboard, plastics, natural and synthetic rubber,
precious or semi-precious,metals or stones, shells, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood, yarns, light metal mesh, pipe, rods or wire.
Bakery goods, candy and food products.
Cameras and other photographic equipment.
Electric and neon signs and outdoor advertising signs.
Medical, dental and drafting instruments.
Mobile homes, camping trailers and prefabricated components for building
construction.
Musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal hand stamps.
Pottery and other ceramic products, using only previous pulverized clay, and
kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
Small precision instruments, such as barometers, clocks, watches and compasses.
Motor freight terminals.
Office buildings.
Printing, lithographing, or film processing plants.
Processing, assembly, handling or storage of plastic materials.
Tiny Homes, if approved by special use, provided they comply with
10-22-11.
Warehouses for storage of merchandise or material in connection with the uses
permitted in this District. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-243, 7-5-1995; Ord.
D-085, 3-1-2022)
10-16-2: CONDITIONS OF USE:
   A.   All business, production, servicing and processing shall take place
within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. All storage in
this District shall be enclosed with walls or fences (including solid doors or
gates thereto) at least eight feet (8') high, but in no case lower in height
than the enclosed storage and suitably landscaped.
However, open off-street loading facilities and open off- street parking of
motor vehicles may be unenclosed throughout the District, except for such
screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the
provisions of
Chapter 19 of this Title.
   B.   Sign regulations and parking regulations shall be as specified in
Chapters
18 and
19, respectively of this Title. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-16-3: YARD AREAS:
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building:
   A.   Front Yard: On every zoning lot a front yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25') in depth shall be provided. However, where lots within the same
block and comprising forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same street are
already developed on the effective date of this Title with front yards with an
average depth of less than twenty five feet (25'), then such average depth
shall be the required front yard depth for such frontage in said block.
   B.   Side Yards: On every zoning lot a side yard shall be provided along
each side lot line. Each side yard shall be not less in width than ten percent
(10%) of the lot width, but need not exceed twenty feet (20') in width. (Ord.
B-39, 1969)
10-16-4: DISTRICT REGULATIONS (PERFORMANCE STANDARDS):
Any use established hereafter in any I-1 District must be so operated as to
comply with the following requirements:
   A.   No use shall be established or maintained which by reason of its nature
or manner of operation is or may become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing
to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas fumes, noise, vibrations,
refuse matters or water-carried waste.
   B.   No use shall be permitted which is in conflict with the provisions of
this Code, or the laws of the State of Iowa, defining and regulating nuisances
1 .
   C.   In carrying on any use in this District the best practical means known
for the disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste and the abatement of
obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar offensive
characteristics must be employed. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   D.   Vibration: Any process or equipment which produces intense earth-
shaking vibrations, such as are created by heavy drop forges or heavy hydraulic
surges, shall be set back at least five hundred feet (500') from the property
boundaries on all sides, except for a property line adjoining an I-2 District,
where such setback shall not be mandatory. However, in no case shall such
vibrations be allowed to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property
boundaries.
   E.   Glare or Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building or an approved incinerator and
effectively screened in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or
hazard beyond the property boundaries. (Ord. B-39, 1969; 1993 Code)
   F.   Fire and Explosive Hazards: Fire and explosive hazards shall be
controlled as follows:
      1.   Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in the I-1 Districts.
      2.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning as determined by the Zoning Administrator is
permitted.
      3.   Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging
from free or active burning to intense burning as determined by the Zoning
Administrator is permitted under the following conditions:
         a.   All indoor storage and manufacture of such materials or products
shall be within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls or fire-resistant component walls; and
         b.   All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty
feet (40') from property boundaries, or in lieu thereof, shall be protected
throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with standards for the
installation prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
         c.   Outside storage of such material shall be allowed when of an
approved type in accordance with the standards and regulations of the City and
the National Fire Protection Association.
      4.   Materials or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or
gases under ordinary weather temperatures shall not be permitted in this
District, with the exception of the following, which are permitted:
         a.   Materials required for emergency or standby equipment.
         b.   Materials used in secondary processes which are auxiliary to a
principal operation such as paint spraying of finished products; and
         c.   Flammable liquids and oils stored, sold and used in conjunction
with the operation of an automobile service station and customarily required or
used in such operations. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  Title 6, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 17
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-17-1: Permitted Uses
10-17-2: Special Uses
10-17-3: Conditions Of Use
10-17-4: Yard Areas
10-17-5: District Regulations (Performance Standards)
10-17-1: PERMITTED USES:
The I-2 District is intended and designed to provide areas of the City for
carrying on as permitted uses, all manufacturing and industrial activities
which conform to the District regulations herein set out, with the exception of
a small number of activities which by reason of certain undesirable
characteristics are subject to Council approval under a special use permit. Any
production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of
materials, goods or products and any use permitted under the I-1 District is
permitted in the I-2 District. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-17-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be carried on only under a special use permit:
Those uses involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation.
Apartment houses, row houses and similar multiple-family dwellings, provided
the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those required in the R-6 Multiple-
Family Dwelling District.
Automobile, tractor or other machinery, wrecking and used parts yards provided
that any such use must be completely enclosed within a building or a solid
painted wall or uniformly painted solid fence, at least twelve feet (12') high
or as high as the highest exposed storage.
Boarding or rooming houses, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply
with those required in the R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
Distillation of bone, coal or wood.
Fertilizer manufacture, including anhydrous-ammonia and bone grinding.
Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction or dumping.
Gasoline or other petroleum products, refining or wholesale storage, or asphalt
plants.
Glue, size or gelatine manufacture.
Junk, iron, rags or waste paper storage or baling, provided that any such use
must be completely enclosed within a building or a solid painted wall or
uniformly painted solid fence at least twelve feet (12') high or as high as the
highest exposed storage.
Lodging rooms, provided the yard areas and lot coverage comply with those
required in the R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
Soybean or alfalfa processing. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-243, 7-5-1995;
Ord. C-250, 11-21-1995)
10-17-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses are subject to the following conditions:
   A.   All uses shall conform to the District restrictions listed in this
Section.
   B.   Business, production, processing or storage which takes place within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district shall be completely
enclosed with the exception of open storage which may be enclosed by a solid
fence of at least eight feet (8') high.
However, open off-street loading facilities and open off- street parking of
motor vehicles may be unenclosed throughout the District, except for such
screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the
provisions of
Chapter 19 of this Title.
   C.   Sign regulations and parking regulations shall be as specified in
Chapters
18 and
19 of this Title, respectively. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-17-4: YARD AREAS:
All yard area requirements shall be the same as specified for I-1 Districts.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-17-5: DISTRICT REGULATIONS (PERFORMANCE STANDARDS):
Any use established hereafter in any I-2 District must be operated so as to
comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Emissions Of Odor, Dust, Smoke: No use shall be established or
maintained which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may
become hazardous, noxious or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matters or water-carried
waste.
   B.   Conflict With Provisions: No use shall be permitted which is in
conflict with the provisions of this Code, or the laws of the State of Iowa
defining and regulating nuisances 1 . (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   C.   Disposal And Abatement Regulated: In carrying on any use in this
District, any disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste and the
abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar
offensive characteristics shall be regulated by Federal Standards or the City
nuisance regulations 2 . (Ord. B-39, 1969; 1993 Code)
   D.   Vibrations: Any process or equipment which produces intense earth-
shaking vibrations such as are created by heavy drop forges or heavy hydraulic
surges shall be set back at least five hundred feet (500') from the property
line adjoining an I-2 District, where such setback shall not be mandatory.
However, in no case shall such vibrations be allowed to create a gross public
nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries.
   E.   Glare And Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building or an approved incinerator and
effectively screened in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or
hazard along property boundaries.
   F.   Fire And Explosive Hazards: Fire and explosive hazards shall be
controlled as follows:
      1.   Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in the I-2 District
unless under a special use permit. However, in no case shall such materials or
products be stored or manufactured within two hundred feet (200') of the
boundary of any other district.
      2.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
ranging from incombustible to moderate burning as determined by the Zoning
Administrator is permitted.
      3.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
ranging from free to active burning to intense burning as determined by the
Zoning Administrator is permitted, provided that within forty feet (40') of the
boundary of a residence or business district the following restrictions shall
apply:
         a.   All storage, utilization or manufacture of such materials or
products shall be within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls or fire resistant component walls; and
         b.   All such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by
an automatic sprinkler system complying with standards for installation
prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
      4.   Materials or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or
gases under ordinary weather temperature shall be permitted in this District,
but the handling, storage or manufacture of such material shall be in
accordance with local, State and national regulations and shall be approved by
the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  Title 6, Chapter 4 of this Code.
2 2. See
  Title 6, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 18
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Purpose
10-18-2: Definitions
10-18-3: Permitted Signs; Residential District
10-18-4: Permitted Signs; Business And Industrial Districts
10-18-5: Sign Requirements
10-18-6: Abandoned Signs; Disposition And Removal
10-18-7: Violations
10-18-8: Variances
10-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these sign regulations is: to minimize the possible adverse
effect of signs on nearby public and private property; to encourage the
effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and
enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of
economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; and
to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. This
sign ordinance is adopted under the zoning authority of the city in furtherance
of the more general purposes set forth in this zoning ordinance. (Ord. C-203,
6-21-1994)
10-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign that identifies: a) an establishment which no longer
exists, or b) goods or services which are no longer provided or no longer
exist, or c) an event or time which has already occurred, or passed, or d) a
purpose which no longer exists.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: Member of the city administrative staff designated by
the city council to enforce this chapter.
AREA: Total exposed surface devoted to a sign message, including ornamentation,
embellishment and symbols, but excluding supporting members. If a sign is
double faced, its sign area shall be computed as the area of a single faced
sign.
AWNING: A device made of cloth, metal or other material attached to a building
when the same is so erected as to either permit its being raised or retracted
to a position against the building when not in use, or to provide shade to a
window.
BILLBOARD: Any sign that advertises or displays goods, products, services or
facilities which are located elsewhere than on the premises upon which the sign
is displayed.
CANOPY: A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other
materials with a frame attached to a building and supported by the ground or
sidewalk underneath.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign whereupon provision is made for letters or
characters to be placed in or upon the surface area either manually or
electronically to provide a message or picture.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign that directs the movement or placement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic without reference to the name of a product sold or service
performed.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A detached sign which is supported by one or more columns,
uprights or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground or
a detached sign which is erected on the ground; provided that no part of the
sign is attached to any part of any building structure or other sign.
GHOST SIGN: A sign painted on a building that has faded, is not current, and
does not constitute effective advertising. Said sign may be of historical
significance identifying past businesses or products.
HISTORIC LANDMARK SIGNS: Signs created by the historic preservation commission
that are similar in shape and mold to each other and which designate
historically significant properties.
HOME OCCUPATION, COTTAGE BUSINESS SIGNS: A sign that identifies the location of
a home occupation or cottage business.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign failing to conform provisions to the requirements of this
chapter.
MAINTAIN: To preserve, keep in repair, or continue.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of
the occupant thereof.
OFF SITE ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign relating to products, services or uses not
located on the same lot as the sign.
OWNER: The purchaser of a sign, or of the copy on a sign, including any
assignee of the purchaser; the fee titleholder of the real estate upon which
the sign is located, including any lessee or assignee, of the fee titleholder.
PERMANENT SIGN: A sign which is permanently affixed or attached to the ground
or to a structure.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed or attached to the
ground or to a structure or which is mounted upon, painted upon, or otherwise
erected upon a vehicle, van, track, automobile, bus, railroad car or other
vehicle in operating condition.
PREMISES: The real estate where a sign exists, defined by a legal description,
and including, but not limited to, the primary structure, any parking
facilities, and any private roadway thereon.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign, other than a wall sign, which projects outward from
a wall or building, more than twelve inches (12") and is supported by a wall or
building.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of a building.
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated
outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images.
The term "sign" includes, but is not limited to, every projecting sign, ground
sign, pole sign, window sign, vehicle sign, awning, canopy, marquee, changeable
copy sign, illuminated sign, flashing sign, animated sign, temporary sign,
portable sign, pennant, banner, streamer or any other attention getting device
or other display, whether affixed to a building or separate from a building.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials or a
sign mounted on a trailer or other moveable device which is intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time. These signs include, but are not
limited to, garage sale signs, political, construction, and special event
signs.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to, painted on or erected against a wall of a
building or structure which extends no more than twelve inches (12") from the
wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to
the face of the building.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign located indoors and visible through a window of a building
or structure. (Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994; amd. Ord. C-354, 11-20-2001)
10-18-3: PERMITTED SIGNS; RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
No sign shall be permitted in any residential district except the following:
   A.   Nameplates: No nameplates shall project higher than seven feet (7')
above ground level.
      1.   For one- and two-family dwellings, there shall not be more than one
nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, for each dwelling unit,
indicating the name or address of the occupant. Historical identification signs
will not be considered as the one nameplate for the property.
      2.   For multiple-family dwellings, for apartment hotels, and for
buildings other than dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding
twelve (12) square feet in area and indicating only the name of the building
and the name of the management thereof may be displayed. Historical
identification signs will not be considered as the nameplate for the above
properties.
   B.   Historic Landmark Signs: Historic landmark signs are permitted in all
zoning districts. Historical identification signs will all be made of similar
material and of an identical mold. These signs may not be located within five
feet (5') of any right of way or within three feet (3') of any property line.
These signs may be freestanding or may be attached directly to a home or
structure. Permits will be given by the historic preservation commission to
homes or buildings included in a historic district or on the local historic
register. The permits will not be subject to the fee requirements found in this
chapter.
   C.   Subdivision Signs: Signs to identify a subdivision will require a sign
permit. The applicant must provide the city with a sketch of the proposed sign.
No part of a subdivision sign shall encroach on a public right of way. A
subdivision sign may not project higher than seven feet (7') above curb level
and may not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.
   D.   Signs Accessory To Parking Areas: Signs designating entrances or exits
to or from a parking area are limited to one sign per entrance or exit and to a
maximum size of three (3) square feet per sign. One sign per parking area
designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited
to a maximum size of eight (8) square feet shall be permitted, provided, that
on corner lots two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
   E.   Church Bulletin Signs: There shall not be more than one church bulletin
sign per lot, except on a corner, two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall
be permitted. The sign shall not be more than thirty two (32) square feet in
area. No sign shall be closer than eight feet (8') to any other zoning lot. No
sign shall project higher than seven feet (7') above the curb level or beyond
the property line into the public right of way.
   F.   For Sale And To Rent Signs: There shall be not more than one for sale
or to rent sign per lot except that on a corner lot two (2) signs, one facing
each street, shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in
area nor be closer than eight feet (8') to any other zoning lot. No sign shall
project higher than seven feet (7') above the curb level or beyond the property
line into the public way.
   G.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs are not permitted in the city right of
way. They must remain on private property and can be located off premises, with
the permission of the property owner. Special event signs can be erected two
(2) weeks prior to an event and must be removed within three (3) days after the
event. Garage sale signs may be displayed three (3) days prior to the sale and
must be removed one day after the sale. Construction signs can be displayed
during the actual construction, but must be removed upon completion. Political
signs can be displayed for any length of time but must be removed no later than
three (3) days following the election to which the sign pertains. Auction signs
may be permitted as provided in subsection I of this section.
   H.   Ghost Signs: Ghost signs may be rehabilitated in any zoning district. A
request to rehabilitate any ghost sign will be reviewed by the historic
preservation commission. If the commission determines that the sign should be
reestablished, the zoning administrator will issue a permit with no fee. Ghost
signs will not be considered abandoned signs in the event they describe goods
and services no longer provided on the premises.
   I.   Auction Signs: Auction signs, used primarily for the direction of
traffic, will be allowed in the right of way provided that:
      1.   Said signs are no larger than five (5) square feet.
      2.   Said signs will be located in city owned right of way on the date of
the sale only.
   J.   Home Occupation And Cottage Business Signs: Every permitted home
occupation and cottage business will be allowed to have one sign, which must
meet the following standards:
      1.   Sign can be no larger than three hundred twenty four (324) square
inches.
      2.   Signs my not be longer than thirty-six inches (36") in any
direction.
      3.   Sign may be displayed through a window or can be attached to the
side of a structure. Signs may not be roof mounted.
      4.   Sign will not be permitted in the city right of way.
      5.    Sign cannot be internally or externally lighted.
   K.   Tiny Homes Signs: Signs for tiny homes as approved by board of
adjustment in code section
10-22-11 shall be allowed as follows:
      1.   A nameplate sign shall be allowed during construction and not to
exceed five (5) years after first occupancy.
      2.   Sign shall be allowed to be double faced.
      3.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
      4.   Sign shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
      5.   Sign shall not be illuminated.
      6.   Only one sign shall be allowed per one or more adjoining of Tiny
Homes developments. (Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994; amd. Ord. C-224, 11-1-1994; amd.
Ord. C-433, 4-4-2006; Ord. D-80, 12-7-2021; Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
10-18-4: PERMITTED SIGNS; BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
No signs shall be permitted in any business or industrial district except the
following:
   A.   Signs And Nameplates: All signs and nameplates permitted in the
residential districts.
   B.   Permanent Signs: Permanent signs can set on any type of standard or
support and must be placed entirely within the property lines of the premises
upon which it is located and no part of the sign or standard shall have a
height of greater than thirty feet (30'). Height is to be measured from the
level of the street upon which the sign faces or above the adjoining ground
level if such ground level is above street grade. (Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994)
   C.   Off Site Advertising Signs: Off site advertising signs are subject to
the following:
      1.   Only one single face off site sign permitted per lot.
      2.   Display surface shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   No closer than two hundred feet (200') from any residential zone,
park, school, cemetery, church, or structure on the National Register of
Historic Places.
      4.   Roof signs are prohibited.
      5.   No part of the sign shall have a height greater than thirty feet
(30').
      6.   Off site portable signs are prohibited.
Portable signs along U.S. Highway 61/State Highway 2 are prohibited. All signs
located along U.S. Highway 61/State Highway 2 must be secured by concrete or
rods driven through the feet of the sign and into the base surface. (Ord. C-
354, 11-20-2001)
      7.   Portable signs along U.S. Highway 61 and State Highway 2 are not
permitted if attached to or placed upon a licensed motor vehicle or any trailer
apparatus or are situated within a state right of way area. Portable signs must
be secured or anchored either to an appropriate base, to the ground or to a
structure in a fashion able to withstand up to approximately forty five (45)
mile per hour winds. Portable signs must consist of semidurable materials such
as aluminum, wood, plywood, hard plastic or fiberglass. Permits are required
for portable signs but no fee will be charged. Portable signs can remain in
place for no longer than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. After the
expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days, such signs must be either removed
or permanently anchored or secured. (Ord. C-438, 10-3-2006)
   D.   Signs On Marquees, Canopies Or Awnings: Signs on marquees, canopies or
awnings must be nonflashing. Said signs will be allowed to project over the
sidewalk in a B-1 zoning district. The bottom of such signs shall be no less
than ten feet (10') above the finished grade of the sidewalk. If said sign has
standards which meet the sidewalk, such standards can be no closer than twenty
four inches (24") to the curb line and an encroachment agreement must be
approved by the city council. Signs may project seventy two inches (72") beyond
the building line but in no case project closer than twenty four inches (24")
to the curb line. In business districts other than B-1, awnings, canopies and
marquees may only project to the property line.
   E.   Traffic Or Directional Signs: Traffic or directional signs designating
entrances, exits and conditions of use of parking facilities accessory to the
main use of the premises, may be maintained provided they are located within
the property lines of the subject lot.
   F.   Permanent Changeable Copy Signs: Permanent changeable copy signs cannot
encroach on city right of way. Changeable copy signs must be located in such a
manner as not to impede vision of pedestrians or vehicles. Said signs can be no
larger than forty (40) square feet on each plane and must be secured in
concrete.
   G.   Portable Changeable Copy Signs: Portable changeable copy signs will
only be permitted at the opening of a new business for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days and for special promotional purposes for a period not to
exceed ten (10) days per month.
   H.   Banners: Banners may be used as temporary signs in all business
districts and shall be governed by the requirements for temporary signs found
in section
10-18-3 of this chapter. Banners must be adequately secured to a building, or
standards, located on the premises where the banner is located. (Ord. C-203, 6-
21-1994)
10-18-5: SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Business And Industrial District: All signs in business and industrial
districts shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot
shall not exceed three (3) times the linear feet of frontage of such zoning
lot. The gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed two (2) times the
linear frontage of such lot. If a sign is double faced, its area shall be
calculated as the area of a single faced sign.
      2.   Fee: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the
applicable fees, which shall be established by the city council from time to
time by resolution.
      3.   Projection: Signs suspended from any building shall not project more
than seventy two inches (72") beyond the building line but in no case project
closer than twenty four inches (24") to the curb line. The bottom of such sign
shall not be less than ten feet (10') above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
(Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994)
      4.   Illumination: Signs must not be illuminated so as to shine on
residential properties. Signs may have electronic areas that display: drawings,
streaming video; symbols or logos; scrolling test messages; shrinking or
enlarging lettering; changing shapes and figures; recreated photographs; or
flash at reasonable, readable intervals. Signs with very rapidly flashing
messages, i.e., strobe lighting effects will not be permitted. Any graphically
enhanced (LED) electronic signs as described above shall be limited to a
maximum height of thirty feet (30') and the graphic display surface shall cover
no more than forty five (45) square feet in total area.
Signs as described in this subsection A4 shall not be permitted within the
boundaries of any duly and formally recognized local, state or national
historic district. (Ord. C-446, 3-6-2007)
      5.   Power Line Clearance: Signs shall be located in such a way that they
maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical
conductors in accordance with the national electrical code specifications,
depending on voltages concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed
closer than twenty four inches (24") horizontally or vertically to any
conductor or public utility guy wire. (Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994)
   B.   B-1 Limited Retail District: Placement of commercial signs on all
property within a B-1 limited retail district zoning designation shall be
allowed as follows:
      1.   Temporary signs are permitted in compliance with the requirements
and provisions of subsection 10-18-3G of this chapter.
      2.   Signs may be placed in city public right of way areas under the
following conditions:
         a.   Only one sign shall be permitted in a right of way per each
twenty five feet (25') of lot frontage on the adjacent street(s).
         b.   The size of each such sign shall be limited to no more than
twenty (20) square feet and shall stand no taller than thirty six inches (36")
above the immediately adjacent ground elevation.
         c.   Signs shall be placed no closer than twenty four inches (24")
from a street curb line on an interior lot.
         d.   Signs shall be placed no closer than thirty six inches (36") from
a street curb line on a corner lot.
         e.   Each lot shall at all times maintain an unobstructed pedestrian
travel corridor with a minimum width of forty eight inches (48"). Such corridor
shall be located at some point between the front building facade and street
curb. (Ord. C-446, 3-6-2007)
10-18-6: ABANDONED SIGNS; DISPOSITION AND REMOVAL:
   A.   Any sign that is abandoned and remains abandoned for a period of ninety
(90) days shall be removed by the owner within forty five (45) days unless the
historic preservation commission has made a determination that the sign is
fifty (50) years or older and/or has historical significance, has made written
recommendation to the zoning administrator to allow the sign to remain and the
zoning administrator has approved it. The zoning administrator or said designee
shall notify the preservation commission within sixty (60) days of the sign
being abandoned.
   B.   Any sign not removed within the required time period, shall be
considered a public nuisance, punishable as a municipal infraction. (Ord. C-
203, 6-21-1994)
10-18-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of this chapter or of the following requirements, shall subject
the violator to penalties provided in the zoning code:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall install, create, erect, or
maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit
governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the sign is located;
   B.   No person, firm or corporation shall install, create, erect, or
maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit; (Ord. C-203, 6-21-
1994)
   C.   No person, firm or corporation shall fail to remove any sign that is
installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter or to
continue any such violation. Each day a violation exists is a separate
violation. (Ord. C-203, 6-21-1994; amd. Ord. C-354, 11-20-2001)
10-18-8: VARIANCES:
   A.   The board of zoning adjustments and appeals may upon consideration of
specific cases and after a public hearing, vary regulations of this chapter in
harmony with their general purpose and intent where the board makes findings of
fact in accordance with the standards prescribed in section
10-20-5 of this title and further finds that there are practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the literal provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Variances to be considered under this chapter shall be strictly limited
to either the actual size or height of a sign. (Ord. C-433, 4-4-2006)
CHAPTER 19
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-19-1: Purpose
10-19-2: General Provisions
10-19-3: Additional Parking Regulations
10-19-4: Location Of Accessory Off Street Parking Facilities
10-19-5: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
10-19-6: Additional Off Street Loading Regulations
10-19-7: Schedule Of Loading Requirements
10-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and unloading of
motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-19-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions
shall apply as follows:
      1.   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date hereof, off street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
      2.   All buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established prior to the effective date hereof shall not be required to
construct off street parking and loading spaces as required in this chapter.
(Ord. D-24, 1-20-2015)
      3.   Any building or use which is enlarged or increased after the
effective date hereof shall conform to the requirements necessary for the
increased intensity of use. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
      4.   The parking requirements may be waived by the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals in the form of a variance when public parking lots are located in
the vicinity of the use and such lots will fill the general parking
requirements. (Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
   B.   Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking
or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or use
served and which were in existence on the effective date hereof or were
provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be reduced
below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below, the
requirements of the provision for a similar new building or use.
   C.   Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing herein shall be
deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all
regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and operation of
such facilities are adhered to.
   D.   Damage Or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off street
parking or loading facilities need not be provided, except that parking or
loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case
shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in
excess of those required by the provision for equivalent new uses or
construction.
   E.   Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building
or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the
same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use
to which the parking facilities are accessory. No such off site parking
facilities shall be authorized by the City Council, and no occupancy permit
shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities other than on the
same zoning lot until and unless the Planning and Zoning Commission has
reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made findings that the common
ownership or possession of the zoning lot and the site of the parking
facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the off site parking
facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use
or building.
   F.   Submission Of Plot Plans: Any application for a building permit or for
a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance herewith. (Ord. B-
39, 1969)
10-19-3: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements herein shall be used solely for the parking of automobiles
owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are
accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the storage
of commercial vehicles.
Exception: Food trucks may be stored on a residential property provided the
size and weight of the vehicle is under the requirements of a commercial
vehicle as stated in sections
9-11-1 and
9-11-10 of this Code and a special use permit is granted to the occupant of the
property who is also the registered owner and operator of the food truck. (Ord.
D-41, 3-7-2017)
   B.   Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses or for mixed uses may be provided collectively in
any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent
use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
use.
   C.   Computation: When determination of the number of off street parking
spaces required herein results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date
hereof is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase
of ten percent (10%) or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such
spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a
building or use existing prior to the effective date hereof is enlarged to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its floor area or in the area used,
said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking
requirements set forth herein.
   D.   Size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps or columns, office or work areas. Such space shall have
a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7'). (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   E.   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
No driveway across public property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty
feet (30').
Driveways and curb cuts of a width of more than thirty feet (30') may be
requested if the request is accompanied by an engineering traffic study. Such a
request will be considered by the engineering department and may be approved,
denied, or modified. In all such requests, the maximum width of the driveway or
curb cut shall be determined by good engineering principle based on the
projected use of the property. (Ord. C-048, 4-3-1990)
   F.   In Yards: Off street parking spaces may be located in any yards;
provided, however, there shall be no parking in front yards in residential
districts, unless on established driveways. Required front yards may be
utilized for parking spaces in business and industrial zones when approved by
special permit by the city council.
   G.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located
on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residential
district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be
open to the sky except when otherwise allowed. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
      2.   Surfacing: All off street parking areas installed for business,
industrial and multi-family dwelling uses as required by this code shall be an
all weather surface: meaning asphalt, portland cement concrete, turf blocks, or
brick pavers of sufficient thickness to adequately support motor vehicles.
(Ord. D-24, 1-20-2015)
      3.   Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas
containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on
each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residential
district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely planted
compact hedge of not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in
height. Such required screening shall conform with front yard setback
requirements of the district in which the parking is located and shall conform
to a side yard setback requirement of not less than three feet (3').
      4.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance and shall be of a low intensity so as not to substantially
change the existing lighting conditions of adjacent residential properties. A
lighting plan must be approved by the planning and zoning commission before any
lighting is used to illuminate off street parking areas located in or adjoining
a residential district. (Ord. 232, 10-19-1976)
      5.   Signs: Accessory signs are permitted on parking areas, when
conforming to the requirements of
chapter 18 of this title.
      6.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall
be permitted in conjunction with accessory off street parking facilities
provided in a residential district.
The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory off street
parking facilities is not permitted in any residential district.
   H.   Maximum Number Of Spaces: The total number of accessory parking spaces
provided for one-family, two-family or multiple- family dwellings or hotels
shall not exceed that required herein for such use or for any equivalent new
use by more than fifty percent (50%) or four (4) spaces, whichever number is
greater.
   I.   Floor Area Exemptions: When two (2) or more uses are located on the
same zoning lot, only one exemption in terms of floor area, as set forth in
section
10-19-5, "Schedule Of Parking Requirements", of this chapter shall be taken.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-19-4: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
The location of off street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall
be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
   A.   For Uses In A Residential District: Parking spaces accessory to
dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces
accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or
directly across a street or alley from, the lot occupied by the use served, but
in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such use.
   B.   For Uses In Business And Industrial District: All required parking
spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the use served, except for
spaces accessory to dwelling units (except those located in a transient hotel)
which shall be within three hundred feet (300') of the use served. However, no
parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or industrial district shall be
located in a residence district, except that private, free, off street parking
accessory to such uses and municipal parking lots may be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 22 of this title, within two hundred feet (200') of and adjacent to any
business or industrial district. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-19-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For the following areas, accessory off street parking spaces shall be provided
as required hereinafter, except in those cases where subsections 10-19-2A and B
of this chapter may apply. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on
the premises at any one time.
   A.   Residential uses, as follows:
      1.   One-family and two-family dwellings: 2 parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit.
      2.   Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels): 3 parking
spaces shall be provided for every 2 dwelling units. For lodging rooms located
in an apartment hotel, 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 lodging
rooms.
      3.   Tourist courts, tourist homes, motels and motor hotels: 1 parking
space shall be provided for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
      4.   Hotels, transient: 1 parking space for each dwelling unit and 1
parking space for each 2 lodging rooms shall be provided.
      5.   Lodging houses: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 lodging
rooms, plus 1 space for the owner or manager.
      6.   Private clubs and lodges (with sleeping facilities for guests): 1
parking space shall be provided for each 2 lodging rooms plus parking spaces
equal in number to 10 percent of the capacity in persons (exclusive of lodging
room capacity) of such club or lodge.
      7.   House trailer camps: 1 parking space shall be provided for each
trailer space.
   B.   Retail and service uses, as follows:
      1.   Retail stores and banks: 1 parking space shall be provided for each
200 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. Drive-in banks or
other similar drive-in establishments shall provide 3 stacking spaces per
teller or customer service window.
      2.   Automobile service stations: 1 parking space shall be provided for
each wash rack, plus 1 parking space for each 4 employees.
      3.   Automobile laundry: 10 stacking spaces shall be provided for each
wash rack, plus 1 parking space for each 4 employees.
      4.   Bowling alleys: 5 parking spaces shall be provided for each alley,
plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses:
bars, restaurants and the like.
      5.   Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the
premises: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
      6.   Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture
repair shops: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 600 square feet of
floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet.
      7.   Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales: 1 parking space shall be
provided for each 300 square feet of floor area.
      8.   Theaters (indoor): 1 parking space shall be provided for each 5
seats.
      9.   Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors: 6 parking spaces shall
be provided for each chapel or parlor, plus 1 parking space for each funeral
vehicle kept on the premises.
   C.   Offices; business, professional and governmental: 1 parking space shall
be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area.
   D.   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage
buildings other than accessory): 1 parking space shall be provided for each 600
square feet of floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet.
   E.   Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing or repair of materials, goods or products: 1 parking space shall be
provided for each 2 employees, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle used in
the conduct of the enterprise.
   F.   Warehouses and storage buildings: 1 parking space shall be provided for
each 2 employees, plus 1 space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the
enterprise.
   G.   Community service uses, as follows:
      1.   Church, school, college and other institutional auditoriums: 1
parking space for each 4 seats or for each 80 linear inches of seating space in
the main auditorium or assembly hall. Adequate space shall also be provided for
buses used in connection with the activities of the institution, and all
loading and unloading of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
      2.   Colleges, universities and business, professional and trade schools:
1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 employees, and 1 parking space
shall be provided for each 4 students based on the maximum number of students
attending classes on the premises at any one time during any 24 hour period.
      3.   Health centers, government operated: 3 parking spaces shall be
provided for each staff and visiting doctor.
      4.   Hospitals: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 hospital
beds, plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees (other than staff doctors),
plus 1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      5.   Libraries, art galleries and museums; public: 1 parking space shall
be provided for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
      6.   Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community
centers: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees, plus space
adequate in number, as determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the
visiting public.
      7.   Public utility and public service uses: 1 parking space shall be
provided for each 3 employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as determined by
the zoning administrator, to serve the public.
      8.   Schools; nursery, elementary and high: 1 parking space shall be
provided for each employee.
   H.   Places of assembly, such as stadiums, arenas, auditoriums (other than
church, college or institutional school), convention halls, dance halls,
exhibition halls, skating rinks and other similar places of assembly: parking
spaces equal in number to 25 percent of the capacity in persons shall be
provided. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
Exception: Places of assembly for events lasting less than 10 consecutive days
shall not be required to provide hard surfacing for off street parking. (Ord.
D-24, 1-20-2015)
   I.   Miscellaneous uses, as follows:
      1.   Fraternities, sororities and dormitories: 1 parking space shall be
provided for each 3 active members, plus 1 parking space for the manager
thereof.
      2.   Institutions for the care of the insane or feeble minded: 1 parking
space shall be provided for each staff doctor, plus spaces adequate in number,
as determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the visiting public.
      3.   Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests):
Parking spaces equal in number to 10 percent of the capacity in persons shall
be provided.
      4.   Rest homes or nursing homes: 1 parking space shall be provided for
each 4 beds, plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees (other than staff
doctors), plus 1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      5.   Sanatoriums, convalescent homes or institutions for the aged or for
children: 1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 beds, plus 1 parking
space for each 2 employees (other than staff doctors), plus 1 parking space for
each doctor assigned to the staff.
      6.   Theaters; automobile drive-in: Reservoir parking space equal to 10
percent of the vehicle capacity of such theaters shall be provided.
      7.   For the following uses, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate
number, as determined by the zoning administrator, to serve persons employed or
residing on the premises as well as the visiting public:
         a.   Airports or aircraft landing fields; heliports.
         b.   Convents and monasteries.
         c.   Crematories and mausoleums.
         d.   Fraternal or religious institutions.
         e.   Outdoor amusement establishments: fairgrounds, permanent
carnivals, kiddie parks and other similar amusement centers.
         f.   Penal and correctional institutions.
         g.   Rectories and parish houses.
         h.   Swimming pools.
   J.   Mixed uses: When 2 or more uses are located on the same zoning lot or
within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the
separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the city council.
   K.   Other uses: For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the zoning administrator.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-19-6: ADDITIONAL OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) tons'
capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residential
district unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted
solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet (6') in
height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
   B.   Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at
least ten feet (10') in width by at least twenty five feet (25') in length,
exclusive of aisles, and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance
of at least fourteen feet (14').
   C.   Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
   D.   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all
weather dustless material.
   E.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind
shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residential or business districts.
   F.   Off Street Loading Berth: Spaces allocated to any off street loading
berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements
for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   G.   Adequate Receiving Facilities: Uses for which off street loading
facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor
area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided
with adequate receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive, or
open space on the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-19-7: SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
For the uses listed in the following table, off street loading berths shall be
provided on the basis of gross floor area of buildings or portions thereof
devoted to such uses in the amounts shown herein. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Use Gross Floor Area In Square Feet Required Number And Minimum Horizontal
                                    Dimensions Of Berths
                             Gross Floor Area In Required Number And
Use                          Square Feet         Minimum Horizontal
                                                 Dimensions Of Berths
   Hospitals, sanatoriums
A. and other institutional   10,000 to 200,000   1 (10' x 25')
   uses
   Hotels, clubs and lodges, For each additional
B. except as set forth in    200,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 25')
   item E of this schedule   thereof
   Hotels, clubs and lodges  10,000 to 20,000    1 (10' x 25')
   when containing any of    20,000 to 150,000   1 (10' x 50')
   the following: retail
C. shops, convention halls,  For each additional
   auditoriums, exhibition   150,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 50')
   halls or business or      thereof
   professional offices
   (other than accessory)
D. Retail stores             5,000 to 10,000     1 (10' x 25')
   Establishments dispensing
E. food or beverages for     10,000 to 25,000    2 (10' x 25' each)
   consumption on the
   premises
F. Motor vehicle and         25,000 to 40,000    2 (10' x 25' each)
   machinery sales
   Wholesale establishments
   (but not including
G. warehouse and storage     40,000 to 100,000   3 (10' x 25' each)
   buildings other than
   accessory)
H. Auditoriums, convention   10,000 to 20,000    1 (10' x 25')
   halls, exhibition halls
                             20,000 to 100,000   1 (10' x 50')
I. Bowling alleys            For each additional
                             100,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 50')
                             thereof
                             10,000 to 100,000   1 (10' x 25')
                             For each additional
   Banks and offices -       100,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 25')
J. business, professional    thereof
   and governmental          For each additional
                             500,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 25')
                             thereof
   Establishments engaged in 5,000 to 10,000     1 (10' x 25')
   production, processing,
K. cleaning, servicing,
   testing or repair of      10,000 to 40,000    1 (10' x 50')
   materials, goods or
   products
                             40,000 to 100,000   2 (10' x 50' each)
L. Warehouses and storage    For each additional
   buildings                 100,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 50')
                             thereof
                             8,000 to 25,000     1 (10' x 25')
M. Theaters                  For each additional
                             50,000 or fraction  1 additional (10' x 25')
                             thereof
   Undertaking               8,000 to 100,000    1 (10' x 25')
N. establishments and        For each additional
   funeral parlors           100,000 or fraction 1 additional (10' x 25')
                             thereof
 
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
CHAPTER 20
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-20-1: Zoning Administrator
10-20-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
10-20-3: Permits
10-20-4: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-20-5: Variances
10-20-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator shall be in charge of the administration and
enforcement of this title, and shall be appointed by the City Council. His
duties shall be as follows:
   A.   Receive applications required, issue permits and furnish certificates,
all in his judgment and discretion.
   B.   Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and make necessary
inspections to determine compliance.
   C.   When requested by the City Council or when the interest of the City so
requires, make investigations and render written reports.
   D.   Issue notices or orders as may be necessary.
   E.   Adopt rules and procedures consistent with this title.
   F.   Keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, permits,
certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions
of the City Council, and shall file the same permanently by street address.
   G.   Keep all such records open to public inspection, at reasonable hours,
but not for removal from his office.
   H.   Report to the Mayor and Council at least once each month as to permits
and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
   I.   Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police
Department, the Legal Department, and other City officials.
   J.   Inform the Legal Department of all violations and all other matters
requiring prosecution or legal action.
   K.   Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him by this title.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-20-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 1 :
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be the same as established by the
provisions of this Code, with additional duties as herein provided:
   A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have general jurisdiction over
the administration, application and enforcement of this title, subject to the
control and regulations imposed by the City Council. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
   B.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet once each quarter (3
months), or more often, as called by the Chairman. Meetings shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order. The decisions and actions of a substantive nature
at each meeting shall be reported regularly to the City Council. (Ord. B-39,
1969; amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  title 2, chapter 3 of this Code.
10-20-3: PERMITS:
A permit shall be required before commencing work on any building project or
structure, as set forth in section
10-4-2 of this title, and issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with
the provisions of this Code.
   A.   No permit as required by the zoning or building provisions of this Code
shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator for construction of a building,
structure or land improvement, or an alteration or enlargement of an existing
building, structure or land improvement and/or the uses thereof, until the
Zoning Administrator ascertains that the application, with accompanying plans
and specifications, conforms with the regulations of this title.
   B.   An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator for any building, structure, land improvement and/or the use
thereof requiring conformance with this title, even though a permit is not
required by other building provisions of this Code.
   C.   All applications for building or zoning permits shall be accompanied by
a plat in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot or
lots, the size of the building or structure to be erected or structurally
altered, its location and elevation on the lot or lots, and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such applications and plots shall be kept in
the Office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall in
writing approve or disapprove all building or zoning permits within thirty (30)
days after submission thereafter, failure to act shall be deemed approval
thereof. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-20-4: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Scope Of Permit: A certificate of occupancy shall be required before
the occupancy or use of each building or structure hereafter constructed,
enlarged or altered, and the regulatory ordinances of this City. No building or
addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof, and no addition
to an existing building shall be occupied, and no land vacant on the effective
date hereof shall be used for any purpose, until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator. No change in a use in any district
shall be made until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or
occupancy complies with all the provisions of this title.
   B.   Application For Occupancy Certificates: Every application for a
building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for a certificate of
occupancy. Every application for a certificate of occupancy for a new or
changed use of land, or building where no building permit is required, shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator on approved forms.
   C.   Issuance Of Occupancy Certificate: Said certificate shall be issued by
the Zoning Administrator, and may be on one form conforming with all the
regulatory ordinances of this City. No certificates of occupancy for a building
or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof, shall be
issued until construction has been completed, and the premises have been
inspected and certified by the Zoning Administrator to be in full and complete
compliance with the plans and specifications. No addition to a previously
existing building shall be occupied, and no new use of a building in any
district shall be established until the premises have been inspected and
certified by the Zoning Administrator to be in full compliance with all the
applicable standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Pending the
issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be
valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, during the
completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An
occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to the
applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later
than fourteen (14) days after the Zoning Administrator is notified in writing
that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
   D.   Certificate For Continued Occupancy Of Nonconforming Uses: Certificates
for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing at the time of
passage of this title, or made nonconforming by this title, shall state that
the use is a nonconforming one, and does not conform with the provisions of
this title. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owners of such property
that it is subject to all the limitations and restrictions imposed by the
regulatory ordinances of this City upon the nonconforming use of property.
(Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-20-5: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The Board, upon appeal in specific cases and after a public
hearing, may vary the regulations of this title in harmony with their general
purpose and intent where the Board makes findings of fact in accordance with
the standards hereinafter prescribed and further, finds that there are
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the
literal provisions of this title.
   B.   Application For Variance And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a
variance shall be filed, in writing, with the Zoning Administrator. The
application shall be in the number of copies and contain such information as
the Board may, by rule, require. The Board shall select a reasonable time and
place for the hearing of the request for a variance. Notice of the time and
place of such public hearing shall be published at least once in a publication
of general circulation and publication to be made not less than four (4) days
nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. The Board shall
reach its decision within forty five (45) days from the date of the hearing
unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the petitioner and the Board.
(Ord. C-196, 5-17-1994)
   C.   Variance Review Criteria: The Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a variance. Each
request for a variance shall be consistent with the following criteria:
      1.   The applicant can demonstrate that without a variance there can be
no reasonable use of the property.
      2.   Limitations on the use of the property due to physical,
topographical and geological features.
      3.   The grant of the variance will not grant any special privilege to
the property owner.
      4.   The grant of the variance is not based solely on economic reasons.
      5.   The necessity for the variance was not created by the property
owner.
      6.   The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow
reasonable use of the property.
      7.   The grant of the variance will not be injurious to the public
health, safety or welfare.
      8.   The property subject to the variance request possesses one or more
characteristics generally not applicable to similarly situated properties.
(Ord. D-51, 3-19-2019)
   D.   Authorized Variances: Variances from the regulations of this title
shall be granted by the Board only in accordance with the standards established
in subsection C of this section, and may be granted only in the following
circumstances:
      1.   To permit any reduction in a setback requirement in the front, side
or rear yard required by this title.
      2.   To allow any reduction in yard size (lot coverage) or greater yard
encroachments than are permitted by this title.
      3.   To allow the use of a lot for a use otherwise permitted when such
use is prohibited solely because the lot's area, width or depth does not meet
minimum requirements.
      4.   To allow no more than twenty five percent (25%) greater or lesser
structure height than the maximums or minimums required.
      5.   To allow the same off street parking facility to qualify as required
facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided that substantial use of such
facilities by each user does not take place at approximately the same times.
      6.   To reduce required off street parking or loading facilities.
      7.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required off street parking facilities are permitted to be
located from the use served.
      8.   To extend the period of time that a nonconforming use may continue
or remain in use.
      9.   To waive any transitional yard screening requirements in a B or I
District if the structure, use or building is already effectively screened by
topography or existing screening comparable to the types required.
      10.   To waive the screening and landscaping requirements for parking
areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces and adjoining or fronting on
property situated in a Residential District. (Ord. C-196, 5-17-1994)
      11.   To allow the maximum height of an accessory structure to be no more
than twenty five feet (25'). When an accessory structure exceeds fifteen feet
(15') in height, the setbacks required shall be thirty percent (30%) of the
structure height. (Example: A 20 foot garage requires a 6 foot setback.) (Ord.
C-394, 3-16-2004)
   E.   Appeal: Any person desiring to appeal from a decision of the Zoning
Administrator shall file a written notice of appeal and application for appeal
within sixty (60) days of the date of the Administrator's decision, and
concurrently pay a filing fee, the amount of which shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
The appeal form entitled "Notice of Appeal and Application for Appeal",
together with a copy of the resolution setting the filing fee, shall be
available in the Office of the Zoning Administrator at City Hall. When
completed, the notice of appeal and application shall be filed in the Office of
the Zoning Administrator at City Hall. The notice of appeal and appeal
application form shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
Upon timely filing and payment of the required fee, an appeal hearing will be
scheduled with the Board of Adjustment. The hearing shall be scheduled not less
than twenty (20), nor more than forty (40), days after the date of the filing
of the notice of appeal and application for appeal. The appeal hearing shall be
a public hearing and notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall
be published at least once in a publication of general circulation. (Ord. C-
274, 12-17-1996)
CHAPTER 21
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-21-1: Initiation Of Amendments
10-21-2: Referral To Offices Of The Planning And Zoning Commission
10-21-3: Public Hearings
10-21-4: Minimum Size Of District
10-21-5: District Boundary Changes
10-21-1: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title shall be initiated by the city council after study and
hearings as provided by the statutes of the state of Iowa. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-21-2: REFERRAL TO OFFICES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
Amendments proposed to this title shall be referred to the planning and zoning
commission of the city for study and recommendation. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-21-3: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   In Front Of The City Council: Public hearings in front of the city
council shall be provided in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the
state. (Ord. C-210, 7-5-1994)
   B.   In Front Of The Planning And Zoning Commission: Before submitting its
recommendation to the city council, the planning and zoning commission shall
hold a public hearing on rezoning applications. Property owners within two
hundred feet (200') of the proposed change shall be given notice of the filing
of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearing on it.
Notice shall be mailed at least seven (7) days in advance of the hearing by
ordinary mail and shall be considered as having been received by the property
owner if addressed to the property owner at the last known address as shown in
the records of the Lee County assessor. Notice shall also be published pursuant
to the requirements of chapter 362 of the code of Iowa. (Ord. C-210, 7-5-1994;
amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-21-4: MINIMUM SIZE OF DISTRICT:
The zoning district subject to this title, shall include the city of Fort
Madison, Iowa, and its environs within a radius of one (1) mile from the city
limits, as prescribed by the statutes of the state of Iowa. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-21-5: DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES:
In accordance with section 414 of the Iowa Code, as the same now exists or may
be hereafter amended, superseded or replaced by subsequent sections of said
Iowa Code, the council herewith provides the following manner to amend,
supplement or change the boundaries as shown on said zoning "district map".
Such amendments, supplements or changes shall be set out in an amending
ordinance identifying the property by legal description and identifying the
zoning district as the same exists, and the new district to be established for
said property. Such ordinance, after adoption and publication shall be then
recorded by the city clerk as other ordinances, and a certified copy of said
ordinance be attached to the "district map", shall be kept continually up to
date by proper notation thereon. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. B-203, 10-21-1975)
Such amending ordinance shall make reference to the zoning ordinance and zoning
district map, and shall thereafter constitute a part of the city zoning
ordinance. Such amending ordinance shall not per se repeal or reenact said
district map, and said map shall continue to exist in full force and effect and
to define and establish the boundaries as the same exist on said map, except
that said map is made subservient and inferior to all subsequent ordinances
amending, supplementing or changing boundaries adopted in the manner as above
provided. After such subsequent ordinances are adopted and published as above
provided, the boundaries and zoning districts as defined in said subsequent
ordinances shall supersede the district and boundaries as shown on said
district map for the particular property described in the subsequent
ordinances. Further, such subsequent ordinances shall be considered as special
ordinances, and not required to be set out at length in the municipal code.
That said map shall be updated and a new district map integrated, reenacted and
reproduced in multiple copies at least once each five (5) years. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
CHAPTER 22
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-22-1: Purpose
10-22-2: Initiation Of Special Uses
10-22-3: Application For Special Use
10-22-4: Reserved
10-22-5: Hearing On Application
10-22-6: Authorization
10-22-7: Standards
10-22-8: Conditions
10-22-9: Planned Developments
10-22-10: Planned Mobile Home Parks
10-22-11: Tiny Homes
10-22-1: PURPOSE:
The development and enactment of a zoning ordinance is based upon the division
of the city into districts, within which districts the use of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to
the land are mutually compatible. It is recognized, however, that there are
uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public
need for the particular use at the particular location. Such special uses fall
into three (3) categories:
   A.   Uses either publicly operated or operated by publicly regulated
utilities or uses traditionally affected by public interest.
   B.   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that
their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact
upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   C.   Nonconforming uses which, as special uses, can be made more compatible
with their surroundings. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-22-2: INITIATION OF SPECIAL USES:
Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an
application to use such land for one (1) or more of the special uses provided
for herein in the zoning district in which the land is situated. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-22-3: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE:
An application for a special use shall be filed with the zoning administrator
upon such form and accompanied by such information as shall be established from
time to time by the planning and zoning commission. The zoning administrator
shall forward to the board of adjustment and appeals without delay a copy of
each special use permit proposed for authorization of a special use. (Ord. D-
39, 1-17-2017)
10-22-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-22-5: HEARING ON APPLICATION:
Upon receipt in proper form of the application with the accompanied information
as referred to above, the board of adjustment and appeals shall hold at least
one (1) public hearing. Notice of the time shall be given by one (1)
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least fifteen
(15) days before the date of hearing. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-
2017)
10-22-6: AUTHORIZATION:
Special uses shall be authorized by special use permit granted by the board of
adjustment and appeals in the same manner and for the same purposes as
variances. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-22-7: STANDARDS:
No special use shall be approved by the board of adjustment and appeals unless
said board shall find that: (Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
   A.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use, will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or
general welfare;
   B.   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
   C.   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted
in the district;
   D.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
   E.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to
automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and
access, in case of fire or catastrophe;
   F.   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulatory
measures as may, in each instance, be modified by the city council pursuant to
the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission; (Ord. B-39, 1969;
amd. Ord. C-059, 8-21-1990; 1993 Code)
   G.   The board of adjustment and appeals may in granting such special use
permit for the sale of alcoholic and/or beer beverages at retail, establish the
location within the premises for sale and consumption and the total area of
such facilities. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. C-059, 8-21-1990; 1993 Code; Ord.
D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-22-8: CONDITIONS:
The board may provide such conditions or restrictions upon the construction,
location and operation of a special use, including, but not limited to,
provisions for the protection of adjacent property, the expiration of said
special use after a specified period of time, off street parking and loading as
shall be deemed necessary to secure the general objectives of this title and to
reduce injury to the value of property in the neighborhood. (Ord. B-39, 1969;
amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
   A.   A special use for a cottage business may be granted for a specified
length of time or may be granted indefinitely upon application, hearing and
authorization by the board of adjustment and appeals as long as the owner and
operator of the business remains unchanged. As with all special uses, the board
may review the validity of the special use at any time in the future if
concerns arise or it is found to no longer conform to the code or conditions
placed on said special use permit. (Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-22-9: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
Planned developments, as defined in
chapter 2 of this title, are of such substantially different character from
other special uses that specific and additional standards and exceptions are
hereby set out to govern the recommendations of the planning and zoning
commission and approval of the board of adjustment and appeals.
   A.   Use Exceptions: In the case of residential, business or manufacturing
planned developments, the planning and zoning commission may authorize that
there be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such
development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the
district in which said development is located, provided the commission shall
find:
      1.   That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
      2.   That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature
or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood;
      3.   That not more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground area of such
development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said exception; and
      4.   That in an industrial planned development, such additional uses
allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located, as set forth in this title.
   B.   Bulk Regulations: In the case of any planned development, the
commission may recommend and the board of adjustment and appeals may authorize
exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this title within the
boundaries of such development, provided that the commission shall find:
      1.   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development as well as of neighboring properties than would obtain under the
bulk regulations of this title for buildings developed on separate zoning lots;
      2.   That the minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement of this
title shall be adhered to in any such development containing residential uses,
and that there shall be available to each residential building and immediately
adjacent thereto (including the land area upon which it is erected) the minimum
amount of land area required for such buildings under the lot area per dwelling
unit provisions of this title;
      3.   That spacing between principal buildings shall be at least
equivalent to such spacing as would be required between buildings similarly
developed under the terms of this title on separate zoning lots, due
consideration being given to the openness normally afforded by intervening
streets and alleys; and
      4.   That along the periphery of such planned developments, yards shall
be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which such
development is located. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-22-10: PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   A.   Continuation Of Existing Parks: Any mobile home park now in operation
as of the enactment of ordinance A-143 on June 23, 1959, may be continued in
operation under the supervision of the zoning administrator and in accordance
with the provisions of this section. (Ord. C-341, 3-20-2001)
      1.   Alterations To An Existing Mobile Home Park: No change in any
sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste
disposal, and no change in the plot plan shall be made without first making a
written application to the city and receiving a written permit therefrom. Such
application shall be made in the way and manner hereinbefore set forth; such
change or changes shall comply with all codes, rules and regulations applicable
thereto. The fee to accompany such an application shall be ten dollars
($10.00). The issuance of a permit does not relieve the applicant from securing
building permits or from complying with any other applicable ordinance,
statute, rule or regulation.
      2.   Replacement Of An Existing Mobile Home: Whenever a mobile home is
moved from any existing mobile home lot, the lot or space left vacant shall not
again be occupied by another mobile home except that the lot or space be made
to meet all of the requirements of this title, except subsections C, D, E and G
of this section. This provision shall in no way eliminate other zoning
requirements or other ordinances of the city. Permits may be issued for
alterations which tend to make the mobile home park conform with this title.
   B.   Application Procedure: In order to obtain a permit to construct a
mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the zoning administrator a
written application setting forth the following. The information requested in
the written application shall not be considered as listing the requirements
that must be met by applicant:
      1.   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application.
      2.   The location and legal description of the tract of land upon which
it is proposed to operate and maintain the mobile home park.
      3.   The proposed and existing facilities in the mobile home park for
water supply, sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection and for a
community building which will include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks,
wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the proposed
alterations therein and the maintenance thereof.
      4.   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the mobile home park is to be located.
      5.   The site plans of the mobile home park, the plans and specifications
for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing
facilities; all as may be required by the rules and regulations of the City
under the provisions of these standards.
      6.   A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which
are available to the mobile home park.
      7.   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached thereto. Where a permit to
construct is sought by the applicant, request therefor shall be made in the
same application.
      8.   Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee
amounting to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each five (5) acres of land or fraction
thereof, proposed to be used as a mobile home park. Each application fee shall
be paid to the City by a separate certified check or U. S. money order in the
amount of the application fee only and said application fee once paid to the
City shall not be refunded. If the application for a permit to construct is
declined, the Zoning Administrator shall give the reasons therefor in writing
to the applicant; and if the objection can be corrected, the applicant may
amend his application and resubmit it for approval without additional fee.
      9.   Each mobile home park, under the provisions of this Title, shall
maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and
sanitary condition. (Ord. C-102, 12-3-91)
   C.   Minimum Area: The minimum area for each mobile home park shall be ten
(10) acres. The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy
before first occupancy if permitted - fifty (50).
   D.   Maximum Density of Units Per Acre: The total density of any mobile home
park shall not exceed seven (7) units per gross acre and the net density on any
particular acre within such park shall not exceed ten (10) units per net acre.
   E.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum area for individual mobile home space
shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet. Not more than one mobile home shall
be placed on a zoning lot.
   F.   Mobile Home Stand: That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home:
      1.   Placement: The mobile home stand placement shall be provided far the
practical placement on and removal from the lot of both the mobile home and its
appurtenant structures, and the retention of the home on the lot in a stable
condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings.
      2.   Size: The size of the mobile stand shall be suitable for the general
market to be served by the individual proposal and suitable to fit dimensions
of mobile homes anticipated, including mobile home appurtenant structures or
appendages.
      3.   Location: The location of each mobile home stand shall be at such
elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and the mobile
home accessway that placement and removal of the mobile home is practical.
      4.   Construction: Appropriate material, properly graded, placed and
compacted, so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the maximum
anticipated loads during all seasons, and protected against the action of frost
or freezing.
      5.   Gradient: There shall be adequate crown or cross gradient for
surface drainage.
      6.   Base Enclosure: All mobile homes which are placed on foundations or
piers shall have the entire perimeter enclosed. The enclosure shall be of a
durable, fire retardant and hard material suitable for all-weather use. The
metal panels manufactured for mobile home enclosures shall be considered to
meet these requirements.
   G.   Minimum Width of Mobile Home Lots: The minimum average width for each
mobile home lot shall be forty feet (40') except that for any mobile home unit
greater than twelve feet (12') in width the minimum average lot width shall be
forty five feet (45'). This average shall be maintained between points ten feet
(10') in front of the mobile home stand and five feet (5') to the rear of the
stand.
   H.   Minimum Distance Between Homes: No mobile home shall be placed within
fifteen feet (15') of another, and in no case shall the mobile home be located
closer than five feet (5') to the side or rear lot lines or ten feet (10') of
the front lot line.
   I.   Yards Abutting Common Areas: The distance from the line or corner of
the mobile home stand to a private access drive, a common parking area, a
common walk or other common area shall be fifteen feet (15') minimum. Patios,
carports and individual storage facilities shall be disregarded in determining
yard widths.
Distance Mobile Homes to be Located from Park Boundary and Public Streets: No
mobile home shall be placed a lesser distance from the mobile home park
boundary than the side yard width required in the zoning district in which the
property is located. In no case shall any mobile home be placed less than
fifteen feet (15') from the mobile home park boundary. The distance from the
line or corner of the mobile home stand to a public street shall be thirty five
feet (35') minimum.
   J.   Markers for Mobile Home Lots: Every mobile home lot shall be clearly
defined on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and
maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the
number of each lot as shown on the plot plan submitted as required in
subsection (C) so that each lot may be easily identified.
      1.   Patio: Each mobile home lot shall provide on appropriate outdoor
living space to supplement the limited interior space of a mobile home.
         a.   Size: The minimum size of each mobile home lot outdoor living
space shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet.
         b.   Location: Every outdoor living space location shall be convenient
to the entrance to the mobile home, appropriately related to open areas of the
lot and other facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to
anticipated mobile home models.
         c.   Elevation: Where practical, the outdoor living space shall be at
an elevation at least as high as the elevation of its mobile home stand. Where
topographical conditions permit, the outdoor living space and adjoining yard
areas on the entry side of the mobile home stand may be as much as two feet
(2') higher than the mobile home stand in order that the level of the outdoor
living areas will be close to the floor level of an in-place mobile home. The
grade difference between the outdoor living space and the stand may be taken up
by a retaining wall or cribbing or by an earth slope. Where the outdoor living
space is higher than the mobile home stand, adequate surface drainage of the
mobile home stand shall be provided across the other side or ends of the stand.
         d.   Construction:
            (1)   Any subgrading shall be well drained, uniformly graded and
compacted.
            (2)   Construction shall provide a useful outdoor surface
constructed or formed either monolithically or in movable units with weather
resistant materials placed sufficiently close together to create a paved area.
      2.   Tenant Storage: If storage facilities are provided they shall be
conveniently located near each mobile home lot a) for the active storage of
outdoor equipment, furniture or tools, b) for the inactive storage of such
other material as is used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant
and cannot be conveniently stored in the typical mobile home.
         a.   Size: There shall be a minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet provided
for general storage for each mobile home lot.
         b.   Design and Location of Storage Facilities: Storage facilities
shall be provided on the lot, or in compounds located within a reasonable
distance, not more than five hundred feet (500') from each stand located not
closer to private streets and public streets than the mobile home unit itself.
Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the
appearance of the court and shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant
materials appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated.
   K.   Streets and Walks: All publicly dedicated streets shall conform to the
requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City.
      1.   Public Streets: All publicly dedicated streets shall conform to the
requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City.
All future public streets constructed in connection with a mobile home park
shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the subdivision regulations
of the City.
      2.   Private Streets: Where private streets are provided within the
mobile home park, the minimum private street on which an individual mobile home
lot fronts shall be twenty eight feet (28') in width and shall be located
approximately in the center of a parcel of property equal to the width of right
of way for a local residential street fifty feet (50').
All future private streets constructed in connection with a mobile home park
shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the subdivision regulations
of the City. This shall not apply to mobile home parks existing at the time of
the passage of this Title.
Private streets in existing mobile home parks shall be not less than twenty
feet (20') in width and shall be installed in accordance with the subdivision
regulations of the City.
      3.   Walks:
         a.   Walks shall be provided for safe, convenient, all-season
pedestrian access; of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient
to maintain. There shall be:
            (1)   Individual walks to each mobile home stand from a paved
street or from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved street.
            (2)   Common walks in location where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated; for example, at the court entrance and to the court office and
other important facilities. The location of walks shall be approved by the Plan
Commission.
         b.   Width, alignment and gradient of walks shall be appropriate for
safety, convenience and appearance, and shall be suitable for use by both
pedestrians and for the circulation of small wheeled vehicles such as baby
carriages and service carts.
         c.   Walks shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the
specifications of the City. Widths shall be generally at least three feet (3')
for entrance walks on individual lots and at least three and one-half feet (31/
2') for common walks. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be
avoided. Required walks are not to be used as drainage ways.
   L.   Parking Spaces: Parking spaces shall be provided for not less than one
and one-half (11/2) cars per mobile home lot. Required car parking spaces may
include one car space on each mobile home lot and in addition shall include a
sufficient number of car spaces in conveniently located parking bays to bring
the total number of parking spaces up to the required one and one-half (11/2)
car spaces per mobile home lot. Each such parking space shall be not less than
nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') deep, shall be surfaced for its
entire area with durable, hard material, suitable for all-weather use.
   M.   Water Supply: An adequate supply of potable water shall be furnished
from a public water supply system or from a private water system conforming to
all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and ordinances, with supply
faucets located on each mobile home lot. An adequate supply of hot water shall
be provided at all times to all hot water outlets required herein.
   N.   Sewers and Sewage: In each mobile home park, all waste or wastewater
(including such waste or wastewater from mobile homes) from a faucet, toilet,
tub, shower, sink, slop sink, drain, washing machine, garbage disposal unit or
laundry shall empty into an approved sewer system installed in accordance with
City specifications. Surface water shall not be discharged into a public
sanitary sewer.
   O.   Service Buildings: Each mobile home park may provide service buildings
to house such toilet, bathing or other sanitation facilities and such laundry
facilities as are hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
      1.   All service buildings shall be permanent structures complying with
all applicable laws and ordinances regulating the construction of buildings.
      2.   All service buildings shall be adequately lighted at all times of
day and night, shall be well ventilated and with screens on all openings, shall
be constructed of such moisture-proof material, including painted woodwork, as
shall permit repeated cleaning and washing and shall be maintained at a
temperature of not less than sixty eight degrees (68o) Fahrenheit during the
period from September 1 to May 15. Floors of all service buildings shall be of
water-impervious material, shall contain a drain or drains and shall be so
constructed as to assure efficient drainage to such drain or drains.
      3.   All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance
or fire hazard.
   P.   Laundry Facilities: When laundry facilities are provided, such
facilities shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Hot and cold water outlets shall equal not less than the number of
laundry trays and washing machines.
      2.   An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying
current sufficient to operate each such machine.
      3.   The laundry facilities shall be in a separate service building or,
if in the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be
separated from the area housing sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
   Q.   Garbage and Trash Disposal: Corrosion-resistive metal garbage cans or
other noncombustible containers, with tight fitting covers, shall be provided
in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Each
mobile home lot shall have at least one garbage can within one hundred feet
(100') of it. The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition as determined by
inspection of the Health Inspector. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and
disposed of as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than weekly, to
insure that the garbage cans shall not overflow.
   R.   Electric Lighting and Outlets: All entrances, exits and driveways shall
be lighted at night. Not less than a one hundred (100) watt electric light
shall be provided for each two hundred (200) lineal feet of private street and
at each entrance and exit to the mobile home park. At least one receptacle
outlet for each mobile home space shall be provided; this receptacle and other
electric wiring shall conform to the requirements of the Electric Code of the
City. Street lighting on public streets shall conform to the requirements in
the subdivision regulations and the Electric Code of the City.
   S.   Storage Tanks: No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil, gas,
liquefied petroleum or other fuels shall be permitted within the trailer park.
   T.   Playgrounds: If recreational facilities are provided, the size of the
recreational area shall be not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site
area, generally provided in a central location, including suitable landscaping,
fencing and benches. In larger courts, decentralization will be allowed.
Recreation areas shall include space for community buildings and community use
facilities, such as adult recreation, child playgrounds and natural open space.
   U.   Additions To Mobile Homes: No permanent or semipermanent structure
shall be affixed to any mobile home as an addition to such mobile home, nor
shall any accessory structure be permitted on any mobile home lot or in any
mobile home park except those accessory structures required by this chapter and
a structure to house an office. If an office structure is provided, its
construction shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances. The
prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a mobile home shall not
apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a mobile home, nor to any
expansion unit or accessory structure specifically manufactured for mobile
homes. The lot coverage of a mobile home, together with an expansion or
accessory structure permitted thereto by this title, shall not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the total mobile home lot area.
   V.   Permitted Obstructions: For the purpose of this title, the following
shall not be considered as obstructions when located in the yards indicated:
      1.   In Any Yards: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces and
awnings adjoining the mobile home if they do not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the depth of the yard; and ornamental light standards and flagpoles, fences,
trees and shrubs, except that on corner lots, fences, trees and shrubs shall
not be higher than thirty inches (30") above the center line grade of the
intersecting streets if located in that portion of a required front or side
yard situated within twenty feet (20') of the lot corner formed by the
intersection of any two (2) street lines.
      2.   In Front Yards: No other obstructions shall be permitted.
      3.   In Side Yards: Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in a
side yard abutting a street.
      4.   In Rear Yards: Private garages or carports, if attached or
structurally a part of the mobile home, open accessory off-street parking
spaces, accessory sheds, tool rooms, or other similar accessory buildings;
private swimming pools in accordance with the regulations of the city.
Accessory buildings or structures may occupy not more than thirty percent (30%)
of a rear yard.
   W.   Screening: Planting shall be hardy, appropriate for use and location,
and planted so as to thrive with normal maintenance. There shall be provided
planting adequate to screen views effectively. Views to be screened shall
include laundry drying yards, garbage, and trash collection stations,
nonresidential uses and yards of all adjacent properties.
   X.   Certificate Of Use Occupancy Required: No mobile home park shall be
occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the
zoning administrator to the effect that the mobile home park or the portion
thereof for which such certificate is requested is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this title.
   Y.   Minimum Code Standards: Every mobile home occupied as a dwelling unit
located in the city after the date of adoption hereof shall meet the minimum
standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as defined by the
American standards association project A 119.1, approved March 12, 1963, as
revised periodically. Mobile homes that display the official seal and register
number of the mobile home manufacturers association and the trailer coach
association will be considered to comply with the American standards
association standard A 119.1. Mobile homes that do not meet these minimum
standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems will not be issued a
certificate of use and occupancy permit by the zoning administrator.
The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as defined
by the American standards association project A 119.1 (1963), as amended and
revised periodically, are hereby made a part of and incorporated by reference
into this title.
This requirement will not apply to occupied mobile homes in the city prior to
the adoption hereof, nor to units built prior to March 12, 1963. (Ord. B-39,
1969)
10-22-11: TINY HOMES:
   A.   Tiny Homes, as defined in
chapter 2 of this title are of such substantially different character from
other residential housing that specific and additional standards and exceptions
are hereby set out to govern the approval of the board of the adjustment and
appeals.
      1.   Developer and occupant requirements: The following requirements must
be met and/or agreed to prior to approval by board of adjustment and appeals.
         a.   A developer requesting to construct Tiny Homes must be registered
with the state of Iowa as a non-profit entity (501C3 or equivalent).
         b.   The developer must retain ownership for a minimum period of five
(5) years.
         c.   The developer shall provide an accessory structure of at least
eighty (80) square feet on each property developed. Said structure shall be
fully enclosed, securable, and protected from the elements. Said structure must
comply with lot and yard requirements as defined in the code for that zoning
district.
         d.   Signs: The erection, construction, alteration and location of
signs, other advertising structures, marquees and awnings shall be in
conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title.
      2.   Bulk Regulations: The following regulations shall supersede the
regulations of the zoning district for the proposed structure.
         a.   Lot size shall be a minimum of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet.
         b.   Lot width shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
         c.   Lot coverage shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%).
         d.   Dwelling width shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet.
         e.   Dwelling size shall be a minimum of five hundred and seventy-six
(576) square feet.
         f.   Setbacks shall be at least:
            (1)   Front: twenty-five (25) feet, but may utilize the exception
in code section
10-8-6(C).
            (2)   Rear yard: thirty (30) feet.
            (3)   Side yard: Side yards between tiny homes and non-tiny homes
are required to meet district regulations for side yard setbacks. Side yards
between multiple tiny homes shall be not less than five (5) feet for each side
yard, totaling not less than ten (10) feet between structures.
   B.   Location: Special Use Permits for Tiny Homes, if approved by Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, shall be approved by resolution of City Council for
location prior to becoming effective. (Ord. D-085, 3-1-2022)
CHAPTER 23
INTERPRETATION; FEES; VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
10-23-1: Interpretation, Purpose And Conflict
10-23-2: Fees
10-23-3: Violations
10-23-1: INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT:
In interpreting and applying the provisions herein, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety, health, convenience,
comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to
interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any ordinances, rules or regulations
previously adopted, and not in conflict with any of the provisions herein or
which shall be adopted, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises, nor is it intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that where
this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than
are imposed or required by such other provision or such other easements,
covenants or agreements, the provisions herein shall control. (Ord. B-39, 1969)
10-23-2: FEES:
Fees pertaining to petitions for zoning amendments, use permits, certificates
of compliance, variations and appeals to the planning and zoning commission
and/or board of adjustment and appeals shall be established by action of the
city council from time to time. Such fees shall be paid to the city clerk who
shall give a receipt therefor, and account for same at regular intervals to the
city council. (Ord. B-39, 1969; amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
10-23-3: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of the provisions of this title may be prosecuted as a municipal
infraction, or simple misdemeanor, or both. (Ord. C-209, 7-5-1994)
In case a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained; or any building, structure, or land
is used in violation of this title, the city council in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violations;
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. (Ord. B-39,
1969; amd. 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 24
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
10-24-1: Purpose
10-24-2: Definition Of Bed And Breakfast Establishments
10-24-3: Number Of Guest Rooms Permitted
10-24-4: Special Use Permit Required
10-24-5: Food Service And Alcoholic Beverage Restrictions
10-24-6: Hotel/Motel Tax Required
10-24-7: Fire Safety Requirements
10-24-8: Signs
10-24-1: PURPOSE:
In that there has been recent interest in the creation of bed and breakfast
establishments which would provide lodging to visitors, promote economic
development and tourism, and encourage the saving and restoring of buildings of
historic value in our city, it is the purpose of this chapter to protect the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens by regulating such
establishments. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
10-24-2: DEFINITION OF BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS:
A bed and breakfast establishment shall be defined as a residence which
provides for overnight lodging and which serves only the breakfast meal to
guests. The structure must be owner occupied or have a dwelling unit within,
which will be the residence of the host or hostess or operator(s). (Ord. C-062,
8-21-1990)
10-24-3: NUMBER OF GUEST ROOMS PERMITTED:
No more than five (5) guest rooms may be made available for sleeping rooms.
(Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
10-24-4: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Bed And Breakfast, Permit Required: A special use permit granted by the
board of adjustment and appeals is required for the establishment of a bed and
breakfast facility, the granting of which is provided for in title 10,
chapter 22 of this code. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. D-39, 1-
17-2017)
   B.   Application: An application for a special use permit shall be filed
with the zoning administrator and shall include the following:
      1.   A reproducible site plan reasonably to scale depicting the existing
conditions or any proposed modifications to the location of property lines,
structures, landscaping, driveways and parking. Any future changes from the
initial application shall also be submitted for approval.
      2.   A reproducible detailed floor plan reasonably to scale of the
structure showing all room uses.
   C.   Personal, Not Transferable: The special use permit shall be personal to
the applicant and not transferable. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
   D.   Bed And Breakfast, Validity: A special use for a bed and breakfast may
be granted for a specified length of time or may be granted indefinitely upon
application, hearing and authorization by the board of adjustment and appeals
as long as the owner and operator of the business remains unchanged. As with
all special uses, the board may review the validity of the special use at any
time in the future if concerns arise or it is found to no longer conform to the
code or conditions placed on said special use permit. (Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
   E.   Parking Requirements: The number of off street parking spaces required,
their locations, surfacing, screening and setbacks from property lines shall be
determined on the special use permit. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
10-24-5: FOOD SERVICE AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
Food service and alcoholic beverages are limited to overnight guests only. Any
alcoholic beverages offered by the owner, operator, or agent thereof shall not
be paid for by the guest(s) in any fashion, but shall be complimentary only.
(Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
10-24-6: HOTEL/MOTEL TAX REQUIRED:
Proof of registration with the Iowa department of revenue for the purpose of
collecting and submitting hotel/motel tax shall be given to the zoning
administrator within ninety (90) days after the issuance of the special use
permit. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
10-24-7: FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
Combination smoke and heat detectors, in proper working order, are required in
each guest sleeping room. A fire extinguisher, in proper working order, is
required on each floor. At least two (2) separate, remote exits are required
for second and third floor guest rooms. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
10-24-8: SIGNS:
The use of signs shall be limited to naming the business. In residentially
zoned districts, one (1) wall sign with a total area of four (4) square feet is
allowed, except that on a corner lot, a wall sign may face each adjacent
street. (Ord. C-062, 8-21-1990)
CHAPTER 25
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
10-25-1: Definitions
10-25-2: Statutory Authority, Findings Of Fact And Purpose
10-25-3: General Provisions
10-25-4: Administration
10-25-5: Establishment Of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
10-25-6: Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)
10-25-7: Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF)
10-25-8: General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF)
10-25-9: [Reserved]
10-25-10: Appointment And Duties Of Board Of Adjustment
10-25-11: Nonconforming Uses
10-25-12: Penalties For Violation
10-25-13: Amendments
10-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of the property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the "one hundred
(100) year flood.")
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor."
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials. "Development" does not include "minor projects" or
"routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities" as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
10-25-7B4a of this chapter; and
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation; and
   D.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY-BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use which is wholly
or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site.
For the purpose of this chapter factory-built homes include mobile homes,
manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include "recreational vehicles"
which are placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two (2) or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
FIVE HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths
percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500)
years.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A report published by FEMA for a community issued
along with the community's flood insurance rate map(s). The study contains such
background data as the base flood discharge and water surface elevations that
were used to prepare the FIRM.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the special flood hazard area outside the
floodway.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of "Enclosed Area
Below Lowest Floor" are met.
MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hospitals and like institutions;
buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or instruments of
great public value; buildings or building complexes containing materials
dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power installations needed
in emergency or other buildings or building complexes similar in nature or use.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and
excavating) valued at less than five-hundred dollars ($500.00).
NEW CONSTRUCTION (NEW BUILDINGS, FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARKS): Those structures or
development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to
keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of
the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
   A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles and replacing siding;
   B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops and similar finish work;
   C.   Basement sealing;
   D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
   E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land within a community subject to the
"base flood". This land is identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and/or other
similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE:
   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to it's before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the estimated cost
of repair.
   Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds
twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the
estimated cost of repair.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either
of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure taking place
during a ten (10) year period, the cumulative cost of which, equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (i) before the
"start of construction" of the first improvement of the structure, or (ii) if
the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.)
   The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and    which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of an
"historic structure", provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's
designation as an "historic structure."
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the
total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. D-61,
6-2-2020)
10-25-2: STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in chapter 414, Iowa Code, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Fort Madison are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
      2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by: (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
      3.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of Fort Madison and
its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare,
and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses
described in division B1 with provisions designed to:
      1.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Fort Madison
shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of
the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Floodplain and Shallow Flooding
(Overlay) Districts, as established in
10-25-5.
   B.   Establishment Of Official Floodplain Zoning Map: The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Lee County and Incorporated Areas, City of Fort Madison,
Panels 19111C0194D, 19111C0212D, 19111C0213D, 19111C0214D, 19111C0216D,
19111C0218D, 19111C0219D, 19111C0329D, 19111C0331D, 19111C0332D, 19111C0333D,
19111C0334D, 19111C0351D, 19111C0352D, 19111C0353D, and 19111C0356D, dated July
22, 2020, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Lee
County, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material
contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this
chapter.
   C.   Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   F.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Fort Madison or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   H.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Local Official:
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
      2.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         a.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         b.   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for floodplain construction.
         c.   Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
         d.   Notify adjacent communities/ counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         e.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
         f.   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
         g.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community's boundaries.
         h.   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the City Council of
potential conflict.
         i.   Maintain the accuracy of the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when;
            (1)   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District
results in any of the following:
               (A)   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
               (B)    Alteration to the floodway boundary.
            (2)   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does
not include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot
(1') in the base elevation; or
            (3)   Development relocates or alters the channel.
            Within six (6) months of the completion of the development, the
applicant shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for
a letter of map revision.
         j.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
         k.   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
   B.   Floodplain Development Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any man-
made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         a.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         b.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         c.   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
         d.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
         e.   Elevation of the base flood.
         f.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
         g.   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
         h.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      3.   Action On Permit Application: The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
      4.   Construction And Use To Be As Provided In Application And Plans:
Floodplain development permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-5: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
   A.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW): Those areas identified as Floodway on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map;
   B.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF): Those areas identified as Zone
AE on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map but excluding those areas identified
as Floodway;
   C.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF): Those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Board of Adjustment. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-6: FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Permitted Uses: All development within the Floodway District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway District.
   B.   Performance Standards: All Floodway District uses allowed as a
permitted use shall meet the following standards.
      1.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
      2.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
         a.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      3.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system.
      4.   Structures, buildings, recreational vehicles, and sanitary and
utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards
of the Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present
the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
      5.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
      6.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District
within the time available after flood warning.
      7.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      8.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
      9.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. D-61, 6-
2-2020)
10-25-7: FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Permitted Uses: All development within the Floodway Fringe District
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable
performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
   B.   Performance Standards: All development must be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no development may
increase the base flood elevation more than one foot (1'). The applicant will
be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make such determination.
      1.   All new and substantially improved structures shall:
         a.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      2.   Residential Structures: All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no
lower than one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and extend at such
elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers or extended
foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the Board of
Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude
elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support
the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated
with flooding.
      All new residential structures located in areas that would become
isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with a means
of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood.
However, this criterion shall not apply where the Administrator determines
there is sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life and property.
When estimating flood warning time, consideration shall be given to the
criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
      3.   Non-Residential Structures: All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
      4.   All new and substantially improved structures:
         a.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings, with positioning on at least
two (2) walls, having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
            Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access and low damage potential storage.
         b.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         c.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated or floodproofed to a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
      5.   Factory-Built Homes:
         a.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
         b.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage systems
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
      6.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
         a.   On-site wastewater disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
         b.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
         c.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation.
         d.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      7.   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major
flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      8.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc.
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood with a minimum of
three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall approve
structural flood control works.
      9.   Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain
the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In
addition, the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or
relocations.
      10.   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions)
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public
utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with
a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base
flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50)
lots (whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those
areas located within the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District.
      11.   Accessory Structures To Residential Uses:
         a.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
            (1)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in size.
Those portions of the structure located less than one foot (1') above the BFE
must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.
            (2)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
            (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
            (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
            (5)   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
            (6)   The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of division B4a.
         b.   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
      12.   Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
division B5 regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
            (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for
less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and
            (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         b.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of division B5 regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes.
      13.   Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due
to channel degradation and meandering.
      14.   Maximum Damage Potential Development: All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the elevation of
the five hundred (500) year flood, or together with attendant utility and
sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is
utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify
that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance flood; and that the structure,
below the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance flood elevation is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the    passage of water. A record of
the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator. Where two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance flood
elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determinations. (Ord. D-61,
6-2-2020)
10-25-8: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (GF):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   All development within the General Floodplain District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the General Floodplain District.
      2.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the land involved is either
wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and (ii) the base flood
elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the
determination.
      3.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         a.   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two (2) square miles, and
         b.   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code.
   B.   Performance Standards:
      1.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District, section
10-25-7.
      2.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
10-25-7. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-9: [RESERVED]:
10-25-10: APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Appointment And Duties Of Board Of Adjustment: A Board of Adjustment is
hereby established which shall hear and decide (i) appeals and (ii) requests
for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall take any other
action which is required of the Board.
   B.   Appeals: Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason
for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to
the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
   C.   Variance: The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in
specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      1.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      3.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction
increases risks to life and property.
      5.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   D.   Hearings And Decisions Of The Board Of Adjustment:
      1.   Hearings: Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal
or a request for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as
well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear
in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The
board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such    information as
is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or
evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources.
      2.   Decisions: The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in division D2b.
         a.   Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Board Of Adjustment Shall
Be Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
            (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
            (2)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
            (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
            (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
            (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the city.
            (6)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
            (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
            (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
            (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for the area.
            (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
            (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
            (12)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
            (13)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
         b.   Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the
factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            (1)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
            (2)   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
            (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
            (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
            (5)   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the
applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory
flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular
area.
   E.   Appeals To The Court: Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the
decision in the office of the Board. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-11: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      3.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred,
unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Except as provided in
10-25-10A2, any use which has been permitted as a variance shall be considered
a conforming use. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained prevent the City of Fort Madison from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
10-25-13: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. D-61, 6-2-2020)
CHAPTER 26
AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-26-1: Statutory Authorization and Purpose
10-26-2: Short Title
10-26-3: Definitions
10-26-4: Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations
10-26-5: Use Restrictions
10-26-6: Lighting
10-26-7: Variances
10-26-8: Board of Adjustment and Appeals, Powers
10-26-9: Judicial Review
10-26-10: Administrative Agency
10-26-11: More Stringent Requirements Prevail
10-26-12: Penalty
10-26-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred on the City by Iowa
Statutes, section 329.3. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers
the lives and property of users of the Fort Madison Municipal Airport and
property or occupants of land in its vicinity. Accordingly, it is declared:
   A.   That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the City served by the Fort Madison Municipal
Airport;
   B.   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public
safety and general welfare that creation of airport hazards be prevented; and
   C.   That this should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by
proper exercise of the police power; and
   D.   That the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which the City may
raise and expend public funds, as an incident to the operation of airports, to
acquire land or property interests therein. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-82)
10-26-2: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the FORT MADISON MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT TALL STRUCTURE ORDINANCE. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-82)
10-26-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: The Fort Madison Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be
seven hundred twenty four feet (724').
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the
Federal obstruction standards as contained in fourteen (14) Code of Federal
Regulations sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25, as revised March 4, 1972, and
which obstruct the airspace required for the flight of aircraft and landing or
takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off
of aircraft.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the
Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or
planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
AIRSPACE HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this Chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
CONTROL ZONE: Airspace extending upward from the surface of the earth which may
include one or more airports and is normally a circular area of five (5)
statute miles in radium with extensions where necessary to include instrument
approach and departure paths.
INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment, for
which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
MINIMUM DESCENT ALTITUDE: The lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea
level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-
land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure,
where no electronic glide slope is provided.
MINIMUM EN ROUTE ALTITUDE: The altitude in effect between radio fixes which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance
requirements between those fixes.
MINIMUM OBSTRUCTION CLEARANCE ALTITUDE: The specified altitude in effect
between radio fixes or VOR airways, off-airway routes, or route segments which
meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within twenty two (22)
miles of a VOR.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
VOR: Visual omny range.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan,
a military services approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning
document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-82; 1993
Code)
10-26-4: AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which are depicted on the Fort Madison Municipal
Airport Tall Structure Map. A structure located in more than one zone of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
   A.   Horizontal Zone: The land lying under a horizontal plane one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of
which is constructed by:
 
                                1. Swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from
(Visual Runway and Nonprecision the center of each end of the primary
Instrument Utility Runways)     surface of Runway(s) 16, 34, 10 and 28,
                                and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
                                tangent to those arcs.
 
   B.   Conical Zone: The land lying under a surface extending outward and
upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. No structure shall penetrate the conical
surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the Fort Madison Municipal Airport
Tall Structure Map.
   C.   Approach Zone: The land lying under a surface longitudinally centered
on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each
end of the primary surface. (Note: An approach surface is applied to each end
of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that
runway end.)
      1.   The inner edge of the approach surface is:
 
(Visual Utility Runway)               250 feet wide for Runway(s) 10 and 26.
(Visual Other Than Utility Runway and 500 feet wide for Runway(s) 16 and 34.
Nonprecision Instrument Runway)
 
      2.   The outer edge of the approach zone is:
 
(Visual Utility Runways)                  1,250 feet for Runway(s) 10 and 26.
(Nonprecision Instrument Utility Runways) 2,000 feet for Runway(s) 16 and 34.
 
      3.   The Approach Zone extends for a horizontal distance of:
 
(All Visual and Nonprecision Instrument 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to 1 for
Utility Runways)                        Runway(s) 16, 34, 10 and 28.
 
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on
the Fort Madison Municipal Airport Tall Structure Map.
   D.   Transitional Zone: The land lying under those surfaces extending
outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway
centerline extended at a slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surface
and from the sides of the approach surfaces.
No structure shall exceed the transitional surface, as depicted on the Fort
Madison Municipal Airport Tall Structure Map.
   E.   No structure shall be erected in Fort Madison that raises the published
minimum descent altitude for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall
any structure be erected that causes the minimum obstruction clearance altitude
or minimum en route altitude to be increased on any Federal airway in Fort
Madison. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-82)
10-26-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of Section
10-26-4 of this Chapter, no use may be made of land or water within the City in
such a manner as to interfere with the operation of any airborne aircraft. The
following special requirements shall apply to each permitted use:
   A.   All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking,
signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a
manner that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the
Fort Madison Municipal Airport or in the vicinity thereof.
   B.   No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare or other visual
hazards within three (3) statute miles of any usable runway of the Fort Madison
Municipal Airport.
   C.   No operations from any use in the City shall produce electronic
interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the airport
and aircraft. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-82)
10-26-6: LIGHTING:
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
10-26-5 of this Chapter, the owner of any structure over two hundred feet
(200') above ground level must install on the structure lighting in accordance
with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-1D and
amendments. Additionally, any structure, constructed after the effective date
of this Chapter and exceeding nine hundred forty nine feet (949') above ground
level, must install on that structure high intensity white obstruction lights
in accordance with chapter 6 of FAA Advisory Circular 7460-1D and amendments.
   B.   Any permit or variance granted may be so conditional as to require the
owner of the structure or growth in question to permit the City, at its own
expense, to install, operate and maintain thereto such markers or lights as may
be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard. (Ord. B-
368, 3-2-1982)
10-26-7: VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to
permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his property in violation of
any section of this Chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
for variance from such regulations. No application for variance to the
requirements of this Chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Fort Madison
Airport Commission for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a
variance. If the Fort Madison Airport Commission does not respond to the Board
of Adjustment and Appeals within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of
the application, the Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.
(Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982; amd. 1993 Code)
10-26-8: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS, POWERS:
   A.   The Fort Madison Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall have and
exercise the following powers:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the administrative agency in the enforcement of this
Chapter;
      2.   To hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of this Chapter
upon which such Board of Adjustment and Appeals under such regulations may be
required to pass; and
      3.   To hear and decide specific variances.
   B.   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall have the powers established
in Iowa Statutes, section 414.12. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982; amd. 1993 Code)
10-26-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, may appeal to the Court of Record as provided in Iowa
Statutes, section 414.15. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982; amd. 1993 Code)
10-26-10: ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY:
It shall be the duty of the Fort Madison Airport Commission and Fort Madison
Planning and Zoning Department to administer the regulations prescribed herein.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the administrative
authority upon a form furnished by them. Applications required by this Chapter
to be submitted to the administrative agency shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982)
10-26-11: MORE STRINGENT REQUIREMENTS PREVAIL:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to height of structures, the use of
land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982)
10-26-12: PENALTY:
Each violation of this Chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor, and be punishable by a
fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment for not
more than thirty (30) days, or both; and each day a violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. B-368, 3-2-1982; amd. Ord. C-
322, 4-4-2000)
CHAPTER 27
SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-27-1: Purpose
10-27-2: Definitions
10-27-3: Enclosures
10-27-4: Steps, Ladders and Ramps
10-27-5: Exceptions to Required Enclosures
10-27-6: Gates
10-27-7: Maintenance
10-27-8: Liability of City
10-27-9: Violations
10-27-10: Effective Date of Provisions
10-27-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the safety, health and general
welfare of people around swimming pools located within the City. The safety of
minors around swimming pools located within the City, is of particular concern.
The term "minor" as used in this Chapter includes any person not an adult.
(Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
SWIMMING POOL: A basin of water contained within a structure, chamber, or tank
constructed of man-made material and used for the purpose of water sport or
water recreation. The facility may be either publicly or privately owned.
WADING POOL: A swimming pool that is an artificial basin of water no more than
twenty four inches (24") deep at any point which is primarily intended for use
by young children under the age of twelve (12) for general recreation or
training. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-3: ENCLOSURES:
Swimming pool enclosures shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to
secure the swimming pool from unauthorized access by minors and shall meet the
following specifications:
   A.   Inground Enclosures: Every outdoor inground swimming pool shall be
completely surrounded by a fence, or wall, not more nor less than six feet (6')
in height above the grade abutting the outside of the fence, or wall. The
fence, or wall, shall be at least four feet (4') from any side of the pool. The
fence, or wall, shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to secure
the pool from unauthorized access by minors. If the enclosure be a fence, then
fence posts shall not be more than ten feet (10') apart. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
   B.   Aboveground Pool Enclosures: Every outdoor aboveground swimming pool
shall be completely surrounded by a fence, or wall, or structural barrier, not
more nor less than six feet (6') in height above the grade abutting the outside
of the fence, or wall, or structural barrier. The fence, or wall, or structural
barrier shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to secure the pool
from unauthorized access by minors. If the enclosure be a fence, then fence
posts shall not be more than ten feet (10') apart. (Ord. C-072, 12-4-90)
      1.   If manufacturer's specifications for the design, construction, and
maintenance of outdoor aboveground pool enclosures do not conflict with the
design, construction, and maintenance specifications herein, then an outdoor
aboveground pool may be installed in accordance with said manufacturers'
specifications.
   C.   No part of a swimming pool enclosure shall be constructed within five
feet (5') of a property line or other structure which might increase the ease
with which a minor could climb the enclosure and gain access to the swimming
pool. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-4: STEPS, LADDERS AND RAMPS:
Steps, ladders, ramps, or any other device affording access to the pool shall
be constructed in a manner that will afford the same degree of security against
unauthorized access as that prescribed for the pool enclosure. (Ord. C-061, 8-
21-90)
10-27-5: EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIRED ENCLOSURES:
   A.   Wading pools are exempt from this Chapter.
   B.   In lieu of maintaining a fence as provided above, the owner or operator
of a swimming pool may provide a competent person; who shall keep the pool
under observation at all times while water is kept in the pool. In the event
the pool is not under the observation of such competent person, a pool cover or
other protective device approved by the Building Inspector may be used. (Ord.
C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-6: GATES:
All gates or door openings to the swimming pool shall be equipped with a self-
closing or self-latching device with locking provisions for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times when the pool is not in actual uses. (Ord. C-
061, 8-21-90)
10-27-7: MAINTENANCE:
The owner or occupant of any premises where a swimming pool is located shall
keep and maintain the fence or wall and gates or door openings to the swimming
pool in good repair throughout the year. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-8: LIABILITY OF CITY:
Nothing contained in any provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to
impose liability on the City or any of its officials for the design or
maintenance of a fence, wall, gate or door openings. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90)
10-27-9: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of any part of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a
Municipal infraction punishable as provided in Section
1-4-2 of this Code. (Ord. C-061, 8-21-90; 1993 Code)
10-27-10: EFFECTIVE DATE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be made effective for all existing pools
as of June 1, 1991, with the exception that pools already in existence at the
date of the passage of Ordinance C-072 shall not be required to comply with
subsection 10-27-3(C). (Ord. C-072, 12-4-90)
CHAPTER 28
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
10-28-1: Purpose
10-28-2: Definitions
10-28-3: Compliance
10-28-4: Application Procedures
10-28-5: Land Use
10-28-6: Noise And Emission Standards
10-28-7: Placement On City-Owned Property
10-28-8: Abandonment
10-28-9: Violations
10-28-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the placement and to provide for the
orderly location of communications towers and antennas used for commercial
purposes to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the community. (Ord. C-
289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANSI: The most recently adopted standard of the American National Standards
Institute which establishes guidelines for human exposure to nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation.
ANTENNA: A device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications
signals for commercial purposes.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a
telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a
fixed location, freestanding, guyed or on a building.
EIA (ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION) STANDARD: Structural standards for
steel antenna towers and antenna support structures.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT: The distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure.
TIA: Telecommunications Industry Association.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-3: COMPLIANCE:
The Telecommunications Act of 1996, prohibits the City from establishing
policies that discriminate against one or a group of providers in favor of
another or another group of providers or potential providers. The following
objectives shall be applied consistently to all commercial telecommunications
providers that request a location in the City.
   A.   To minimize the overall number of commercial towers located in the
City, providers may be required to participate in collocation agreements.
   B.   To ensure that new commercial towers will be safe and blend into their
environment, providers will propose designs consistent with site
characteristics. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
All applicants who wish to locate a communications antenna or tower for
commercial purposes on property within the City must submit to the Planning
Administrator a completed application, accompanied by a one hundred dollar
($100.00) fee, and the following documents:
   A.   One copy of the typical specifications for proposed structures and
antennas, including description of design characteristics and materials.
   B.   A site plan drawn to scale, showing property lines, tower location and
height, guy wires, anchors, existing and proposed structures. A site plan is
not required if an antenna is to be mounted on an approved existing structure.
   C.   A current map showing locations of other antennas or towers.
   D.   A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity
by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand
winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standard.
   E.   Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be
located on the site.
   F.   Written authorization from the site owner for the application.
   G.   Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been
issued.
   H.   A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within one
hundred eighty (180) days after cessation of use. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-5: LAND USE:
   A.   Special Use Required: All commercial telecommunications towers
exceeding one hundred feet (100') in height, regardless of zoning
classification, require a special use permit, as provided in
Chapter 22 of this Title.
   B.   Residential Locations: To minimize placement of commercial wireless
equipment in highly populated areas, residential locations will be considered
as a last resort. An applicant for a permit in a residential district must show
that the area cannot be adequately served by a facility in a nonresidential
district for valid technical reasons.
   C.   Yard Areas: Setbacks for towers and antennas for commercial use on all
property lines shall be a distance equal to the height of the tower. (For
example, if the tower is 80 feet in height, the setback required is 80 feet.)
   D.   Other Regulations: Requirements or fences, off-street parking, access,
storage, accessory buildings, and signs shall conform to the zoning district in
which the commercial tower or antenna is constructed. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-6: NOISE AND EMISSION STANDARDS:
No equipment shall be operated at commercial towers and telecommunications
facilities so as to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
WAC173-60, except during emergencies or periodic routine maintenance which
requires the use of a backup generator, where the noise standards may be
exceeded temporarily.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC sole jurisdiction to regulate
radio frequency emissions. Facilities that meet the FCC standards shall not be
conditioned or denied on the basis of emissions impacts. Applicants for
commercial tower sites shall be required to provide information on the
projected power density of the facility and how this meets the FCC standards.
(Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-7: PLACEMENT ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY:
   A.   Lease Required: No person or other entity shall use any public property
for the installation of commercial telecommunications towers or antennas
without first obtaining a lease approved by the City Council.
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   The commercial tower or antenna shall not interfere with the purpose
for which the City-owned property is intended.
      2.   The commercial tower or antenna shall have no adverse impact on
surrounding private property.
      3.   Applicant will produce proof of adequate liability insurance for
potential damage commercial towers or antennas could reasonably cause to City
property and facilities.
      4.   Applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other
security acceptable to the City to cover the cost of commercial tower or
antenna removal.
   C.   Specific Placement Requirements:
      1.   Water Tower Or Reservoir Sites: Written approval is required from
the Water Services Director each time access to the facility is desired.
      2.   Parks: Commercial towers and antennas are prohibited from all public
parks and ball fields. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-8: ABANDONMENT:
In the event the use of any commercial communication tower has been
discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the
tower shall be deemed abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall
be made by the Zoning Administrator who shall have the right to request
documentation and/or affidavits from the tower owner/operator regarding the
issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower
shall have an additional one hundred eighty (180) days within which to: a)
reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator
who makes actual use of the tower, or b) dismantle and remove the tower. Upon
official abandonment of the tower, all special use permits and/or variances
shall automatically expire. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-1997)
10-28-9: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter may be prosecuted as a
Municipal infraction, as a simple misdemeanor, or both. (Ord. C-289, 10-21-
1997)
CHAPTER 29
AR-1 AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-29-1: Purpose
10-29-2: Definitions
10-29-3: Farm Exempt
10-29-4: Nonconforming Uses Of Buildings And Structures
10-29-5: Permitted Uses
10-29-6: Special Uses
10-29-7: Lot Requirements
10-29-8: Yard Areas
10-29-9: Lot Coverage
10-29-10: Height Of Buildings
10-29-11: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
10-29-12: Signs
10-29-1: PURPOSE:
The AR-1 agricultural/residential district is intended and designed to permit
the continuation of low density residential areas and to provide for the
location of animals and permit their continued husbandry, and to provide for
accessory buildings housing such animals. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-2: DEFINITIONS:
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: Shall include, but not be limited to, a building,
structure, or erection used for agricultural purposes as part of an
agricultural unit.
AGRICULTURE: The art and science of cultivating the ground, including the
harvesting of crops and the rearing and management of livestock.
ANIMAL PRODUCTION: Commercial grazing; commercial ranching; commercial dairy
farming; and the commercial breeding and raising of horses, bovine animals,
goats, sheep, rabbits, poultry, mink, chinchillas, emus, ostriches, rheas,
guinea fowl, alpacas, llamas, mules, donkeys, asses, swine, turkeys, ducks,
geese and other similar animals and fowl.
ANIMAL RAISING, PERSONAL: The breeding and raising of agricultural animals and
fowl for personal use and for agriculturally related projects by the owner or
occupant of the premises.
COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT: The use of a site for the confined feeding or holding of
livestock or poultry within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters
which are not used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation
is not the major feed source.
CROP PRODUCTION: The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops or field
crops on an agricultural or commercial basis.
HORTICULTURE: The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such
as flowers, shrubs or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes.
Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
LIVESTOCK SALES: The use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange
or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sales barns.
STABLES, COMMERCIAL: A building or structure used or intended to be used for
the housing only of horses on a fee basis. Riding instruction may be given in
connection with a commercial stable.
STABLES, PRIVATE: A building or structure used or intended to be used for
housing horses belonging to the owner of the property only for noncommercial
purposes. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-3: FARM EXEMPT:
Subject to the above, all agricultural areas created pursuant to section 352.6,
code of Iowa, and the activities conducted thereon, are and shall remain exempt
from zoning and building regulations. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-4: NONCONFORMING USES OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Any use, building, or structure existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter may be continued even though such use, building or structure may not
conform with the provisions of this chapter. No change of title or right of
possession shall affect the continuation of an existing use. No existing
building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter, except
when required to do so by law or order, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered unless the use thereof is
changed to a use permitted in this district. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-5: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the AR-1 agricultural/residential district:
Animal production.
Animal raising, personal.
Cemetery.
Churches and similar religious institutions, including accessory uses required
for operation.
Crop production.
Forest preserve.
Home occupations.
Horticulture.
Personal animal raising, including cattle, horses, sheep, goats, llamas, asses,
mules, swine, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, ostriches, emus, rheas, and
guinea fowl.
Recreational areas, including golf course, country club, tennis court, swimming
pool, park, playground, and similar recreational uses.
Schools, including playgrounds, athletic fields, and accessory structures
required for operation.
Single-family residences. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-6: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Bed and breakfast operations, in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 24 of this title.
Commercial feedlots.
Commercial stables.
Kennels, in accordance with the state code of Iowa.
Livestock sales.
Quarries, mining.
Telecommunications towers, in accordance with
chapter 28 of this title.
Veterinary clinics. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot having an area of not less than five (5) acres, or two hundred
seventeen thousand eight hundred (217,800) square feet. Minimum lot width shall
be not less than two hundred feet (200').
   B.   All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this
district shall be located on a lot of not less than five (5) acres, or two
hundred seventeen thousand eight hundred (217,800) square feet. Minimum lot
width shall be not less than two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-8: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than forty feet (40').
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, there shall be a
side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than twenty feet
(20').
      2.   On each lot upon which a permitted nonresidential building or
structure is erected or enlarged, there shall be a side yard of not less than
twenty feet (20') on each side of the principal building or structure.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. C-405,
8-17-2004)
10-29-9: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-
2004)
10-29-10: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The maximum height of buildings shall be as follows:
   A.   Single-family dwellings: Forty five feet (45'), or three (3) stories.
   B.   Agricultural buildings: Forty five feet (45'). (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-11: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Vehicle parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
10-29-12: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, marquees and
awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. C-405, 8-17-2004)
CHAPTER 30
MA-1 AIRPORT DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-30-1: Purpose
10-30-2: Farm Exempt
10-30-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Buildings And Structures
10-30-4: Permitted Uses
10-30-5: Special Uses
10-30-6: Yard Areas
10-30-7: Height Of Buildings Or Structures
10-30-8: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
10-30-9: Signs
10-30-10: FAA Approval
10-30-1: PURPOSE:
The MA-1 airport district is intended and designed to facilitate the efficient
and safe operations of the Fort Madison municipal airport facility and to
provide for certain other compatible commercial or light industrial uses on
airport property. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-2: FARM EXEMPT:
Subject to the above, all agricultural areas created pursuant to section 352.6,
code of Iowa, and the activities conducted thereon, are and shall remain exempt
from zoning and building regulations. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Any use, building, or structure legally existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter that does not conform to the use or bulk regulations for the
MA-1 district may be continued, but only in accordance with
chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-4: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the MA-1 airport district:
Aircraft hangars for storage and maintenance.
Airport terminals.
Aviation fuel storage.
Emergency services facilities and vehicles.
Farming operations excluding livestock.
Heliports.
Light industrial or commercial warehousing.
Manufacturing requiring close proximity to airports for normal daily
operations.
Runway and taxi areas. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-5: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of
chapter 22 of this title:
Industrial uses as permitted and conditioned within
chapter 16 of this title.
Offices.
Parks or nature preserve areas.
Restaurants.
Transportation terminals and services.
Vehicle rental facilities. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided or maintained along the perimeter of the airport property:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side Yards: Side yards of not less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. C-420,
5-17-2005)
10-30-7: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
The maximum height of buildings or any other structures shall be regulated as
provided for in
chapter 26, "Airport Tall Structure Regulations", of this title. (Ord. C-420,
5-17-2005)
10-30-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Vehicle parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-9: SIGNS:
The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, marquees and
awnings shall be in conformity with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
10-30-10: FAA APPROVAL:
Any proposed development within the MA-1 district shall be reviewed by the Fort
Madison airport commission for possible comment prior to issuance of a permit
by the city. (Ord. C-420, 5-17-2005)
CHAPTER 31
HUNTING GROUNDS
SECTION:
10-31-1: Purpose
10-31-2: Definition Of Hunting Grounds
10-31-3: Special Use Permit Required
10-31-4: Reporting
10-31-1: PURPOSE:
In that there has been interest in the creation of hunting grounds within the
city limits it is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens by regulating such hunting grounds. (Ord. D-
010, 12-3-2013)
10-31-2: DEFINITION OF HUNTING GROUNDS:
"Hunting grounds" shall be defined as a continuous tract of at least eighty
(80) acres of land on which hunting is allowed after all of the requirements of
this chapter have been met. Adjoining property owners may combine tracts to
meet the eighty (80) acre minimum but the property lines must adjoin for at
least one-half (1/2) mile. (Ord. D-010, 12-3-2013)
10-31-3: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   A special use permit granted by the board of adjustment is required for
the establishment of hunting grounds. The granting of a special use permit
shall meet the requirements provided for in
chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. D-010, 12-3-2013; amd. Ord. D-39, 1-17-2017)
   B.   An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the zoning
administrator and shall include the following:
      1.   A reproducible map that shows the following items:
         a.   Parcels proposed for hunting.
         b.   All buildings located on the proposed hunting ground and within
two hundred (200) yards of the proposed hunting grounds including a two hundred
(200) yard buffer surrounding these buildings.
         c.   Location of any hunting related structures (blinds, stands, etc.)
must be depicted on the map submitted. If new blinds, stands, etc., are to be
erected, the map must be updated and submitted to the police chief for
approval. Upon approval from the police chief, the new map must be submitted to
the zoning director prior to erection.
   C.   The holder of the special use permit shall be required to meet the
following requirements:
      1.   All hunting and firearm use must meet and follow all applicable Iowa
department of natural resources regulations.
      2.   Hunting will only be allowed from a blind or stand.
      3.   Hunting will only be by shotgun or archery.
      4.   Archery hunting will only be allowed from a stand no less than
twelve feet (12') above grade.
      5.   Releasing an arrow and/or discharging a shotgun on or over buffer
areas surrounding buildings as depicted on the map submitted or over
neighboring land not included in the hunting grounds is prohibited.
      6.   All hunters must carry with them while hunting written landowner
permission to hunt. Written permission must include a map of where hunting is
allowed. The permission form shall be supplied by the city; copies needed shall
be made by the holder of the special use permit.
      7.   Written landowner permission must be furnished to a peace officer
upon request.
      8.   Written permission must be renewed on an annual basis, except
relatives of the owner of said hunting grounds may be given permission for up
to five (5) years.
      9.   Consumption of alcohol while in possession of a loaded firearm or
while hunting from a stand or elevated platform is prohibited.
      10.   A certificate of insurance listing the city of Fort Madison as an
additional insured must be submitted to the planning and zoning director
annually. A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance
is required.
   D.   The special use permit shall be personal to the applicant and not
transferable.
   E.   The special use permit shall not be approved by board of adjustment
without the approval of the police chief.
   F.   The special use permit shall be valid for one (1) year only, after
which time an application may be made for renewal for a period of three (3)
years. The permit may be renewed upon the approval of the board of adjustment.
(Ord. D-010, 12-3-2013)
10-31-4: REPORTING:
Special use permit holders will provide an annual report including the number
of hunting permissions issued. (Ord. D-010, 12-3-2013)
TITLE 11: SUBDIVISIONS
   Chapter
      
1.   General Provisions
      
2.   Definitions
      
3.   Improvements
      
4.   Design Standards
      
5.   Platting Procedure
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
11-1-1   Short title
   
11-1-2   Purpose
   
11-1-3   Application
   
11-1-4   Recording of plat
   
11-1-5   Fees established
   
11-1-6   Penalties
   
11-1-7   Building permit to be denied
   
11-1-8   Variances
   
11-1-9   Changes and amendments
   
11-1-10   Disapproval; appeal
   
11-1-11   City Clerk; responsibility
   
11-1-12   Void plat; action to annul
   
11-1-13   Review of subdivision plats within two miles of city
§ 11-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This title shall be known as the “Subdivision Title” of the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this title is to provide minimum standards for the design,
development and improvement of all new subdivision and resubdivisions of land,
so that existing land uses will be protected and so that adequate provisions
are made for public facilities and services, and so that growth occurs in an
orderly manner, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-3 APPLICATION.
   It is unlawful for the owner, agent or persons having control of any tract
or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat the
tract or parcel into three or more parts, for the purpose of laying out an
addition, subdivision, building lots, acreage, avenues, alleys or public ways
within the city or within two miles from the corporate limits of the city
unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of
this title.
(Ord. C-187, passed 3-15-1994)
§ 11-1-4 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat or street dedication within
the city or within two miles of the corporate limits of the city shall be filed
for record with the County Recorder, or recorded by the County Recorder, until
a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision or street dedication has been
reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   (B)   (1)   Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing body, it
shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the
County Auditor and County Recorder, as required by law.
      (2)   Such approval shall be revocable after 30 days, unless the plat has
been duly recorded and evidence filed with the City Clerk within 30 days.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-5 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   The governing body shall, from time to time, establish by resolution, fees
for the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be
considered filed with the City Clerk unless and until the plat is accompanied
by the fee, as established by resolution of the governing body, and as required
by this title.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-6 PENALTIES.
   Any violation of this title shall be a municipal infraction, punishable as
provided in §
1-4-2 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. C-201, passed 6-21-1994)
§ 11-1-7 BUILDING PERMIT TO BE DENIED.
   No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel or
tract, where a subdivision is required by this title, unless and until a final
plat of the subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance with this
title, and until the improvements required by this title have been accepted by
the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-8 VARIANCES.
   Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown
that strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual topography or
other conditions, the governing body may vary, modify or waive the requirements
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided, however, that, the variance, modification or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title. In no case shall any
variance or modification be more than minimum easing of the requirements as
necessary to eliminate the hardship. In so granting a variance, the governing
body may impose such additional conditions as are necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of the requirements varied, modified or waived.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-9 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   This title or any provision of this title may be changed or amended, from
time to time, by the governing body; provided, however, that, the changes or
amendments shall not become effective until after a public hearing has been
held, public notice of which shall have been published at least once, not less
than four, nor more than 20, days before the date of the hearing.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-10 DISAPPROVAL; APPEAL.
   (A)   In case, on application for such approval of any plat, the City
Council shall fail to either approve or reject the same within 60 days from the
date of application, the person proposing said plat shall have the right to
file the same with the County Recorder, Assessor and Auditor.
   (B)   If said plat is disapproved by the Council, such disapproval shall
point out wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
   (C)   From the action of the Council refusing to approve any such plat, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal to the District Court within 20 days
after such rejection by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
   (D)   Such appeal shall be triable de novo as an equitable proceeding and
accorded such preference in assignment as to assure its prompt disposition.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-11 CITY CLERK; RESPONSIBILITY.
   The responsibility of the City Clerk to receive and distribute plats may be
redelegated to another officer of the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-12 VOID PLAT; ACTION TO ANNUL.
   In case any plat shall be filed and recorded in violation of Iowa Code §
354.20, the same shall be void, and the Mayor of the city who shall be
authorized so to do by resolution of the Council may institute a suit in equity
in the district court in which suit the court may order such plat expunged from
the records.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-1-13 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PLATS WITHIN TWO MILES OF CITY.
   Pursuant to the authority of Iowa Code § 354.9, the city shall review
subdivisions outside the city’s boundaries including: all land within two miles
of the boundaries.
(Ord. D-036, passed 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
11-2-1      Terms defined
§ 11-2-1 TERMS DEFINED.
   For the purposes of this title, certain words shall be defined as, and
interpreted as, follows. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, the masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the term “shall”
is always mandatory, and the term “may” is permissive. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates of requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, railroad rights-of- way, rivers, tracts of public land or the boundary
of the subdivision.
   CITY ENGINEER. The professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa
designated as City Engineer by the governing body or other hiring authority.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The general plan for the development of the community,
which may be titled master plan, comprehensive plan or some other title, which
plan has been adopted by the governing body. Such COMPREHENSIVE PLAN shall
include any part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to the plan
or parts of the plan.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having one end connecting to another street, and the
other end terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
   EASEMENT. An authorization by a property owner for another to use a
designated part of his or her property for a specified purpose.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any area subject to flooding by a 1% probability flood,
otherwise referred to as a 100-year flood; as designated by the state’s Natural
Resources Council or the Federal Insurance Administration.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands
that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a 100-year flood
without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation more than one foot.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites
including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving,
sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways and other public works
and appurtenances.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel or tract intended as a unit
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. Any lot which is not a corner lot which abuts two
streets.
   OWNER. The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or
such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The appointed commission designated by the
governing body for the purpose of this title, and may also be the Zoning
Commission, in which case such commission shall be known as the PLANNING AND
ZONING COMMISSION.
   PLAT. A map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider’s plan for the
subdivision of land is presented, which he submits for approval and intends, in
final form, to record.
   PLATS OFFICER. The individual assigned the duty to administer this title by
the governing body or other appointing authority.
   RESUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land which has previously been included in
a recorded plat. In appropriate context, it may be a verb referring to the act
of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
   STREET. Public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation.
In appropriate context, the term STREET may refer to the right of way bounded
by the property lines of such public property, or may refer to the paving
installed within such right-of-way.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part
of the city to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting
property.
   STREET, MAJOR. An arterial street or other street which has or is planned to
have continuity to carry traffic from one section of the city to another.
   SUBDIVIDER. The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person
or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more parts for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development.
The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of
subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of small
parcels of land to or between the owner of adjacent platted lots, where such
sale or exchange does not create any additional lots and where the land sold or
exchanged constitutes less than 50% of the area of the enlarged lot after such
transfer, shall not be considered a SUBDIVISION.
   UTILITIES. Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
electricity, wastewater and storm water.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
CHAPTER 3: IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
11-3-1   Improvements required
   
11-3-2   Inspection
   
11-3-3   Minimum improvements
   
11-3-4   Easement required
   
11-3-5   Maintenance bond required
   
11-3-6   Alternative systems for sewer or water
§ 11-3-1 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The subdivider shall, at his or her expense, install and construct all
improvements required by this title. All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established
for the improvements by the city, as shown on the approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-3-2 INSPECTION.
   All improvements shall be inspected to insure compliance with the
requirements of this title. The cost of the inspection shall be borne by the
subdivider, and shall be the actual cost of the inspection to the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-3-3 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.
   The improvements set forth herein shall be considered the minimum
improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   The subdivider of land being subdivided shall provide the grading
of the entire street right-of- way, alley or public place and provide
appropriate paving, including curb and gutter on all streets. All streets or
alleys shall be of such width and shall be so constructed as to meet the
standards of the city.
      (2)   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a street having a width
greater than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to
complete the city street system as it relates to both the area being platted
and other areas.
      (3)   In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in
cost of improving the wider street and the street width reasonable to meet the
foreseeable needs of the subdivision taken alone. The streets shall, upon final
approval and acceptance by the city, become the property of the city.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer system.
      (1)   The subdivider of the land being platted shall make adequate
provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage from the platted area with due
regard being given to present or reasonably foreseeable needs. There shall be
constructed, at the subdivider’s expense, a sanitary sewer system, including
all necessary pumping stations, pumping equipment, manholes and all other
necessary or desirable appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary
sewage from all lots or parcels of land within the platted area to a connection
with the city’s sanitary sewers. The sanitary sewer system shall be constructed
in accordance with the plans and specifications of the city and at the sewer
grades as established by the city.
      (2)   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than
necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the
city sanitary sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and
other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in
cost of the pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of
sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      (3)   The above mentioned facilities for the collection and disposal of
sanitary sewage from the platted area shall, upon final approval and acceptance
by the city, become the property of the city.
   (C)   Storm sewer system.
      (1)   The subdivider of land being platted shall install and construct a
storm sewer system adequate to serve the area, including anticipated extension
of use to serve additional areas. The storm sewer system shall be constructed
in accordance with plans and specifications of the city and at sewer grades
established by the city.
      (2)   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, installation of a storm sewer system that is larger than
necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the
city storm sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and other
areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in cost
of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of sewer
reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      (3)   The sewers shall, upon inspection, approval and acceptance by the
city, become the property of the city. In the storm sewer design phase,
consideration shall be given to alternatives and principles of storm water
management, or the provisions of a storm water management plan if such plan has
been adopted by the city.
   (D)   Water main system.
      (1)   The subdivider of land being platted shall install and construct a
water main system to adequately serve all lots or parcels of land within the
platted area, with due regard to the present and reasonably foreseeable needs
of the entire area, and shall connect them to the city’s existing water mains.
      (2)   (a)   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a
condition for approval of the plat, installation of a water main that is larger
than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete
the city water distribution system as it relates to both the area being platted
and other areas.
         (b)   In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference
in cost of pipe and installation between the larger water main and the diameter
of water main reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      (3)   The water mains shall, upon inspection, approval and acceptance by
the city, become the property of the city.
   (E)   Other improvements. The owner and subdivider of the land being platted
shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within the street area;
the installation of walkways as necessary; grading, seeding or sodding of all
lots; the planting of any required trees in the right-of-way; the installation
of street signs; and, the provision of street lighting. All such improvements
shall be under the direction of the City Engineer.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983; Ord. D-95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 11-3-4 EASEMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Public utilities. Where alleys are not provided, or where otherwise
required by the present or future placement of public utilities, easements of
not less than ten feet in width shall be granted by the owner along rear and
where necessary, along side lot lines for public utility requirements. Except
where prohibited by topography, such easements shall be centered on lot lines.
Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines, or across lots when
necessary for the placement and maintenance of utilities. No buildings or
structures, except as necessary for utilities, shall be permitted on the
easements.
   (B)   Easements along streams and watercourses. Whenever any stream or
surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the
subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate provisions for the
proper drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the city an
easement along the stream or watercourse as necessary for the proper
maintenance of the watercourse, and as approved by the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-3-5 MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be required to
provide to the city proper maintenance bonds, satisfactory to the city, so as
to ensure that for a period of two years from the date of acceptance of any
improvement, the owner and subdivider shall be responsible to maintain the
improvement in good repair.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-3-6 ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS FOR SEWER OR WATER.
   Where connection to the city sewer or water system cannot reasonably be
made, the city may approve alternate facilities for the distribution of water
or the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes. The alternate systems shall
be designed to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare, and shall
meet all requirements of state, county or other applicable health regulations.
Prior to granting approval of the alternate systems, the city shall require
that the owner and subdivider provide to the city a waiver of assessment
protest or other legally binding documents necessary to protect the city from
the expense of subsequent installation of sewer or water facilities.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
CHAPTER 4: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
11-4-1   Standards prescribed
   
11-4-2   Land suitability
   
11-4-3   Lands subject to flooding
   
11-4-4   Plat to conform to Comprehensive Plan
   
11-4-5   Construction standards for improvements
   
11-4-6   Street standards
   
11-4-7   Block and lot standards
   
11-4-8   Parks and open space
   
11-4-9   Parks and school sites reserved
§ 11-4-1 STANDARDS PRESCRIBED.
   The standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered the minimum
standards necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-2 LAND SUITABILITY.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided which is found to be unsuitable for
subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse soil
conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory topography or other
conditions likely to be harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare
unless the unsuitable conditions are corrected to the satisfaction of the city.
   (B)   If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision for any of the
reasons cited in this section, the governing body shall state its reasons in
writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present data regarding the
unsuitability. Thereafter, the governing body may reaffirm, modify or withdraw
its determination regarding the unsuitability.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-3 LANDS SUBJECT TO FLOODING.
   (A)   No subdivision containing land located in a floodway or a flood hazard
area shall be approved by the city without conformance to all applicable state
and federal regulations. No lot shall be located so as to include land located
within a floodway or flood hazard area unless the lot is of such size and shape
that it will contain a buildable area not within the floodway or flood hazard
area, suitable for development as allowed by the zoning ordinance for the zone
in which the lot is located.
   (B)   Land located within a flood hazard area of a floodway may be included
within a plat as follows, subject to the approval of the city:
      (1)   Included within individual lots in the subdivision, subject to the
limitations of this section;
      (2)   Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots in
the subdivision, with an appropriate legal instrument, approved by the city,
providing for its care and maintenance by owners; and
      (3)   If acceptable to the city, dedicated to the city as public open
space for recreation or flood control purposes.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-4 PLAT TO CONFORM TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
and the general nature and extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform
to the Comprehensive Plan of the city; provided, the plan has been adopted by
the city; and, shall conform to other plans, including, but not limited to a
major street plan, a sanitary sewer system plan or a parks and open space plan;
provided, the plan has been adopted by the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-5 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the City
Engineer shall, from time to time, prepare and the governing body shall, from
time to time, adopt by resolution, technical standards for public improvements.
Such technical standards for public improvements shall contain the minimum
acceptable specifications for the construction of public improvements. These
technical standards may vary for classes of improvements giving due regard to
the classification of streets or other improvements, and the extent and
character of the area served by the improvements.
   (B)   Upon adoption by the governing body by resolution, the technical
standards for public improvements shall have force and effect as if they were
fully set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-6 STREET STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all streets to be located within the
subdivision.
   (A)   Streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets from
adjoining platted areas, and the extension of major streets into adjoining
unplatted areas. Where a plat encompasses the location for a major street
proposed in the Comprehensive Plan or major street plan, the plat shall provide
for the major street.
   (B)   Street grades shall align to existing streets, and all grades for
streets shall be as approved by the city.
   (C)   Arterial streets shall be located so as to not require direct access
from the arterial street to abutting lots.
   (D)   Street right-of-way widths and pavement widths shall be as specified
in the Comprehensive Plan, major street plan or technical standards for public
improvement.
   (E)   Half-streets are prohibited, except where an existing platted half-
street abuts the subdivision, a platted half-street to complete the street
shall be required.
   (F)   Minor streets should be designed to discourage through traffic while
safely connecting to major collector or arterial streets.
   (G)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited, except where topography or other physical conditions make such jogs
unavoidable.
   (H)   Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible; and, no
street shall intersect any other street at less than 75 degrees.
   (I)   At intersections of major streets, and otherwise as necessary, lot
corners abutting the intersection shall be rounded with a radius sufficient to
provide necessary space within the right-of-way for sidewalks, traffic-control
devices and other necessary improvements without encroachment onto the corner
lots.
   (J)   Dead-end streets are prohibited, except where a street is planned to
continue past the subdivider’s property, a temporary dead-end may be allowed.
   (K)   Streets which connect with other streets, or loop streets, are
preferable for maintenance, fire protection and circulation, but cul-de-sacs
may be permitted. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length.
   (L)   In general, alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas and
required in commercial areas with normal street frontage. Dead-end alleys are
prohibited, unless provided with a turn-around with a minimum right-of-way
diameter of 100 feet.
   (M)   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or parcels,
the lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and
opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision with provision for
adequate utility connections for the resubdivision. Easements for future
openings and extensions for the streets or utilities may, at the discretion of
the governing body, be made a requirement of the plat.
   (N)   Streets which are, or will become extensions of existing streets shall
be given the same name as the existing streets. New street names shall not be
the same or sound similar to existing street names. All street names shall be
at the approval of the governing body.
   (O)   Private streets, not dedicated to the city, shall be avoided. The
governing body may approve a private street where unusual conditions made a
private street desirable; provided, adequate covenants or other legal documents
ensure that the city will not have or need to assume any maintenance or other
responsibility for the street.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-7 BLOCK AND LOT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to the layout of blocks and lots in all
subdivisions, and to the extent possible, in all resubdivisions.
   (A)   No residential block shall be longer than 1,300 feet or shorter than
300 feet, measured from street line to street line. The width of blocks should
be arranged so as to allow two tiers of lots, with utility easement.
   (B)   In blocks over 700 feet in length, the governing body may require a
public way or an easement at least ten feet in width, at or near the center of
the block, for use by pedestrians.
   (C)   The size and shape of blocks or lots intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide for the use intended, and to meet
the parking, loading and other requirements for the uses contained in the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and surrounding
land uses.
   (E)   The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located.
   (F)   All lots shall abut a public street, or upon an approved private
street, with a minimum frontage of at least 35 feet, measured as a straight
line between the two front lot corners.
   (G)   Unless unavoidable, lots shall not front, or have direct access to
arterial streets. Where unavoidable, lots shall be so arranged as to minimize
the number of access points.
   (H)   All lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines, except where, in the judgment of the governing
body, a variation to this provision will provide a better street and lot
layout.
   (I)   Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit the required
front yard setback as specified in the Zoning Ordinance, oriented to either
street.
   (J)   Reversed frontage lots are prohibited. Double frontage lots shall only
be permitted where abutting a major street and a minor street, and such lots
shall front only on the minor street.
   (K)   Any lot not to be served by a sanitary sewage system shall have
sufficient area to allow for a satisfactory drain field. No subdivision to be
served by septic systems shall be approved by the governing body until
percolation tests have been performed and the results of the tests have been
provided to, and reported on, by the City Engineer.
   (L)   Satellite dishes intended to serve an entire development should be
shown on the site plan construction dwellings. Assurances should exist that
dish would not interfere with utility easements or create problems with nearby
electrical substation, if applicable.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983; Ord. B-466, passed 5-7-1985)
§ 11-4-8 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE.
   All residential subdivisions should be so designed, as to meet the
neighborhood park and open space needs of its residents. These needs may be met
by dedication and acceptance of public park land and/or by reservation by
covenant of private open space; provided, there shall exist sufficient
covenants, running with the land, to ensure adequate maintenance by the
property owners benefitting from the open space.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-4-9 PARKS AND SCHOOL SITES RESERVED.
   When a tract being subdivided includes lands proposed to be parks or school
sites in the Comprehensive Plan or other official plans of the city, the
subdivider shall indicate the areas on the plat.
   (A)   Proposed parks sites shall be reserved for three years, giving the
city or other authorized public agency the option to purchase the land at the
appraised raw land value prior to the subdivision as established by a certified
land appraiser. The purchase price shall also include one-half of the cost for
grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any streets that are
contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider
between the date of reservation and date of purchase by the public agency.
Should the park site not be purchased within three years, the subdivider may
then amend the final plat.
   (B)   Proposed school sites shall be reserved for three years, giving the
appropriate school district the option to purchase the land at the appraised
raw land value prior to the subdivision as established by a certified land
appraiser. The purchase price shall also include one-half of the cost for
grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any streets that are
contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider
between the date of reservation and date of purchase by the school district.
Should the school sites not be purchased within three years, the subdivider may
then amend the final plat.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
CHAPTER 5: PLATTING PROCEDURE
Section
   
11-5-1   Pre-application conference
   
11-5-2   Sketch plan required
   
11-5-3   Presentation to Planning Commission or City Council
   
11-5-4   Subdivision classified
   
11-5-5   Plats required
   
11-5-6   Requirements of preliminary plat
   
11-5-7   Procedure for review of preliminary plats
   
11-5-8   Duration of approval of preliminary plat
   
11-5-9   Authorization to install improvements
   
11-5-10   Completion and acceptance of improvements
   
11-5-11   Performance bond permitted
   
11-5-12   Requirement of final plat
   
11-5-13   Attachments to final plat
   
11-5-14   Procedures for review of final plats
   
11-5-15   Official application; submission dates
§ 11-5-1 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivision located within the platting jurisdiction of the
city is proposed, the owner and subdivider shall schedule a pre-application
conference with the Plats Officer. The conference should be attended by the
Plats Officer and other city or utility representatives as are deemed desirable
and by the owner and his or her engineer, and/or planner, as deemed desirable.
   (B)   The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the city with the
proposed subdivision and to acquaint the subdivider with the requirements,
procedures and any special problems relating to the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-2 SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED.
   For the pre-application conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or
sketch showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any
proposed streets and other improvements and the general layout and arrangement
of intended land uses, in relation to the surrounding area.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-3 PRESENTATION TO PLANNING COMMISSION OR CITY COUNCIL.
   The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the Planning Commission and
governing body for review, prior to incurring significant costs preparing the
preliminary or final plat.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-4 SUBDIVISION CLASSIFIED.
   Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as a minor
subdivision or a major subdivision.
   (A)   Minor subdivision. Any subdivision which contains not more than four
lots fronting on an existing street and which does not require construction of
any public improvements, and which does not adversely affect the remainder of
the parcel shall be classified as a minor subdivision.
   (B)   Major subdivision. Any subdivision which does not for any reason meet
the definition of a minor plat, shall be classified as a major subdivision.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-5 PLATS REQUIRED.
   In order to secure approval of any proposed subdivision, the owner and
subdivider shall submit to the city, plats and other information as required by
this title. The owner and subdivider of any major subdivision shall comply with
the requirements for a preliminary plat and the requirements for a final plat.
The owner and subdivider of a minor subdivision may elect to omit the
submission of a preliminary plat.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-6 REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   The subdivider shall prepare and file with the City Clerk 20 copies of
the preliminary plat, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger.
Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Where more than one sheet
is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the total number
of sheets in the plat and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
   (B)   One of the copies submitted shall be a permanent copy or a
photographic print made on stable plastic film.
   (C)   The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked “preliminary plat” and
shall show, or have attached thereto, the following:
      (1)   Title, scale, north point and date;
      (2)   Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or
resemble existing subdivision names in the county;
      (3)   The name and address of the owner and the name, address and
profession of the person preparing the plan;
      (4)   A key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision
in relation to surrounding development;
      (5)   The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
record owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. A list of
all owners of record of property located within 200 feet of the subdivision
boundary shall be attached. Platted streets or alleys shall not be counted for
the 200-foot measurement;
      (6)   The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements,
buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses and other existing features
affecting the plat;
      (7)   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and
adjoining property;
      (8)   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet in the
general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals of not
more than five feet if the general slope is 10% or greater;
      (9)   The legal description of the area being platted;
      (10)   The boundary of the area being platted, shown as a dark line with
the appropriate length of boundary lines and the approximate location of the
property in reference to known section lines;
      (11)   The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots;
      (12)   The location, width and dimensions of all streets and alleys
proposed to be dedicated for public use;
      (13)   The proposed names for all streets in the area being platted;
      (14)   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities
and other facilities;
      (15)   Proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and
limitations;
      (16)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community purposes, or shown
for such purpose in the Comprehensive Plan or other adopted plan;
      (17)   A general summary description of any protective covenants or
private restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat;
      (18)   Any other pertinent information as necessary; and
      (19)   The fee, as established by the governing body.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-7 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (A)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of 20 copies of the preliminary plat,
shall file one copy in the records of the city; shall retain one copy for
public inspection; and, shall forward the remaining copies of the plat to the
Plats Officer.
   (B)   The Plats Officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Engineer, and other persons as necessary to review the plat; and, shall
schedule the plat for consideration by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall examine the plat and the
report of the City Engineer; and, shall examine other information as it deems
necessary or desirable to ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances
of the city, and conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted
plans of the city. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within 60 days of
the filing of the plat with the City Clerk, forward a report and recommendation
regarding the plat to the governing body. If the recommendation is to
disapprove or modify the plat, the reasons shall be set forth in writing in the
report and a copy of the report and recommendation shall be provided to the
applicant.
   (D)   The governing body shall examine the plat, the report of the City
Engineer, the report of the Planning Commission and other information as it
deems necessary or desirable. Upon the examination, the governing body shall
ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and standards of the
city, conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans of the
city, and will be conducive to the orderly growth and development of the city;
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Following the
examination, the governing body may approve, approve subject to conditions, or
disapprove the plat. If the decision of the governing body is to disapprove the
plat, or to approve the plat subject to conditions, the reasons shall be set
forth in writing in the official records of the governing body, and the
decisions shall be provided to the applicant. Action on the preliminary plat by
the governing body shall be taken within 60 days of the official submission of
the plat, unless the time period is extended by agreement between the
subdivider and the city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-8 DURATION OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The approval of a preliminary plat by the governing body shall be valid for
a period of one year from the date of the approval; after which the approval
shall be void, and the subdivider shall take no action requiring the precedent
approval of a preliminary plat, except upon application for and approval of an
extension of the period of validity by the governing body.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-9 AUTHORIZATION TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization by the
governing body for the installation of improvements as required by this
chapter, and as shown on the preliminary plat; provided, no such improvement
shall be constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles, cross-
sections and specifications for the construction of the improvement has been
submitted to and approved in writing by the City Engineer.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-10 COMPLETION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before the governing body will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the City
Council. Before passage of the resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that the improvements meet all city specifications and ordinances
or other city requirements, and the agreements between the subdivider and the
city.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-11 PERFORMANCE BOND PERMITTED.
   In lieu of the requirement that improvements be completed prior to the
approval of a final plat, the subdivider may post a performance bond with the
city, guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed within a
period of two years from the date of approval of the final plat; but, the
approval of the plat shall not constitute final acceptance of any improvements
to be constructed. Improvements will be accepted only after their construction
has been completed.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-12 REQUIREMENT OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The subdivider shall, within one year from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, unless the time period has been extended, prepare and file
with the City Clerk, 20 copies of the final plat and required attachments, as
set forth in this title. Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision as set
forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the governing body until and
unless a preliminary plat for the area included in the proposed final plat has
been approved and has not expired and become void as set forth hereinabove.
   (B)   One of the copies submitted shall be a permanent copy or a
photographic print made on a stable plastic film.
   (C)   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
or larger. Sheet size shall be no greater than 18 inches by 24 inches, not
smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and shall be of a size
acceptable to the County Auditor. If more than one sheet is used, each sheet
shall clearly show the number of the sheet, the total number of sheets included
in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
   (D)   The final plat shall be clearly marked “final plat” and shall show the
following:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner and subdivider;
      (3)   Scale, and a graphic bar scale, north arrow and date of each sheet;
      (4)   All monuments to be of record, as required by Iowa Code Chapter
409;
      (5)   Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every
lot, block, street, easement or other area shown on the plat, as well as the
outer boundaries of the subdivided lands;
      (6)   All distance, bearing curve and other survey data, as required by
Iowa Code Chapter 409;
      (7)   All adjoining properties shall be identified, and where the
adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that
subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a resubdivision of a
part or the whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall
be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an
overlay to be made. Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle
following the name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat;
      (8)   Street names and clear designation of public alleys;
      (9)   Block and lot numbers;
      (10)   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public use, and the purpose for which such property is dedicated or
reserved for public use;
      (11)   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be confined to
only those easements pertaining to public utilities, including gas, power,
telephone, cable television, water, sewer; easements for ingress and egress;
and the drainage easements as are deemed necessary for the orderly development
of the land encompassed within the plat;
      (12)   All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled, “not
a part of this plat”;
      (13)   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the
land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service as
determined by the governing body;
      (14)   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all
subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any
individual lot; and
      (15)   A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was
prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor’s direct personal supervision,
signed and dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor’s Iowa registration
number or seal; and, a sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the
registered land surveyor who drew the plat.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-13 ATTACHMENTS TO FINAL PLAT.
   The following shall be attached to and accompany any final plat:
   (A)   A certificate by the owner and his or her spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with their free consent, and is in accordance with the desire of
the owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the
owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds;
   (B)   A complete abstract of title and an attorney’s opinion showing that
the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner and that the land is free
from encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond;
   (C)   A certificate from the County Treasurer that the subdivision land is
free from taxes;
   (D)   The encumbrance bond, if any;
   (E)   A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land become
covenants in the deed of lots;
   (F)   A certificate by the City Engineer that all required improvements have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the construction plans as
approved and in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat.
Prior to such certification, “as built” plans for all improvements shall have
been provided to the City Engineer. In lieu thereof, the City Clerk may certify
that a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City
Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or that the governing body has agreed that
the city will provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess
the costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the subdivision;
   (G)   Where the improvements have been installed, a resolution accepting and
approving the improvements, along with the maintenance bond required by this
chapter;
   (H)   If private streets or other private improvements have been approved,
an agreement in the form of a covenant running with the land, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, providing for the construction or reconstruction
of any improvements to meet city standards, and the assessment of all costs to
the property owners in the event of annexation and dedication and acceptance,
shall be required; and
   (I)   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983; Ord. C-187, passed 3-15-1994)
§ 11-5-14 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of 20 copies of the final plat, shall
file one copy in the records of the city, shall retain one copy for the public
inspection and shall forward the remaining copies to the Plats Officer.
   (B)   The Plats Officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Engineer and other persons as are necessary to review the plat; and shall
schedule the plat for review by the governing body.
   (C)   The Plats Officer and the City Engineer shall examine the plat as to
its compliance with the ordinances and standards of the city, and its
conformance with the preliminary plat; and shall set forth their findings in
writing. A copy of the findings shall be provided to the subdivider.
   (D)   If the plat is found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat
as approved, the final plat shall be forwarded to the governing body for
review. If the plat is found not to conform to the preliminary plat, it shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for review, prior to review by the
governing body. The Planning Commission shall then review the plat and shall
forward a written recommendation thereon to the governing body within 60 days
of the filing of the plat with the City Clerk. If the recommendation is to
disapprove the plat, or to require modification of the plat, the reasons shall
be set forth in writing and a copy of the recommendation shall be provided to
the subdivider.
   (E)   Upon receipt of the plat and written reports, the governing body shall
review the plat and attachments. If the plat is found to conform to the
ordinances and standards of the city and the Comprehensive Plan and other duly
adopted plans, all as of the date of approval of the preliminary plat; and is
found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat, the governing body
shall approve the plat, and shall cause its approval to be entered on the plat
as required by law.
   (F)   Action on the final plat, by the governing body shall be taken within
60 days of the date of the official submission of the plat, unless the time
period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and the city. If the
action is to disapprove the plat, the reasons shall be set forth in the
official records of the governing body and the decision shall be provided to
the subdivider.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
§ 11-5-15 OFFICIAL APPLICATION; SUBMISSION DATES.
   For the purpose of these regulations, for both major and minor subdivisions,
the date of the regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which
the public hearing on final approval of the subdivision plat, including any
adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal or
application date of the plat at which the statutory period required for formal
approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence to run.
(Ord. B-391, passed 1-4-1983)
APPENDIX: SPECIAL ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Description
Ord. Description
No.
21   Establishing grades.
41   Granting to the C. B. & Q. R. R. permission to lay side tracks on and across
     certain streets.
49   Granting certain rights to the Chicago, Santa Fe and California Railway Company of
     Iowa.
51   Amending Ord. 49, being an ordinance granting certain rights to the Chicago, Santa
     Fe and California Railway Company of Iowa.
     Granting certain rights and privileges to the Chicago, Santa Fe and California
57   Railway Company of Iowa and permanent maintenance by said corporation of its
     principal construction and repair shops in Madison Township, Lee County, Iowa, and
     vacating a portion of West Street.
     Granting permission and authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad
62   Company to move that part of its main track and side track lying between Broadway
     and Bridge over Penitentiary Creek, and to reconstruct the same, and to maintain
     and operate the same where so moved and constructed.
96   Establishing grades.
115  Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company to
     extend street to connect with the plant of the Morrison Manufacturing Company.
119  Franchise granted to Western Union Telegraph Company.
     Vacation of alley between Front Street and Second Street, and providing for a
142  strip of ground to be given by the Morrison Manufacturing Company to the city for
     public purposes.
146  Authorizing the erection of posts, wires and the maintenance of a telephone
     exchange in the city.
151  Opening, laying off and establishing Halliday Street.
152  Granting certain rights to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company.
     Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company to
156  extend its present side tracks on Front Street to connect with the warehouses and
     shops and property of the Fort Madison Chair Company, the Iowa Farm Tool Company
     and the Iowa State Penitentiary.
157  Vacation of alley, and establishing of an alley.
161  Amending Ord. 21, the same being an ordinance establishing grades.
174  Establishing a street.
178  Establishing grades.
181  Establishing permanent sidewalk grades.
182  Establishing grade of Fourth Street.
183  Empowering the congregation of Sacred Heart Church to establish a cemetery within
     the limits of the city.
184  Granting certain rights and privileges to the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe
     Railway.
189  Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company to
     construct and maintain a side track.
192  Establishing grades on Fifth Street.
193  Establishing grades on Front Street.
194  Establishing sidewalk grades.
198  Vacating of an alley.
199  Sidewalk grades.
203  Establishing sidewalk grades on Fourth Street.
207  Establishing grades of certain streets.
209  Establishing grades on Front Street, Des Moines and Sixth Streets.
212  Establishing grades on Sixth Street.
215  Granting certain rights and privileges to the Standard Oil Company.
219  Establishing grades on Front Street.
220  Providing for the vacation and vacating Person Street.
     Establishing grades in the alley between Front and Second Streets and Pine and
221  Cedar Streets, and in the alley between Front and Second Streets and Chestnut and
     Walnut Streets.
222  Establishing grades on Fifth Street.
224  Providing for the vacation of Third Street.
227  Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company to
     build, operate and maintain a railroad track on Connecticut Avenue.
229  Opening of Vermont Avenue.
230  Establishing grades in the alley between Second and Third Streets and Chestnut and
     Walnut Streets.
232  Establishing grades on Connecticut Avenue.
239  Establishing grades of Second Street.
240  Establishing the grades of certain streets, avenues, roads, highways and special
     points in Factoria Addition.
245  Opening of Fourth Street.
248  Providing for the maintenance of an electric arc street light.
249  Establishing grades on Santa Fe Avenue and Oak Street.
252  Establishing grades on Fifth Street and Elm Street.
256  Establishing grades on Market and Sixth Streets.
258  Establishing grades on Webster Street.
261  Vacation of alleys.
265  Granting franchise to Iowa Telephone Company.
266  Vacating certain streets and public places in Factoria Addition.
271  Vacating streets.
279  Granting to Standard Oil Company permission to erect and maintain a service and
     filling station.
281  Vacating streets.
289  Vacating streets and alleys.
290  Granting to the Cedar Rapids Oil Company permission to erect and maintain a
     service or filling station.
291  Granting franchise to Westion Union Telegraph Company.
294  Granting to the Consumers Service Stations, Inc. permission to erect and maintain
     a service or filling station.
296  Vacating certain portions of Factoria Avenue, Second Avenue, Madison Avenue,
     Monroe Avenue, Jackson Avenue and Van Buren Avenue.
303  Granting to the Sinclair Refining Company permission to erect and maintain a
     distributing station.
304  Granting to the Sinclair Refining Company permission to erect and maintain a
     distributing station.
305  Granting to the Consumers Service Stations, Inc., permission to erect and maintain
     a storage plant and warehouse.
306  Vacating streets and alleys.
310  Granting authority to the Hinde and Dauche Paper Company to construct and operate
     side tracks.
314  Granting to the Board of Control of State institutions the right to construct and
     maintain a switch track.
317  Granting to the Standard Oil Company permission to erect and maintain a service
     and filling station.
323  Establishing grades on Second Street.
324  Establishing grades on Occidental and Hamilton Streets.
325  Establishing grades on Sixth Street.
327  Vacating a portion of Hamilton Street and dedicating said portion of the street
     thus vacated.
330  Vacating alley.
331  Establishing grades on Chestnut and Bluff Streets.
332  Establishing grades on Fourth Street.
337  Establishing grades on Second Street.
338  Establishing curb grades on Santa Fe Avenue.
339  Granting to the Sinclair Refining Company permission to erect a service and
     filling station.
340  Establishing grades on Spruce, Seventh and Front Streets.
341  Establishing grades in alley.
342  Establishing grades in alley.
343  Vacating portions of streets and avenues.
345  Granting to Armould’s Oil Company permission to erect and maintain a service and
     filling station.
351  Granting to Leonard Schell permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
352  Establishing grades on Front Street.
353  Establishing grades on Front and Broadway Streets.
362  Changing names of streets.
367  Granting authority to the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company to lay,
     construct and maintain an industry on side track.
368  Granting franchise to Artesian Ice Company.
374  Granting franchise to Hinde and Dauche Paper Company.
375  Establishing grades on Avenues I and G.
376  Establishing grades on Avenue I.
380  Establishing grades on Sixth Street.
388  Establishing grades on Avenue E.
389  Establishing grades on Avenue D.
390  Establishing grades on 27th Street.
391  Establishing grades on Avenue E.
392  Establishing grades on streets and alleys.
394  Establishing sidewalk grades.
395  Vacating alley.
397  Establishing grades on Avenue D and on Third Street.
398  Establishing grades on Seventh Street and on Avenue E.
399  Establishing grades in alleys.
403  Water rates.
408  Granting to the Standard Oil Company of Indiana permission to erect and maintain a
     service and filling station.
409  Granting to H. D. Everingham permission to erect and maintain a storage plant and
     warehouse.
410  Establishing grades on Avenues H, I and M and on 29th Street.
412  Establishing the grade of Avenue J.
413  Establishing grades in alleys.
415  Establishing grades on 23rd Street.
425  Granting to George Helling permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
428  Granting to Henry S. Eikmeyer permission to erect and maintain a service and
     filling station, (tire and battery station).
429  Vacation of 36th Street.
430  Establishment and opening of 36th Street.
431  Establishing sidewalk grades.
436  Granting to Roy West permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
439  Granting to Thomas Gaule permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
441  Granting to the American Seventy Corporation permission to erect and maintain a
     storage plant, warehouse, tanks and pumps.
445  Granting to G. W. Capwell permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
446  Granting to F. L. Childs permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
453  Granting to Joseph Claypoole permission to erect and maintain a service and
     filling station.
458  Granting to E. W. Wyrick permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
470  Vacation of Avenue E.
474  Vacating alley.
475  Granting to Z. O. Zentgraf permission to erect and maintain a storage plant and
     warehouse.
478  Vacating parts of streets, avenues and alleys.
481  Granting to D. F. Andrews permission to erect and maintain a service and filling
     station.
483  Vacating streets and alleys and parts of streets and alleys.
484  Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad to build,
     operate and maintain two railroad tracks.
489  Granting to Earp and McDonald Company permission to erect and maintain a service
     and filling station.
494  Granting to Iowa Union Electric Company a franchise.
495  Granting a franchise to Mississippi River Power Company.
502  Granting to the Town Pump permission to erect and maintain a service filling
     station.
503  Granting a franchise to Fort Madison Gas Light Company.
510  Vacating Tenth Street.
514  Granting permission to Otis Clar Company to construct, maintain and use a coal
     room.
515  Establishing grades.
516  Establishing grades on Avenue N.
517  Establishing grades on 12th, 14th and 20th Streets.
518  Establishing grades on Avenue L, 17th Street and 24th Street.
519  Establishing grades on 20th and 16th Streets.
521  Vacating portions of Avenue G, Avenue E and Fourth Street.
     Granting authority to the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company to
528  construct a side track from the main line of said Chicago, Burlington and Quincy
     Railroad tracks.
529  Vacation of portion of 18th Street.
530  Establishing grades.
531  Establishing grades on Avenue G and on 27th Street.
533  Establishing alley grades.
567  Vacation of portion of alley.
568  Establishing street grades.
571  Vacation of portion of street.
572  Vacation of alley.
573  Granting to Chester B. Brown permission to erect and maintain a service and
     filling station.
597  Providing for the lighting by electricity of the streets, avenues, alleys and
     other public places in the city.
602  Establishing grades on Richards Drive and on 30th Street.
608  Annual tax levy.
609  Annual tax levy.
610  Park fund certificate issue.
614  Annual tax levy.
624  Permitting certain owners in the city to use part of an alley.
626  Vacation of 12th Street.
628  Providing for annual tax and for issuance of certificates.
629  Vacation of Third Street.
633  Providing for annual tax and for the issuance of certificates.
634  Vacating Avenue K.
637  Vacating 22nd Street.
641  Establishing sidewalk grades.
646  Vacating alley.
649  Providing for the lighting by electricity of the streets, avenues, alleys and
     other public places.
650  Vacating alley.
653  Granting franchise to Madison Coaxial Antenna, Incorporated.
654  Revacating street.
657  Establishing grades.
660  Issuance of general obligation street improvement bonds.
A-83 Alley Vacation, Lot 17, Block 2, FMT&L Subd. of Allens Addn. - To Wm. Garner.
A-84 Street Vacation, Outlot 1101 - To R. N. Johnson.
A-94 Vacation: Avenues M, N, 0 - 14th to 15th Block 5 Atlee’s Addn., Interstate
     Wholesale.
A-98 Vacation: Avenues M, N, 0 - 14th to 15th. Block 5 Atlee’s Addn., Interstate
     Wholesale.
A-   Street lighting, Union Electric Contract.
117
A-   Grades: Avenue A - 21st Street West.
118
A-   Establishing grades of streets and alleys.
119
A-   Alley Vacation, Block 9, South West Addn., Chariton Storage (HyVee).
121
A-   General obligation bond issue.
129
A-   Alley vacation, Block 1057, School District.
135
A-   Vacating streets and alleys.
136
A-   Street vacation, A & First, R. W. Deitchler.
139
A-   Electric franchise, Union Electric.
140
A-   Election on Union Electric Franchise.
141
A-   Sewer bond issue.
154
A-   Iowa Video, Inc. franchise.
169
A-   Vacation of Avenue A between 15th Street and C. B. & Q. right-of-way on the West.
179  To Dr. R. E. Murphy.
A-   Vacation of 125 feet of 19th Street lying immediately North of Avenue P.
181
A-   Sewer bond issue.
184
A-   Sewer bond issue.
193
A-   Amending Zoning Ordinance No. A-143 to rezone an area at 3923 Avenue L.
207
A-   Gas franchise, North Central Public Service Co.
209
A-   Sewer revenue bond issue.
223
A-   Amending Zoning Ordinance No. A-143 to rezone area lying on the Southeast corner
227  of the intersection of Avenue A and Fredericks Lane.
A-   Vacation, To Textron Corp., alley between 12th and 13th Street, South of Avenue I.
233
A-   Establishing temporary traffic regulations on 15th Street.
235
A-   Zoning classification change.
236
A-   Zoning classification change.
238
A-   Vacation, to adjoining property owners, portion of Avenue A in 1200 Block.
239
A-   Amending Zoning Ordinance No. A-143 to rezone an area in the 1100 block Avenue G.
241
A-   Amending Zoning Ordinance No. A-143 to rezone an area on the South side of Highway
242- #61, West of 39th Street.
A
A-   Vacating the alley in Block 17 of Fairview Addition.
245
B-2  Vacation of a portion of 16th Street between the North Line of Avenue N and the
     South Line of the alley North of Avenue N.
B-3  Amending Zoning Ordinance No. A-143 to rezone an area at 805 to 815 Avenue F.
B-21 Amending the Zoning Ordinance Title 10 of the city code to provide that area known
     as “Scenic Hills Area” be classified as an R-1B Single-Family Dwelling District.
B-26 Amending the Zoning Ordinance Title 10 of the city code to provide that area known
     as “Pilley Brush” area be classified as an M-2 Industrial area.
     Providing for the vacation and conveyance of a portion of Twenty-First Street
B-41 South of Avenue O in the City of Fort Madison to Montgomery Ward & Co.,
     Incorporated.
B-52 Water revenue bond issue.
     Amending Zoning Ordinance Title 10 of the city code by changing the District Map
B-58 to include annexed land, and to change the classification thereof from R-1 One-
     Family Dwelling District to I-2 Industrial District, General.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-59 Map to rezone designated area from B-2 Business District, General, and R-3 One-
     Family Dwelling District, to R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
B-61 Establishing street grades.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-63 Map to rezone designated area from R-3 One-Family Dwelling District, to R-6,
     Multiple Family Dwelling District.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-73 Map to rezone certain designated areas from Residential to Business and from
     Unclassified to Industrial.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10, of the city code, by changing the
B-78 District Map to rezone designated area from R-1 One-Family Dwelling District to B-
     4 Highway Business District.
B-81 Vacating, on conditions, a part of Avenue H in the City of Fort Madison, Lee
     County, Iowa, and providing for conveyance thereof to Howard S. Wright.
B-83 Granting franchise to Iowa Video, Inc.
B-84 Making the entire City of Fort Madison, Iowa, one precinct for the special
     election pertaining to the Iowa Video, Inc. franchise to be held on 6-21-1971.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-85 Map to rezone certain designated area from Highway Business District to General
     Business District.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-88 Map to rezone certain designated area from One-Family Dwelling District to General
     Business District.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-90 Map to rezone certain designated area from One-Family Dwelling District to General
     Business District.
B-93 Vacation and Conveyance of 145 feet of 4th Street lying immediately north of
     Avenue D.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-96 Map to rezone certain designated area from One-Family Dwelling District to Highway
     Business District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
106  Map to rezone certain designated area from One-Family Dwelling District to
     Multiple-Family District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
107  Map to rezone certain designated area from Single-Family Dwelling District to
     Business District General.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
111  Map to rezone certain designated area from Two-Family Dwelling District to Service
     and Wholesale District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
114  Map to rezone certain designated area from Business District General to Single-
     Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
116  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-1 Single- Family to R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District.
B-   Establishing grades.
118
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
119  Map to rezone certain designated area from I-I Industrial District Limited to I-
     2 Industrial District General.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
122  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District to
     R-6 Multiple- Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
123  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District to
     B-4 Highway Business District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
138  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-2 Single-Family Dwelling District to
     an R-4 Single- Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
139  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-5 Two-Family Dwelling District to an
     R-6 Multiple- Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
140  Map to rezone the north side of Avenue H from 17th Street West a distance of 350
     feet to a B-3 Service and Wholesale District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
142  Map to rezone certain designated area from R-4 One-Family Dwelling District to an
     R-2 Industrial District, General.
B-   Vacation and conveyance of the east 100 feet of the alley lying between Avenues G
156  and H in the 400 Block of the city.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
159  Map to rezone a certain designated area from R-1 Single-Family District to R-
     2 Single-Family District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
160  Map to rezone a certain designated area from B-4 Highway Business District to B-
     2 Business District, General.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing from the
164  present B-4 Highway Business District to B-2 Business District General the
     property at 24-1-2407 Avenue L.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
166  Map to rezone a certain designated area from R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
     to I-I Industrial Limited District.
B-   An Ordinance vacating and providing for the conveyance of the alley between Lot 9
167  and Lots 5, 6 and 7 of Outlot 1083 in the City of Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
B-   An ordinance adopting Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
171
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
178  Map to rezone a certain designated area from R-2 One-Family Dwelling District to
     R-6 Multiple- Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
183  Map to rezone a certain designated area from R-6 Multiple-Family to I-I Industrial
     District Limited.
B-   Amending Ord. B-83 which granted to Iowa Video, Inc. a franchise for the
184  transmission and distribution of television impulses and television energy.
B-   An ordinance providing for the issuance of $940,000 sewer construction bonds, and
186  levying a tax to pay said bonds.
B-   An Ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
194  the District Map to rezone a certain designated area from B-3 Service and
     Wholesale to R-6 Multiple-Family.
B-   An Ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
196  the District Map to rezone a certain designated area from R-4 Single-Family to R-
     6 Multiple-Family.
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
B-   the District Map to include land annexed in Sections 22, 23, 26 and 27 in
216  Jefferson Township, Lee County, Iowa and to rezone the area from an R-1 One-Family
     Dwelling District to an I-2 General Industrial District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
218  the District Map to rezone a certain designated area known as 331 Avenue D from R-
     5 Two-Family Dwelling District to R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
B-   (Rep. by Ord. B-468, passed 5-21-1985)
222
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
B-   the District Map to rezone a certain designated area known as a piece of property
224  located north of Alta Drive, south of Bluff Road, west of Dry Creek and east of an
     imaginary extended line of 31st Street, from the present R-3 One-Family Dwelling
     District to R-4 One-Family Dwelling District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
227  the District Map to rezone certain designated area from Multiple-Family District
     to Single-Family Dwelling District.
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
B-   the District Map to rezone a certain designated area known as 1704, 1714-16, 1720,
228  1724 and 1726 Avenue H, from the present R-5 Two- Family Dwelling District to B-
     4 Highway Business District.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-   Map to rezone 3302 Avenue L from a R-4 Single- Family Dwelling District to a B-
236  2 Business District and 3310, 3316 and 3320 Avenue L from a R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to a B-4 Business District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10, of the city code, by changing the
238  District Map to rezone 519 2nd Street from R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
     to a B-3 Service and Wholesale District.
B-   Amending official Zoning District Map by changing property from R-4 Single- Family
253  Residential to R-6 Multiple-Family Residential.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by adding to the
B-   District Map as an I-2 Industrial District, General, an area in Jefferson Township
257  which was omitted from the Map at the time of the adoption of the Zoning
     Ordinance.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
261  Map to rezone a part of Outlot 1067 from R-5 Two-Family District to B-3 Service
     and Wholesale District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
267  Map to rezone a part of Block 7, in West Madison or M.A.P. Douglas Addition from
     R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District to B-2 Business District General.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
269  Map to rezone an area in the 900 block of 48th Street from an R-2 Single- Family
     Dwelling District to an R-6 Multi-Family Dwelling District.
B-   Vacating, on conditions, a part of Avenue H in the City of Fort Madison, Lee
270  County, Iowa, and providing for conveyance thereof to Howard S. Wright.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-   Map to rezone an area on the south side of U.S. 61 between the T.G. & Y. Store and
278  the Ortho Road from and R-1 Single-Family District to a B-3 Service and Wholesale
     District.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
B-   Map to rezone an area bounded by Avenue N on the north, 39th Street on the east,
284  40th Street on the west and Highway 61 on the south from B-2 District General to a
     B-3 Service and Wholesale District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing the District
296  Map to rezone 2702 Avenue L from R-4 One- Family Dwelling District to B-2 Business
     District General.
B-   An ordinance vacating that part of Avenues G & H in the city west of the west line
298  of 34th Place.
B-   An ordinance providing for partial property tax exemptions for industrial property
299  on which improvements have been made.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
303  Map to rezone an area south of Avenue Q between 36th and 39th Streets from an R-
     4 One- Family Dwelling District to an I-2 General Industrial District.
B-   An ordinance vacating the south block of 37th Street and certain adjacent alleys.
306
B-   An ordinance vacating a street right-of-way at 300 block of Avenue A.
309
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
310  Map to rezone the property located at Highway 61 west from a R-1, Single-Family
     Dwelling District to a B-2, General Retail Business District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
311  Map to rezone the property located at Highway 61 west from a R-1 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to a R-6, Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
312  Map to rezone the property at 48th Street and Avenue J from a R-2, Single-Family
     Dwelling District to a R-6, Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
318  Map to rezone the property located at 1023 Avenue G from a R-6, Multiple-Family
     District to a B-3 Service and Wholesale District.
B-   An ordinance providing an Agreement, the effective date of which is 7-1-1980
324  through 6-30-1981, between the city and Seco Division, Local 246, International
     Brotherhood of Painters and Allied Trades, AFL-CIO.
B-   An ordinance providing reserved parking space for penitentiary and other law
328  enforcement agencies use near the Lee County District Courthouse.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the property
333  located at north and east of intersection 49th Street and Avenue J from an R-
     6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District to a B-2 Business District, General Retail.
     Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, changing the property
B-   located between 37th Street and 40th Street between Avenue L and Avenue N from a
339  B-2 General Retail Business District to an R-6 Multiple- Family Residential
     District.
B-   An ordinance establishing an urban revitalization/renewal area in the city, and
343  adopting a plan for the development to the area.
B-   Amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing the District
344  Map to rezone 2201 Avenue H from R-4 Single- Family Dwelling District to B-
     2 General Retail District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
349  the District Map to rezone 2001 Avenue L from R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District
     to B-4 Highway Business District.
B-   An ordinance repealing special Ord. 57 of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa so that
352  certain property owned by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company can be
     annexed to the City of Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa.
B-   An Ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
362  the District Map so as to rezone 4707 Avenue L from an R-2 One-Family Dwelling
     District to a B-2 Business General Retail District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, so that the property
369  located at 1705 Avenue G in the city be zoned as an R-5, Two-Family Dwelling
     District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
370  located at 214 Avenue F from an R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District to a B-
     4 Highway Business District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
372  located at 23rd Street and Avenue M from a B-3 Service and Wholesale Business
     District to an R-5 Two-Family Dwelling District.
B-   An ordinance vacating 4th Street right-of-way between Avenue C and the alley south
383  of Avenue C.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing the
397  property located at 511 2nd Street from an R-6 Multi-Family to B-3 Service and
     Wholesale District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
417  from R-1, One-Family Dwelling District to I-2, General Industrial District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
418  located at 628-35th Street in the city, from a R-4 One- Family Dwelling District
     to a B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
419  located at 3111 Avenue K in the city from an R-4 One- Family Dwelling District to
     a B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.
B-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing said Zoning
425  Map to reflect the existence of a B-2 Business at the property described herein as
     Lots 4 and 5 of Outlot 1073 in the city.
     An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
B-   bounded by Crescent Lane, 33rd Street, Bluff Road on the north and Alta Drive in
429  the city, from an R-3 One- Family Dwelling District to an R-4 One-Family Dwelling
     District.
     An ordinance establishing grades on streets, avenues and alleys as follows: Avenue
B-   J, the 2600 block; Avenue J, the 4600 and 4700 block; Avenue M from 21st Street
433  alley to 23rd Street; 22nd Street alley between Avenue L and Avenue M; and, 34th
     Street from Avenue D to Avenue E, all in the city.
     An ordinance establishing the Fort Madison Riverfront Self-Supported Municipal
B-   Improvement District, pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 386 and
437  providing for the establishment of funds and the levy of annual taxes in
     connection therewith.
B-   An ordinance establishing grades on streets, avenues and alleys as follows: Avenue
444  G east of 1st Street.
B-   An Ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
445  the District Map to rezone property along Avenue H east of French Creek from R-5,
     Two-Family Dwelling District to B-4, Highway Business District.
     An ordinance granting for a period of ten years to Union Electric Company, a
     corporation, its successors and assigns, the right, permission and authority to
     construct, reconstruct, excavate for, place, maintain, operate and use its poles,
     towers, wires, conduits, conductors, manholes, underground vaults and other
     equipment, and appliances in connection therewith, in, along, across, over and
B-   under the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, squares, bridges and other public
446  places in the city and areas dedicated to the city for public utility use, for the
     purpose of transmitting, furnishing and distributing electricity for light, heat,
     power and other purposes within and through said city, prescribing the terms and
     conditions of such grant, imposing certain obligations upon the grantee, its
     successors and assigns, successively, in connection therewith; and, providing
     that, this ordinance shall not be effective unless and until such grant be
     approved by a majority of the voters of the city at an election.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
466  the District Map to rezone property at 1100 48th Street from R-1 One-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2, Business District, General.
     An ordinance repealing, in its entirety, ICR Ord. B-222 which established charges
     for the industrial cost recovery system to recover that portion of the Federal
B-   Environmental Protection Agency Grant Project Number C190596-01 which is allocable
468  to the industrial user portion of the facilities constructed under said project
     number. Also included was the charge for industrial cost recovery of the local
     financing costs associated with Project Number C190399 which is allocable to the
     industrial user portion of the facilities under said project number.
B-   An ordinance vacating an alley right-of-way between 14th and 15th Streets between
470  Avenue M and Avenue N.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code by changing
483  the District Map from B-2, General Business District to R-6, Multi- Family
     Dwelling District.
B-   An ordinance establishing grades on streets, avenues and alleys as follows: Bluff
486  Road, Avenue A, Chalk Ridge Road, 35th Street, 33rd Street and Crescent Lane.
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
B-   the District Map to rezone property on the north side of the 1800 block of Avenue
488  I from 18th to 19th Street from an R-5 Two-Family Dwelling District to a B-
     2 Business District.
     An ordinance vacating an alley right-of-way between 18th and 19th Streets between
B-   Avenue H and I, except the west 93 feet, subject to said property reverting to use
489  as an alleyway if actual construction and expansion of the store and parking lot
     is not completed by 1-15-1989.
B-   An ordinance vacating 5th Street from Avenue C south to the north line of the
491  alley located between Avenues C and D, with easement rights retained by the city.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
492  the District Map to rezone property at 2002 Avenue L, from an R-6, Multi-Family
     Dwelling to a B-3, Service and Wholesale Business.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
501  the District Map to rezone property on the north side of the 1900 block of Avenue
     I, from an R-4, Single-Family Residential to a B-2, General Business District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
503  the District Map to rezone property on the south side of the 2000 block of Avenue
     L, from an R-6, Multi-Family, to a B-4, Highway Business District.
B-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
505  the District Map to rezone property at 1501 39th Street, from an R-4, Single-
     Family Residential to a B-4, Highway Business District.
B-   An ordinance vacating a ten- foot wide, 230-foot north- south undeveloped alley
515  west of 14th Street, south of French Creek.
C-   An ordinance vacating the north-south alley and the first 100 feet of the east-
001  west alley immediately east of Lincoln Elementary School.
C-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
006  the District Map to rezone property at 1502 39th Street, from an R-4, Single-
     Family Residential to a B-1, Business District, Limited Retail.
C-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
007  the District Map to rezone 2.3 acres adjacent to the Lee County landfill from an
     R-1, Single-Family Residential to an I-2, General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
009  the District Map to rezone property north of Avenue L and west of 48th Street,
     from a B-2, Limited Retail to R-6, Multi-Family.
C-   An ordinance vacating the west 200 feet of the east-west alley lying east of 7th
015  Street between Avenues G and H.
C-   An ordinance vacating Avenue O right-of-way west of 39th Street, with easement
016  rights retained by the city.
C-   An ordinance vacating property adjacent to 14th Street right-of-way north of
018  Avenue B, with easement rights retained by the city.
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as Lot 37A, just west of #2 Richard Drive.
019
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as 3430 Avenue Q.
020
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 by changing the district map
C-   to rezone property on both sides of the highway in the 1500-1600 Blocks of Avenue
028  H from R-4, One-Family District and R-5, Two-Family District to B-3, Service and
     Wholesale District.
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban by revitalization tax exemption district
032  in the City of Fort Madison, Lee County, Iowa. (Repealed by Ord. C-134)
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
C-   the district map to rezone property south of Avenue L, between 26th and 27th
036  Street, north of Avenue N, from B-2 General Retail and R-5 Residential Two-Family
     to a B-3, Service and Wholesale District.
C-   An ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the
039  Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area No. 1 of the city, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
C-   An ordinance vacating 6th Street between High C and C Alley.
043
     An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
C-   the district map to rezone property known as Gregory Manufacturing at Henry Ladyn
045  Drive and Highway 61 South from an R-1, One-Family Dwelling District to an I-2,
     General Industrial District.
     An ordinance vacating property within Fort Madison Urban Renewal District #1
C-   bounded on the north by Avenue L, on the south by Avenue N, on the west by 27th
047  Street and on the east by 26th Street, excluding the Quick Shop Property on the
     northwest corner, with drainage and utility easement rights retained by the city.
C-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
050  the District Map to rezone property known as Super 8 Motel, Highway 61 west, from
     an R-1, One-Family Dwelling District to an R-6, Multi-Family Dwelling District.
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban revitalization tax exemption district in
052  the city. (Repealed by Ord. C-134)
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban revitalization tax exemption district in
053  the city. (Repealed by Ord. C-134)
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban revitalization tax exemption district in
068  the city. (Repealed by Ord. C-134)
     An ordinance granting unto Midwest Gas, a division of Iowa Public Service Company,
     an Iowa corporation, its successors and assigns, a non-exclusive franchise and
     right for a period of 15 years to erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and
     operate a gas plant or plants and distribution system or systems for the
     transmission and distribution of gas in the city and to enter upon and to use and
     occupy the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges and other public places of the city
C-   for the purpose of erecting, constructing, reconstructing, maintaining and
082  operating thereon, therein, thereunder and thereover said systems, consisting of
     gas mains, pipes, pipelines, conduits and other necessary or useful appurtenances
     or equipment related thereto for the transmission and distribution of gas,
     together with the franchise and right to supply, distribute and sell gas for heat,
     air conditioning, cooking, light, fuel and any other purpose to the city and to
     the inhabitants thereof and others within the corporate limits of the city, and
     prescribing the terms and conditions of the grant and repealing all ordinances in
     conflict therewith.
C-   An ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of the city code, by changing
084  the District Map to rezone property known as 1927 Avenue L from an R-4, One-
     Family Dwelling District to a B-3, Service and Wholesale District.
C-   An ordinance vacating two “paper” alleys located on city property at the southeast
087  corner of 26th and Avenue L with the utility and drainage easements retained by
     the city.
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban revitalization tax exemption district in
088  the city. (Repealed by Ord. C-134)
C-   An ordinance vacating city-owned property at 29th and Avenue N, with utility and
089  drainage easements retained by the city.
C-   An ordinance repealing, in its entirety, Ord. B-503, and adding a new ordinance
113  changing the District Map to rezone property on the south side of the 2000 Block
     of Avenue L, from an R-6, Multi-Family, to a B-4, Highway Business.
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for an urban revitalization tax exemption district in
122  the city.
C-   An ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the
125  Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area No. 2 of the city, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
C-   An ordinance adopting a plan for a city-wide urban revitalization tax exemption
133  district in the city.
C-   An ordinance repealing Ord. C-032, Ord. C-052, Ord. C-053, Ord. C-068 and Ord. C-
134  088, regarding urban revitalization tax exemption districts.
C-   An ordinance designating the names of the following streets: Peavine Lane,
135  Orthoway and Rabbit Island Road; and changing the names of the following streets:
     Old Denmark Hill and Denmark Hilltop.
C-   An ordinance amending Ord. B-184 by increasing the franchise fee paid by Heritage
140  Cablevision, Inc.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property at the corner of 26th
145  Street and Avenue L, from an R-5, Two-Family, to a B-2, Business, General Retail.
C-   An ordinance amending Ord. B-140 by amending Section 10 so as to change the terms
151  of payment of the 5% franchise fee paid by Heritage Cablevision, Inc., and to
     define gross revenues.
C-   An ordinance amending Ord. C-113 changing the legal description to describe
153  property on the south side of the 2000 block of Avenue L.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property south of the Burlington
155  Northern right-of- way from 25th Street past 35th Street from an R-1, One- Family,
     to an I-2, General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property located at 5601 Avenue O
162  from an R-1, One-Family, to a B-2, General Retail District.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property located at 2640 Avenue K
169  and 1108 27th Street from an R-4, One-Family, to a B-2, General Retail District.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property located at 1735 Avenue H
173  from a B-2, General Retail, to a B-3, Service and Wholesale.
     An ordinance repealing Ord. C-028, and changing the district map to rezone
C-   property on both sides of the highway in the 1500-1600 blocks of Avenue H from an
174  R-4, One-Family (west of French Creek) and an R-5, Two-Family (east of French
     Creek), to a B-3, Service and Wholesale; excluding property at 1615 Avenue H which
     will remain R-4, One- Family.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone property located at 1407 39th
188  Street from a B-3, Service and Wholesale District to an R-6, Multi-Family
     District.
C-   An ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the
208  Urban Renewal Area No. 3 of the city, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
C-   An ordinance changing the district map to rezone properties located at 4834, 4902
230  and 5031 Avenue O from an R-1, One-Family Dwelling District to a B-2, Business
     District.
C-   An ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in
236  Urban Renewal Areas No. 4, 5 and 6 of the city, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
C-   An ordinance providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable property in the
251  Urban Renewal Area No. 7, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19. (Repealed by Ord. D-
     098)
     An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of Fort Madison, Iowa, by changing
C-   property located at 5036 Avenue O from a B-2, General Business District to a B-3,
255  Service and Wholesale Business District; and by changing the 33 acres directly
     south of 5036 Avenue O from an R-1, One-Family Residential District to an I-2,
     General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
256  located at 3032-3034 Avenue L and 3033 Avenue M from an R-4, One-Family Dwelling
     District to a B-4, Highway Business District.
C-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
257  located at 3909 Avenue O (previously known as 1407 39th Street) from R-6, Multi-
     Family Dwelling District to B-4, Highway Business District.
C-   An ordinance amending the Official Zoning Map of the city, by changing property
259  located at 2401 through 2405 Avenue M from R-5, Two- Family Residential Dwelling
     District to B-2, General Business District.
C-   An ordinance vacating city- owned property (Paper Alleyway) between 39th and 40th
265  Street running from Highway 61 north to Avenue N.
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as a portion of platted Avenue A south of the
273  water tower on Denmark Hill Top.
C-   An ordinance regulating the public sale of food, or merchandise, alcoholic
280  beverages and the provision of outdoor entertainment in Riverview Park during
     RAGBRAI.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the city’s urban renewal project area, in the city,
C-   by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee,
293  Fort Madison Community School District and other taxing districts, be paid to a
     special fund for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to
     and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by said city in
     connection with said urban renewal redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “Zoning” by
297  changing property located at 1123 48th Street from an R-1, Single-Family
     Residential to an R-6, Multi-Family Residential District.
C-   An ordinance granting to Cablevision VII, Inc., d.b.a. TCI of Eastern Iowa, an
299  Iowa Corporation, a non-exclusive cable television franchise for ten years.
     An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “Zoning” by
C-   rezoning property from the landfill entrance north to the corporate limits, east
307  to the quarter section line, from an R-1, Single-Family Residential to an I-2,
     General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance designating the street south of Avenue H at 6th Street as Prum
314  Strasse.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “Zoning” by
316  changing property located at 1021 48th Street from an R-1, Single-Family
     Residential to an R-6, Multi-Family Residential District.
     An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “zoning” by
C-   changing certain property located north of Dupont and south of Bluff Road from an
317  R-2 Single-Family Residential, and from an R-4 Single-Family Residential, and from
     an R-6 Multiple-Family Residential to an I-1 Limited Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “zoning” by
319  changing property located at 3102 and 3106 Avenue L from R-4 Single-Family
     Residential to B-4 Highway Business District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “zoning” by
320  changing the south side of the 3200 block of Avenue L from R-4 Single-Family
     Residential to B-4 Highway Business District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code of the city entitled “zoning” by
326  rezoning property located at 1801 Avenue M from I-1 Limited Industrial District to
     I-2 General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as the right- of-way of platted Avenue A 20
332  feet west of 8th Street continuing west 990 feet.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code entitled “zoning” by changing the
343  industrial tooling and fabrication property from R-1, Single-Family Residential to
     I-2, General Industrial.
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as the right- of-way of platted 26th Street
357  north of Avenue A continuing 270 feet.
C-   An ordinance amending title 10 of the code entitled “zoning” by changing 2701 -
366  2709 Avenue O from R-4 Single-Family Residential dwelling district to R-5 Two-
     Family Residential Dwelling District.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the west end development district urban renewal
     project area, in the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of
C-   Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District and other
367  taxing districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest
     on loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by said city in connection with said urban renewal redevelopment
     project.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10 of the code entitled “zoning” by changing Reve
369  subdivision from R-1 Single-Family Residential Dwelling District to B-2 General
     Business District.
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as part of the right-of-way of 16th Street
379  north of Avenue G, between Avenue G and the alley between Avenues F and G.
C-   An ordinance entitled RAGBRAI ordinance - miscellaneous permits.
380
C-   An ordinance vacating property known as the north/south alley in the 1600 block,
385  south side of Avenue G.
     An ordinance amending Title 10 of this code entitled “zoning” by changing 2701 -
     2709 Avenue O (Harrison addition, block 6, lots 16–20) from R-5 Two-Family
C-   Residential Dwelling District to R-6 Multiple-Family Residential Dwelling
393  District; and by changing 2715 Avenue O (Harrison addition, block 6, lots 14 and
     15) from R-4 Single-Family Residential Dwelling District to R-6 Multiple-Family
     Residential Dwelling District.
C-   An ordinance vacating 3rd Street north of Avenue D to the alley.
396
C-   An ordinance vacating a portion of 16th Street south of Avenue L to the alley.
397
C-   An ordinance vacating a portion of the alley between 38th and 39th Streets south
399  of Avenue Q.
C-   An ordinance vacating 17th Street from Avenue N north to the alley.
400
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
409  zoning classification of 4001 Bluff Road from R-2 One-Family Dwelling District to
     AR-1 Agricultural/Residential District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
410  zoning classification of 1535 Avenue G from R-5 Two-Family Residential Dwelling
     District to B-2 General Retail Business District.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the Burlington Hill urban renewal project area, in
     the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison,
C-   County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District and other taxing districts,
427  be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies
     advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by
     said city in connection with said urban renewal redevelopment project. (Repealed
     by Ord. D- 093)
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
431  zoning classification of 2301 Avenue G from R-4 One-Family Residential Dwelling
     District to B-2 General Retail Business District.
C-   An ordinance vacating the south 640 feet of the alley right-of-way between 38th
435  and 39th Streets south of Avenue Q.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by assigning the
436  zoning classification of B-2 General Retail Business District to 5831 and 5833
     Avenue O.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by assigning the
437  zoning classification of B-2 General Retail Business District to 5836 and 5909
     Avenue O.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning,” of the municipal code by changing the
440  zoning classification of 1117 and 1119 23rd Street from R-4 One-Family Residential
     Dwelling District to B-4 Highway Business District.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-208; providing that, general property taxes levied
     and collected each year on all property located within the amended urban renewal
     area #3 (a/k/a cyprus climax TIF district) of the city, by and for the benefit of
C-   the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community
442  School District, and other taxing districts, be paid to a special fund for payment
     of principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including
     bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by said city in connection with the amended
     urban renewal area #3 (a/k/a cyprus climax TIF district) redevelopment project.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-208 and C-442, providing that general property taxes
     levied and collected each year on all property located within the amended urban
     renewal area #3 (a/k/a cyprus climax TIF district) of the city, by and for the
C-   benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison
443  Community School District, and other taxing districts, be paid to a special fund
     for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to and
     indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by said city in
     connection with the amended urban renewal area #3 (a/k/a cyprus climax TIF
     district) redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance vacating the entire 7th Street right-of-way area between “C Alley”
444  and Avenue C.
C-   An ordinance vacating an alley right-of-way in the original town of Fort Madison.
449
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
     zoning classification of part of the south half of the northeast quarter, and part
C-   of the north half of the southeast quarter, all in Section 1, Township 67 North,
450  Range 5 West, consisting of approximately 43 acres, all within the city (4900
     through 5200 blocks of Bluff Road) from R-1 One-Family Dwelling District to R-
     6 Multi-Family Dwelling District.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the urban renewal area #12 (a/k/a River Bend
     subdivision TIF district) project area, in the city, by and for the benefit of the
C-   state of Iowa, city of Fort Madison, county of Lee, Fort Madison Community School
452  District and other taxing districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of
     principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including
     bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by the city in connection with the urban
     renewal redevelopment project. (Repealed by Ord. D- 96)
C-   An ordinance granting a franchise to MidAmerican Energy Company within the city.
453
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
C-   zoning classification of Lots 11-18 of Block 8 in Oakland Addition to the city,
458  all within the city (known as 1214 40th Street) from R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling
     District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the city code by changing the zoning
C-   classification of part of Lot 1 in the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 67
460  North, Range 5 West of the fifth principal meridian city (known as 901 48th
     Street), from R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District to R-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling
     District.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-236, C-293 and C-367; providing that, general
     property taxes levied and collected each year on all property located within the
     Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area #13 (which area is comprised by the consolidation
     of Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area #4, 5 and 6, Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area #8
C-   and Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area #10, together with certain newly added
461  property) of the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort
     Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District, and other taxing
     districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on
     loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the amended Fort Madison urban
     renewal redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance vacating rights- of-way in Tschoepe and Albrights Heights subdivision
462  to the city.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-208, C-442 and C-443; providing that, general
     property taxes levied and collected each year on all property located within the
     amended Urban Renewal Area #3 (a/k/a Cyprus Climax TIF District) of the city, by
C-   and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee,
463  Fort Madison Community School District, and other taxing districts, be paid to a
     special fund for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to
     and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by said city in
     connection with the amended Urban Renewal Area #3 (a/k/a Cyprus Climax TIF
     District) redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
464  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” all within the city
     from R-1 One-Family Dwelling District to I-2 General Industrial District.
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
C-   zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” all contingent upon
465  said land being officially annexed into the city from R-1 One- Family Dwelling
     District to I-2 General Industrial District.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-427, providing that general property taxes levied and
     collected each year on all property located within the amended Burlington Hill
     urban renewal area of the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City
C-   of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District, and other
468  taxing districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest
     on loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the amended Burlington Hill Urban
     Renewal Redevelopment Project.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
471  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-6 Multiple-
     Family Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
     An ordinance providing that the targeted jobs withholding credit collected each
C-   year in connection with certain property located within the Urban Renewal Area #3
472  (also known as Cyprus Climax TIF District Area) of the city, be paid into a
     designated account in the special fund previously established by Ord. C-208, C-
     442, C-443 and C-463.
     An ordinance providing that the targeted jobs withholding credit collected each
C-   year in connection with certain property located within the Urban Renewal Area #13
473  of the city, be paid into a designated account in the special fund previously
     established by Ord. C-461.
     An ordinance providing that the targeted jobs withholding credit collected each
C-   year in connection with certain property located within the Burlington Hill Urban
474  Renewal Area #11 of the city, be paid into a designated account in the special
     fund previously established by Ord. C-427 and C-468.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-452; providing that, general property taxes levied
     and collected each year on all property located within the amended Urban Renewal
     Area #12 (a/k/a River Bend subdivision TIF District) in the city, by and for the
C-   benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison
479  Community School District, and other taxing districts, be paid to a special fund
     for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies advanced to and
     indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by the city in
     connection with the amended Urban Renewal Area #12 (a/k/a River Bend subdivision
     TIF District) redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance vacating a portion of 16th Street right- of-way in the original town
483  of Fort Madison.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
486  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from I-1 Limited
     Industrial District to I-2 General Industrial District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
487  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
489  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
491  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-1 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
494  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from B-4 Highway
     Business District to R-6 Multi-Family Dwelling District.
     An ordinance amending Ord. C-461, providing that general property taxes levied and
     collected each year on all property located within the amended Fort Madison Urban
     Renewal Area #13, in the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City
C-   of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District, and other
495  taxing districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest
     on loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the amended Fort Madison Urban
     Renewal Area #13 redevelopment project.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the Fort Madison Urban Renewal Area #14 (the
     Bluffs), in the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort
C-   Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District and other taxing
496  districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on
     loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the Fort Madison Urban Renewal
     Area #14 (the Bluffs) redevelopment project.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
502  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
C-   An ordinance vacating a portion of 16th Street right- of-way in the original town
514  of Fort Madison.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
516  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the Downtown Urban Renewal Area in the city, by and
C-   for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison, County of Lee, Fort
518  Madison Community School District, Southeastern Community College and other taxing
     districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on
     loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the Downtown Urban Renewal Area.
C-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
523  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-6 Multi-Family
     Dwelling District to B-2 Business District, General Retail.
D-   An ordinance vacating the alley right-of-way between 1st and 2nd Streets and
004  between Avenues F and G in the original town of Fort Madison.
D-   An ordinance entitled RAGBRAI ordinance - miscellaneous permits.
006
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
007  zoning classification of property described in exhibit “A” from R-4 Single-Family
     Dwelling District to R-6 Multi-Family Dwelling District.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the Innsbrook Residential Urban Renewal Area, in
     the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort Madison,
D-   County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District and other taxing districts,
013  be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on loans, monies
     advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be issued, incurred by
     the city in connection with the Innsbrook Residential Urban Renewal Area (Project
     #1 area of the Innsbrook Residential Urban Renewal Plan).
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
014  zoning classification of property from R-6, Multi- Family Dwelling District to B-
     3, Service and Wholesale District.
D-   An ordinance granting a franchise to ITC Midwest LLC within the city.
016
D-   An ordinance vacating a portion of property formerly known as the city’s water
021  treatment plant (near east limits).
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
D-32 zoning classification of property from R-4, Single- Family Dwelling District to B-
     4, Highway Business District.
     An ordinance providing that general property taxes levied and collected each year
     on all property located within the business U.S. Highway 61 Corridor Urban Renewal
     Area, in the city, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Fort
     Madison, County of Lee, Fort Madison Community School District and other taxing
D-33 districts, be paid to a special fund for payment of principal and interest on
     loans, monies advanced to and indebtedness, including bonds issued or to be
     issued, incurred by the city in connection with the business U.S. Highway 61
     Corridor Urban Renewal Area (the business U.S. Highway 61 Corridor Urban Renewal
     Plan).
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
037  zoning classification of property from R-1, Single- Family Dwelling District to I-
     1, Limited Industrial District.
D-   An ordinance vacating 15th Place and 16th, 17th and 19th Streets south of Avenue
042  P.
D-57 An ordinance vacating a portion of the right-of-way in the 3500 block of Avenue L.
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
D-60 zoning classification of property from R-4 Single- Family Dwelling District to B-
     3, Service and Wholesale District.
D-   An ordinance granting to Interstate Power and Light Company a non-exclusive
069  electric franchise for a period of 15 years.
D-   An ordinance granting to MidAmerican Energy Company a non-exclusive natural gas
070  franchise for a period of 20 years. (Repealed by Ord. D-111)
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
073  zoning classification of property from R-1 Single- Family Dwelling District to I-
     2, General Industrial.
D-   An ordinance vacating the platted Avenue C West of Vica Lane.
075
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
076  zoning classification of property from R-4, Single- Family Dwelling District to B-
     4, Highway Business District.
D-78 An ordinance to adopt the code of ordinances of the City of Fort Madison, Iowa,
     2021, also known as “city code”.
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
D-88 zoning classification of property from R-4, Single- Family Dwelling District to R-
     6, Multi-Family Dwelling District.
     An ordinance amending Title 10, “Zoning”, of the municipal code by changing the
D-91 zoning classification of property from R-4, Single- Family Dwelling District to I-
     1, Limited Industrial District.
D-92 An ordinance vacating a portion of the right-of-way located between Avenue B and
     117 – 16th Street.
D-   An ordinance repealing Ord. C-427, regarding the division of taxes levied on
093  taxable property in the Burlington Hill Urban Renewal Area, pursuant to Iowa Code
     § 403.19.
D-   An ordinance repealing Ord. C-310, regarding the division of taxes levied on
094  taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area No. 9, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
D-96 An ordinance repealing Ord. C-452, regarding the division of taxes levied on
     taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area No. 12, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
D-   An ordinance repealing Ord. C-251, regarding the division of taxes levied on
098  taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area No. 7, pursuant to Iowa Code § 403.19.
     An ordinance amending title 10 "zoning" of the Fort Madison municipal code by
D-   changing the zoning classification of property from R-1 Single Family Dwelling
105  District, and B-2, General Retail Business District, to B-3, Service and Wholesale
     Business District.
D-   An ordinance repealing ordinance D-070, and amending a natural gas franchise
111  granted to MidAmerican Energy Company.
D-   An ordinance amending title 10, chapter 25 of the Fort Madison municipal code
112  regarding floodplain management.
     An ordinance amending title 10 “Zoning” of the Fort Madison municipal code by
D-   changing the zoning district designation of properties generally known as 2301
115  Avenue G, 2331 Avenue G and 2333 Avenue G, from B-2, Business District, General
     Retail and R-4, One-Family Dwelling District, to R-6, Multiple-Family Dwelling
     District.
D-   Vacating a portion of right-of-way located between Avenue A and Avenue B along 4th
116  Street.
D-   An ordinance amending title 10 “Zoning” of the Fort Madison Municipal Code by
117  changing the zoning classification of property from R-6, Multiple-Family Dwelling
     District to B-2, Business District.
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10 "Zoning" of the Fort Madison municipal code by
118  changing the zoning classification of properties from R-5, Two-Family Dwelling
     District to R-6, Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10 "Zoning" of the Fort Madison Municipal Code by
119  changing the zoning classification of properties from R-1, Single-Family Dwelling
     District to R-4, Single-Family Dwelling District.
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10, Chapter 18 Signs, of the City of Fort Madison,
120  Iowa, zoning code.
D-   An ordinance repealing, in its entirety, Title 10, Chapter 27 of the city code
121  entitled "Swimming Pool Regulations."
D-   An ordinance amending Title 10 "Zoning" of the Fort Madison municipal code by
124  changing the zoning classification of properties from R-1, Single-Family Dwelling
     District to B-2, Business District, General Retail.
     
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Iowa Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE
Iowa Code Cite Code Section
Iowa Code Cite            Code Section
Ch. 17A                   9-11-1;
                          9-11-3
Ch. 20                    1-13-1
Ch. 23                    9-15-4
35.1                      8-10-12
64.2                      1-12-1
69.16A(2)                 2-1-1
Ch. 80B                   7-10-8
80D.11                    7-10-15
80D.12                    7-10-17
Ch. 85                    7-10-17
Ch. 99F                   7-2-60
Ch. 100                   7-12-6
Ch. 109                   7-7-3
123.1 et seq.             4-1-1
Ch. 124, Division II      7-2-56
Ch. 124                   7-2-56;
                          7-2-57
Ch. 206                   7-4-1
303.34(3)                 2-9-1
                          9-7-8;
                          9-11-3;
Ch. 321                   9-11-4;  
                          9-15-1;
                          9-15-2
321.1                     7-2-21
321.17                    9-4-1
321.20B                   9-4-1
321.32                    9-4-1
321.34                    9-4-1
321.37                    9-4-1
321.38                    9-4-1
321.45                    9-4-1
321.98                    9-4-1
321.99                    9-4-1
321.174                   9-4-1
321.174A                  9-4-1
321.180                   9-4-1
321.180B                  9-4-1
321.193                   9-4-1
321.194                   9-4-1
Ch. 321E                  9-11-1
321G.10                   9-15-10
Ch. 321L                  9-7-12
321L.2(1b)                9-7-12
321L.2A(1)                9-7-12
321L.8                    9-7-12
321.216                   9-4-1
321.216B                  9-4-1
321.216C                  9-4-1
321.219                   9-4-1
321.220                   9-4-1
321.229                   9-4-1
321.231                   9-4-1
321.232                   9-4-1
321.234                   9-4-1
321.234A                  9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-5
321.247(B)                9-15-7
321.249                   9-5-3
321.255                   9-5-1
321.256                   9-4-1
321.257                   9-4-1
321.277                   9-4-1
321.277A                  9-4-1
321.284                   9-4-1
321.284A                  9-4-1
321.285                   9-3-1;
                          9-4-1
321.288                   9-4-1
321.294                   9-3-6
321.297                   9-4-1
321.298                   9-4-1
321.299                   9-4-1
321.302                   9-4-1
321.303                   9-4-1
321.304                   9-4-1
321.305                   9-4-1
321.306                   9-4-1
321.307                   9-4-1
321.308                   9-4-1
321.309                   9-4-1
321.310                   9-4-1
321.311                   9-4-1
321.312                   9-4-1
321.313                   9-4-1
321.314                   9-4-1
321.315                   9-4-1
321.316                   9-4-1
321.317                   9-4-1
321.318                   9-4-1
321.319                   9-4-1
321.320                   9-4-1
321.321                   9-4-1
321.322                   9-4-1
321.323                   9-4-1
321.324                   9-4-1
321.324A                  9-4-1
321.325                   9-4-1
321.326                   9-4-1
321.327                   9-4-1
321.328                   9-4-1
321.331                   9-5-4
321.332                   9-4-1
321.333                   9-4-1
321.340                   9-4-1
321.353                   9-4-1
321.354                   9-4-1
321.358                   9-4-1
321.361                   9-4-1
321.362                   9-4-1
321.363                   9-4-1
321.365                   9-4-1
321.367                   9-4-1
321.368                   9-4-1
321.369                   9-4-1
321.370                   9-4-1
321.375                   9-4-1
321.381                   9-4-1
321.382                   9-4-1
321.383                   9-4-1
321.384                   9-4-1
321.385                   9-4-1
321.386                   9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-5
321.387                   9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-5
321.388                   9-4-1
321.389                   9-4-1
321.390                   9-4-1
321.392                   9-4-1
321.393                   9-4-1
321.394                   9-4-1
321.395                   9-4-1
321.398                   9-4-1
321.402                   9-4-1
321.403                   9-4-1
321.404                   9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-5
321.409                   9-4-1
321.415                   9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-6
321.419                   9-4-1
321.420                   9-4-1
321.422                   9-4-1
321.423(2)                9-4-1
321.423(6)                9-4-1
321.430                   9-4-1
321.432                   9-15-5
321.433                   9-4-1
321.436                   9-4-1
321.437                   9-4-1 ;
                          9-15-5
321.438(1)                9-4-1
321.438(2)                9-4-1
321.438(3)                9-4-1
321.439                   9-4-1
321.440                   9-4-1
321.441                   9-4-1
321.444                   9-4-1
321.445                   9-4-1
321.446                   9-4-1
321.449                   9-4-1
321.450                   9-4-1
321.452                   9-11-4
321.454                   9-4-1;
                          9-11-1
321.455                   9-4-1
321.456                   9-4-1,
                          9-11-2
321.457                   9-4-1,
                          9-11-3
321.458                   9-4-1,
                          9-11-5
321.460                   9-4-1,
                          9-11-7
321.461                   9-4-1
321.462                   9-4-1
321.463                   9-4-1,
                          9-11-8
321.466                   9-4-1
Ch. 330                   2-6-2
330.20                    2-6-1
336.5                     2-5-2
354.9                     11-1-13
354.20                    11-1-12
364.3                     1-4-1
364.12(2)(c)              8-4-6
364.12(3)(h)              3-7-6
364.22                    1-4-2
376.6                     1-17-2
376.7                     1-17-2
376.9                     1-17-2
Ch. 384                   1-6-9,
                          8-3-8
384.41 through 384.54     1-6-9
384.60                    1-6-9
384.84                    6-5-15;
                          8-12-1
Ch. 386                   Appendix
389.38                    8-4-4
Ch. 392                   2-3-1
                          1-9-2,
Ch. 400                   2-4-2;
                          5-1-2;
                          7-1-2
400.1                     2-4-1
                          2-4-3;
400.4                     2-4-4;
                          2-4-5
400.5                     2-4-6
400.17(3)(a)              1-13-3
403.19                    Appendix
Ch. 404                   2-3-1
Ch. 409                   11-5-12
                          2-2-1;
Ch. 414                   2-3-1;
                          2-3-5
414.8                     2-2-2
414.12                    2-2-5
414.13                    2-2-6
414.14                    2-2-7
Ch. 423A                  4-7-1
427.1, subs. 8            4-7-2
                          1-4-1;
Ch. 455B                  1-4-2;
                          8-2-10
455B.381, subs. 4         6-6-2
455B.411, subs. 3, par. a 6-6-2
Ch. 455D                  1-4-2
Ch. 455E                  1-4-2
Ch. 523I                  8-10-8
523I.502                  8-10-8
Ch. 556B                  8-13-1
599.1                     7-11-2;
                          7-11-4
602.6306, subs. 2         1-4-1
602.8106                  1-4-1
Ch. 631                   1-4-1
631.1, subs. 1            1-4-1
631.13                    1-4-2
657A.10B                  3-9-3
Ch. 687 through 747       1-4-2
703.1                     7-2-1
708.1                     7-2-7
714.1                     7-2-5
714.4                     6-5-16
716.1                     7-2-9
716.2                     7-2-10
716.7                     7-2-11
724.16                    7-2-23
727.2                     7-12-1,
                          7-12-7
                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
21       - -         Appendix
41       - -         Appendix
49       - -         Appendix
51       - -         Appendix
57       - -         Appendix
62       - -         Appendix
96       - -         Appendix
115      - -         Appendix
119      - -         Appendix
142      - -         Appendix
146      - -         Appendix
151      - -         Appendix
152      - -         Appendix
156      - -         Appendix
157      - -         Appendix
161      - -         Appendix
174      - -         Appendix
178      - -         Appendix
181      - -         Appendix
182      - -         Appendix
183      - -         Appendix
184      - -         Appendix
189      - -         Appendix
192      - -         Appendix
193      - -         Appendix
194      - -         Appendix
198      - -         Appendix
199      - -         Appendix
203      - -         Appendix
207      - -         Appendix
209      - -         Appendix
212      - -         Appendix
215      - -         Appendix
219      - -         Appendix
220      - -         Appendix
221      - -         Appendix
222      - -         Appendix
224      - -         Appendix
227      - -         Appendix
229      - -         Appendix
230      - -         Appendix
232      - -         Appendix
239      - -         Appendix
240      - -         Appendix
245      - -         Appendix
248      - -         Appendix
249      - -         Appendix
252      - -         Appendix
256      - -         Appendix
258      - -         Appendix
261      - -         Appendix
265      - -         Appendix
266      - -         Appendix
271      - -         Appendix
279      - -         Appendix
281      - -         Appendix
289      - -         Appendix
290      - -         Appendix
291      - -         Appendix
294      - -         Appendix
296      - -         Appendix
303      - -         Appendix
304      - -         Appendix
305      - -         Appendix
306      - -         Appendix
310      - -         Appendix
314      - -         Appendix
317      - -         Appendix
323      - -         Appendix
324      - -         Appendix
325      - -         Appendix
327      - -         Appendix
330      - -         Appendix
331      - -         Appendix
332      - -         Appendix
337      - -         Appendix
338      - -         Appendix
339      - -         Appendix
340      - -         Appendix
341      - -         Appendix
342      - -         Appendix
343      - -         Appendix
345      - -         Appendix
351      - -         Appendix
352      - -         Appendix
353      - -         Appendix
362      - -         Appendix
367      - -         Appendix
368      - -         Appendix
374      - -         Appendix
375      - -         Appendix
376      - -         Appendix
380      - -         Appendix
388      - -         Appendix
389      - -         Appendix
390      - -         Appendix
391      - -         Appendix
392      - -         Appendix
394      - -         Appendix
395      - -         Appendix
397      - -         Appendix
398      - -         Appendix
399      - -         Appendix
403      - -         Appendix
408      - -         Appendix
409      - -         Appendix
410      - -         Appendix
412      - -         Appendix
413      - -         Appendix
415      - -         Appendix
425      - -         Appendix
428      - -         Appendix
429      - -         Appendix
430      - -         Appendix
431      - -         Appendix
436      - -         Appendix
439      - -         Appendix
441      - -         Appendix
445      - -         Appendix
446      - -         Appendix
453      - -         Appendix
458      - -         Appendix
470      - -         Appendix
474      - -         Appendix
475      - -         Appendix
478      - -         Appendix
481      - -         Appendix
483      - -         Appendix
484      - -         Appendix
489      - -         Appendix
494      - -         Appendix
495      - -         Appendix
502      - -         Appendix
503      - -         Appendix
510      - -         Appendix
514      - -         Appendix
515      - -         Appendix
516      - -         Appendix
517      - -         Appendix
518      - -         Appendix
519      - -         Appendix
521      - -         Appendix
528      - -         Appendix
529      - -         Appendix
530      - -         Appendix
531      - -         Appendix
533      - -         Appendix
567      - -         Appendix
568      - -         Appendix
571      - -         Appendix
572      - -         Appendix
573      - -         Appendix
597      - -         Appendix
602      - -         Appendix
608      - -         Appendix
609      - -         Appendix
610      - -         Appendix
614      - -         Appendix
624      - -         Appendix
626      - -         Appendix
628      - -         Appendix
629      - -         Appendix
633      - -         Appendix
634      - -         Appendix
637      - -         Appendix
641      - -         Appendix
646      - -         Appendix
649      - -         Appendix
650      - -         Appendix
653      - -         Appendix
654      - -         Appendix
657      - -         Appendix
660      - -         Appendix
A-83     - -         Appendix
A-84     - -         Appendix
A-94     - -         Appendix
A-98     - -         Appendix
A-117    - -         Appendix
A-118    - -         Appendix
A-119    - -         Appendix
A-121    - -         Appendix
A-129    - -         Appendix
A-135    - -         Appendix
A-136    - -         Appendix
A-139    - -         Appendix
A-140    - -         Appendix
A-141    - -         Appendix
A-154    - -         Appendix
A-169    - -         Appendix
A-179    - -         Appendix
A-181    - -         Appendix
A-184    - -         Appendix
A-193    - -         Appendix
A-207    - -         Appendix
A-209    - -         Appendix
A-223    - -         Appendix
A-227    - -         Appendix
A-233    - -         Appendix
A-234    2-7-1967    9-7-11
A-235    - -         Appendix
A-236    - -         Appendix
A-238    - -         Appendix
A-239    - -         Appendix
A-241    - -         Appendix
A-242-A  - -         Appendix
A-245    - -         Appendix
B-2      - -         Appendix
B-3      - -         Appendix
B-21     - -         Appendix
B-26     - -         Appendix
B-41     - -         Appendix
B-52     - -         Appendix
B-58     - -         Appendix
B-59     - -         Appendix
B-61     - -         Appendix
B-63     - -         Appendix
B-73     - -         Appendix
B-78     - -         Appendix
B-81     - -         Appendix
B-83     - -         Appendix
B-84     - -         Appendix
B-85     - -         Appendix
B-88     - -         Appendix
B-90     - -         Appendix
B-93     - -         Appendix
B-96     - -         Appendix
B-106    - -         Appendix
B-107    - -         Appendix
B-111    - -         Appendix
B-114    - -         Appendix
B-116    - -         Appendix
B-118    - -         Appendix
B-119    - -         Appendix
B-122    - -         Appendix
B-123    - -         Appendix
B-138    - -         Appendix
B-139    - -         Appendix
B-140    - -         Appendix
B-142    - -         Appendix
B-156    - -         Appendix
B-159    - -         Appendix
B-160    - -         Appendix
B-164    - -         Appendix
B-166    - -         Appendix
B-167    - -         Appendix
B-171    - -         Appendix
B-178    - -         Appendix
B-183    - -         Appendix
B-184    - -         Appendix
B-186    - -         Appendix
B-194    - -         Appendix
B-196    - -         Appendix
B-216    - -         Appendix
B-218    - -         Appendix
B-222    - -         Appendix
B-224    - -         Appendix
B-227    - -         Appendix
B-228    - -         Appendix
B-236    - -         Appendix
B-238    - -         Appendix
B-253    - -         Appendix
B-257    - -         Appendix
B-261    - -         Appendix
B-267    - -         Appendix
B-269    - -         Appendix
B-270    - -         Appendix
B-278    - -         Appendix
B-284    - -         Appendix
B-296    - -         Appendix
B-298    - -         Appendix
B-299    - -         Appendix
B-303    - -         Appendix
B-306    - -         Appendix
B-309    - -         Appendix
B-310    - -         Appendix
B-311    - -         Appendix
B-312    - -         Appendix
B-318    - -         Appendix
B-324    - -         Appendix
B-328    - -         Appendix
B-333    - -         Appendix
B-339    - -         Appendix
B-343    - -         Appendix
B-344    - -         Appendix
B-349    - -         Appendix
B-352    - -         Appendix
B-362    - -         Appendix
B-369    - -         Appendix
B-370    - -         Appendix
B-372    - -         Appendix
B-383    - -         Appendix
B-397    - -         Appendix
B-417    - -         Appendix
B-418    - -         Appendix
B-419    - -         Appendix
B-425    - -         Appendix
B-429    - -         Appendix
B-433    - -         Appendix
B-437    - -         Appendix
B-444    - -         Appendix
B-445    - -         Appendix
B-446    - -         Appendix
B-466    - -         Appendix
B-468    - -         Appendix
B-470    - -         Appendix
B-483    - -         Appendix
B-486    - -         Appendix
B-488    - -         Appendix
B-489    - -         Appendix
B-491    - -         Appendix
B-492    - -         Appendix
B-501    - -         Appendix
B-503    - -         Appendix
B-505    - -         Appendix
B-515    - -         Appendix
C-001    - -         Appendix
C-006    - -         Appendix
C-007    - -         Appendix
C-009    - -         Appendix
C-015    - -         Appendix
C-016    - -         Appendix
C-018    - -         Appendix
C-019    - -         Appendix
C-020    - -         Appendix
C-028    - -         Appendix
C-032    - -         Appendix
C-036    - -         Appendix
C-039    - -         Appendix
C-043    - -         Appendix
C-045    - -         Appendix
C-047    - -         Appendix
C-050    - -         Appendix
C-052    - -         Appendix
C-053    - -         Appendix
C-068    - -         Appendix
C-082    - -         Appendix
C-084    - -         Appendix
C-087    - -         Appendix
C-088    - -         Appendix
C-089    - -         Appendix
C-113    - -         Appendix
C-122    - -         Appendix
C-125    - -         Appendix
C-133    - -         Appendix
C-134    - -         Appendix
C-135    - -         Appendix
C-140    - -         Appendix
C-145    - -         Appendix
C-151    - -         Appendix
C-153    - -         Appendix
C-155    - -         Appendix
C-162    - -         Appendix
C-169    - -         Appendix
C-173    - -         Appendix
C-174    - -         Appendix
C-188    - -         Appendix
C-208    - -         Appendix
C-230    - -         Appendix
C-236    - -         Appendix
C-251    - -         Appendix
C-255    - -         Appendix
C-256    - -         Appendix
C-257    - -         Appendix
C-259    - -         Appendix
C-265    - -         Appendix
C-273    - -         Appendix
C-280    - -         Appendix
C-293    - -         Appendix
C-297    - -         Appendix
C-299    - -         Appendix
C-307    - -         Appendix
C-312    5-4-1999    1-4-2
C-314    - -         Appendix
C-316    - -         Appendix
C-317    - -         Appendix
C-319    - -         Appendix
C-320    - -         Appendix
C-326    - -         Appendix
C-332    - -         Appendix
C-343    - -         Appendix
C-357    - -         Appendix
C-366    - -         Appendix
C-367    - -         Appendix
C-369    - -         Appendix
C-379    - -         Appendix
C-380    - -         Appendix
C-385    - -         Appendix
C-393    - -         Appendix
C-396    - -         Appendix
C-397    - -         Appendix
C-399    - -         Appendix
C-400    - -         Appendix
C-409    - -         Appendix
C-410    - -         Appendix
C-427    - -         Appendix
C-431    - -         Appendix
C-435    - -         Appendix
C-436    - -         Appendix
C-437    - -         Appendix
C-440    - -         Appendix
C-442    - -         Appendix
C-443    - -         Appendix
C-444    - -         Appendix
C-449    - -         Appendix
C-450    - -         Appendix
C-452    - -         Appendix
C-453    - -         Appendix
C-458    - -         Appendix
C-460    - -         Appendix
C-461    - -         Appendix
C-462    - -         Appendix
C-463    - -         Appendix
C-464    - -         Appendix
C-465    - -         Appendix
C-468    - -         Appendix
C-471    - -         Appendix
C-472    - -         Appendix
C-473    - -         Appendix
C-474    - -         Appendix
C-479    - -         Appendix
C-483    - -         Appendix
C-486    - -         Appendix
C-487    - -         Appendix
C-489    - -         Appendix
C-491    - -         Appendix
C-494    - -         Appendix
C-495    - -         Appendix
C-496    - -         Appendix
C-502    - -         Appendix
C-514    - -         Appendix
C-516    - -         Appendix
C-518    - -         Appendix
C-523    - -         Appendix
D-004    - -         Appendix
D-006    - -         Appendix
D-007    - -         Appendix
D-013    - -         Appendix
D-014    - -         Appendix
D-016    - -         Appendix
D-021    - -         Appendix
D-32     - -         Appendix
D-33     - -         Appendix
D-037    - -         Appendix
D-042    - -         Appendix
D-57     - -         Appendix
D-60     - -         Appendix
D-069    - -         Appendix
D-070    - -         Appendix
D-073    - -         Appendix
D-075    - -         Appendix
D-076    - -         Appendix
D-78     - -         Appendix
D-88     - -         Appendix
A-2      12-28-1953  1-14-2
                     8-6-1—
A-3      12-28-1953  8-6-5;
                     8-6-7;
                     8-6-8
3A-6     12-28-1953  1-6-8
                     1-6-1;
A-7      12-28-1953  1-6-4;
                     1-6-6;
                     1-6-7
A-18     12-28-1953  5-1-3;
                     5-1-4
                     1-8-1;
                     1-8-3;
A-23     12-28-1953  1-8-5;
                     1-8-9—
                     1-8-19
A-27     12-28-1953  1-10-2—
                     1-10-6
                     1-7-1;
A-28     12-28-1953  1-7-3;
                     1-7-4—
                     1-7-8
A-32     12-28-1953  1-12-2
                     9-1-1;
                     9-2-1—
A-35     12-28-1953  9-2-10;
                     9-3-4;
                     9-11-6;
                     9-11-9
                     9-13-1—
A-36     12-28-1953  9-13-9;
                     9-13-12
                     7-8-1;
A-39     12-28-1953  7-8-2;
                     7-8-4
                     4-2-1—
A-48     12-28-1953  4-2-10;
                     4-2-13
A-51     12-28-1953  3-4-1—
                     3-4-8
A-53     12-28-1953  8-8-1—
                     8-8-3
A-67     12-28-1953  7-3-1—
                     7-3-3
A-68     12-28-1953  8-4-1—
                     8-4-4
A-69     12-28-1953  1-6-9
A-79     8-2-1954    8-3-1—
                     8-3-8
A-90     4-4-1955    8-6-8
A-95     7-5-1955    8-4-2
A-110    5-7-1957    6-2-1
A-138    2-3-1959    8-6-8
A-142    5-26-1959   8-6-8
A-159    1-3-1961    8-6-9
A-167    7-18-1961   8-3-2
A-172    11-20-1961  4-2-3
A-173    12-4-1961   1-7-4
A-180    5-22-1962   9-8-1
                     9-13-10;
A-197    10-1-1963   9-13-11;
                     9-13-13
A-198    11-19-1963  9-8-1
A-218    3-1-1966    9-12-1;
                     9-12-2
B-25     4-1-1969    4-5-1—
                     4-5-9
B-51     3-3-1970    1-7-2
B-60     5-19-1970   9-9-1
B-69     8-18-1970   1-14-1
B-92     10-5-1971   9-9-1
B-94     10-12-1971  9-9-1
B-95     10-12-1971  9-9-1
                     9-14-1;
B-126    1-2-1973    9-14-2;
                     9-14-12
B-143    7-3-1973    1-5-1—
                     1-5-7
B-152    10-30-1973  4-5-7
B-162    5-21-1974   4-5-12
B-172    9-17-1974   9-9-1
B-177    10-22-1974  9-11-10
B-191    6-3-1975    6-4-2
B-197    9-2-1975    1-17-1—
                     1-17-6
B-199    9-2-1975    1-15-1
                     1-6-9;
                     1-7-7;
B-204    10-21-1975  1-8-2;
                     1-8-17;
                     4-5-7
B-206    10-21-1975  3-4-5;
                     3-4-6
B-210    10-21-1975  9-8-1;
                     9-9-1
B-241    6-7-1977    9-9-1
B-249    9-20-1977   5-1-5
B-250    10-4-1977   9-9-1
B-254    3-7-1978    1-3-1
                     7-2-1—
                     7-2-3;
                     7-2-6;
                     7-2-13—
                     7-2-17;
                     7-2-19;
B-256    3-7-1978    7-2-23—
                     7-2-32;
                     7-2-34—
                     7-2-42;
                     7-2-44—
                     7-2-49;
                     7-2-51—
                     7-2-54
263      7-5-1978    1-7-2
B-268    9-5-1978    6-1-1;
                     6-1-2
B-282    2-6-1979    8-1-1
B-285    6-5-1979    1-11-1
B-288    7-3-1979    1-7-2
B-289    7-17-1979   9-9-1
B-291    8-28-1979   1-7-2
B-292    9-4-1979    7-3-3
B-295    9-4-1979    9-9-1
B-302    12-4-1979   9-14-2—
                     9-14-11
B-304    12-18-1979  8-9-1—
                     8-9-4
B-305    1-2-1980    9-9-1
B-322    7-15-1980   9-9-1
                     7-5-1;
                     7-5-2;
B-325    8-19-1980   7-5-4;
                     7-5-5;
                     7-5-8
B-341    2-3-1981    9-9-1
B-350    6-2-1981    1-9-1—
                     1-9-3
B-358    11-2-1981   1-13-2
B-363    1-2-1982    1-6-8
B-366    2-16-1982   1-12-3
B-373    6-15-1982   1-13-1;
                     5-1-3
B-375    7-6-1982    9-9-1
B-377    7-20-1982   4-5-2;
                     4-5-7
B-384    10-5-1982   7-5-6
B-389    11-16-1982  9-9-1
                     11-1-1;
                     11-1-2;
                     11-1-4;
                     11-1-5;
                     11-1-7—
                     11-1-12;
B-391    1-4-1983    11-2-1;
                     11-3-1—
                     11-3-6;
                     11-4-1—
                     11-4-9;
                     11-5-1—
                     11-5-15
B-395    1-18-1983   4-3-1—
                     4-3-13
B-404    4-19-1983   6-6-1—
                     6-6-4
                     7-1-1;
B-406    5-17-1983   7-1-3;
                     7-1-4—
                     7-1-8
B-410    6-7-1983    3-3-1—
                     3-3-10
B-376    7-20-1983   9-9-1
B-414    8-2-1983    9-9-1
B-436    2-7-1984    7-5-10
B-442    5-1-1984     9-9-2
B-443    5-15-1984   7-8-1;
                     7-8-3
B-452    9-18-1984   9-2-3
B-454    10-2-1984   9-9-2
B-457    12-4-1984   9-9-2
B-458    12-18-1984  9-9-2
B-459    3-5-1985    8-4-6
B-466    5-7-1985    11-4-7
B-475    2-4-1986    4-5-11
B-476    2-18-1986   9-9-2
B-482    5-20-1986   9-9-2
B-484    6-2-1986    9-9-2
B-494    12-2-1986   9-9-2
B-502    6-2-1987    9-9-2
B-506    8-4-1987    9-9-2
B-507    8-4-1987    9-9-2
B-508    8-4-1987    9-9-2
B-510    9-1-1987    9-9-2
B-512    9-15-1987   7-7-1—
                     7-7-6
B-513    11-4-1987   7-4-1—
                     7-4-7
C-008    8-16-1988   9-9-2
C-014    10-18-1988  7-5-8
C-024    3-7-1989    1-12-1
C-027    5-16-1989   8-3-1
C-029    6-20-1989   7-5-11;
                     7-5-15
C-042    12-19-1989  1-9-2
C-046    2-20-1990   7-5-12
C-058    8-7-1990    9-13-14
C-063    9-4-1990    9-9-2
                     4-5-2;
C-066    9-4-1990    4-5-10;
                     4-5-13
C-069    11-6-1990   6-1-3;
                     6-1-4
C-075    2-5-1991    1-10-7
C-080    4-16-1991   5-1-2;
                     7-1-2
                     8-7-1—
C-083    5-21-1991   8-7-3;
                     8-7-5
                     4-4-2—
                     4-4-4;
C-086    7-2-1991    4-4-7—
                     4-4-9;
                     4-4-12;
                     4-4-13
C-096    11-19-1991  9-9-2
C-100    11-19-1991  4-4-3;
                     4-4-12
C-117    5-5-1992    7-5-16;
                     7-5-17
C-119    5-19-1992   8-7-3
C-121    5-19-1992   4-4-1
C-123    6-16-1992   9-7-20
C-126    7-21-1992   4-4-6;
                     4-4-12
C-141    11-17-1992  9-9-2
C-142    11-17-1992  9-9-1
C-146    1-5-1993    9-9-2
C-156    4-20-1993   4-4-12
C-159    5-18-1993   1-14-3
C-160    6-1-1993    4-4-3
C-164    7-20-1993   4-4-6
                     8-10-1—
                     8-10-4;
C-167    8-3-1993    8-10-7;
                     8-10-9;
                     8-10-12;
                     8-10-13
C-171    9-7-1993    8-11-1—
                     8-11-5
C-172    9-7-1993    8-2-1—
                     8-2-12
                     7-2-8;
C-175    10-19-1993  7-2-22;
                     9-3-2;
                     9-3-3
C-176    11-1-1993   8-4-2
C-178    11-16-1993  1-4-2
C-179    12-21-1993  8-9-6
C-181    1-4-1994    7-2-33
C-187    3-15-1994   11-1-3;
                     11-5-13
C-190    4-19-1994   9-10-1
C-191    4-19-1994   9-10-1
C-195    5-3-1994    9-10-1
C-197    5-17-1994   9-10-1
C-198    6-21-1994   1-4-1
C-199    6-21-1994   6-4-3
                     8-4-5;
C-200    6-21-1994   8-6-6;
                     8-6-8
C-201    6-21-1994   11-1-6
                     4-4-1;
                     4-4-3;
                     4-4-5;
C-202    6-21-1994   4-4-6;
                     4-4-9—
                     4-4-11;
                     4-4-14
C-206    7-5-1994    9-10-1
                     7-6-1—
C-214    8-16-1994   7-6-5;
                     7-6-8—
                     7-6-14
C-217    9-6-1994    9-10-1
C-218    9-20-1994   7-2-33
C-222    10-4-1994   8-11-2
C-225    11-1-1994   9-8-1;
                     9-10-1
C-231    1-17-1995   7-2-33
C-232    1-17-1995   7-5-7
C-246    8-15-1995   9-13-15
C-261    6-4-1996    7-5-9
C-262    6-4-1996    7-5-1;
                     7-5-2
C-279    6-17-1997   7-10-1—
                     7-10-20
C-282    7-15-1997   7-5-18
C-286    8-19-1997   1-5-5
C-287    8-19-1997   9-10-1
C-288    9-16-1997   7-11-1—
                     7-11-8
C-292    12-2-1997   9-13-14
C-302    3-2-1998    7-2-33
C-308    1-5-1999    7-5-1;
                     7-5-2
C-312    5-4-1999    1-4-2
C-313    6-1-1999    7-2-50
                     7-5-17;
C-322    4-4-2000    7-11-7;
                     8-2-10
C-329    8-15-2000   9-10-1
C-330    9-19-2000   1-13-3
C-331    12-5-2000   9-10-1
C-333    1-16-2001   1-6-10;
                     1-7-9
C-346    8-21-2001   9-10-1
                     1-16-1;
C-348    8-21-2001   1-16-4;
                     1-16-5
C-355    12-4-2001   6-4-1
C-360    4-16-2002   7-2-60
C-364    9-3-2002    7-2-55
C-375    3-4-2003    9-10-1
C-382    6-17-2003   8-7-3
C-383    8-5-2003    9-10-1
                     8-10-10;
C-386    9-2-2003    8-10-12;
                     8-10-13
C-390    11-18-2003  4-7-1—
                     4-7-6
                     3-1-1;
C-391    1-6-2004    3-1-2;
                     3-7-1;
                     3-7-2
C-404    7-20-2004   5-1-1
C-407    10-5-2004   8-4-6
C-408    11-3-2004   8-10-12
C-411    2-1-2005    6-6-5
C-421    6-21-2005   8-7-2
C-422    7-5-2005    8-12-1—
                     8-12-5
C-425    7-5-2005    8-7-4
                     8-10-5;
C-434    5-1-2006    8-10-10—
                     8-10-13
C-439    10-3-2006   4-8-1—
                     4-8-22
C-454    9-4-2007    9-10-1
C-456    9-18-2007   8-10-12
                     7-9-1—
C-475    8-19-2008   7-9-5;
                     7-9-7
C-476    1-6-2009    9-10-1
C-488    11-17-2009  9-10-1
C-503    6-7-2011    7-2-56—
                     7-2-59
                     9-3-5;
C-515    4-3-2012    9-8-1;
                     9-11-10
C-519    5-15-2012   3-5-1—
                     3-5-22
C-525    12-18-2012  1-4-1;
                     7-2-4
D-002    2-5-2013    9-3-2
D-003    2-5-2013    9-10-1
D-010    12-3-2013   7-2-43
D-012    5-6-2014    1-15-3
D-015    5-20-2014   8-7-2
D-019    10-7-2014   9-10-1
                     6-5-1—
D-20     10-21-2014  6-5-75;
                     6-5-77—
                     6-5-81
D-022    11-3-2014   9-9-1
D-023    12-2-2014   8-5-1—
                     8-5-3
D-028    2-2-2016    8-10-6;
                     8-10-8
                     6-5-66;
D-31     4-5-2016    6-5-68;
                     6-5-69
D-036    12-6-2016   11-1-13
D-38     12-20-2016  5-2-2;
                     5-2-3
D-40     2-21-2017   1-6-3
D-41     3-7-2017    9-1-1;
                     9-11-10
D-045    10-3-2017   9-11-2;
                     9-11-6
                     2-1-1;
                     2-2-1—
                     2-2-8;
                     2-3-1—
                     2-3-5;
                     2-4-1;
                     2-4-2;
D-047    11-21-2017  2-5-1—
                     2-5-7;
                     2-6-1;
                     2-6-2;
                     2-7-1—
                     2-7-3;
                     2-9-1—
                     2-9-7
D-047    11-21-2017  8-13-1
D-48     6-4-2018    6-3-1—
                     6-3-18
                     1-1-2;
                     1-1-3;
                     1-6-2;
                     1-6-8;
                     1-7-2;
                     1-7-5;
                     1-8-4;
                     1-8-6;
D-49     11-5-2018   1-12-3;
                     1-13-1;
                     1-13-3;
                     1-14-1;
                     1-15-2;
                     1-16-1;
                     1-17-3;
                     1-17-6;
                     8-10-6
                     7-12-1 ,
D-50     12-5-2018   7-12-4—
                     7-12-6
D-52     4-16-2019   3-5-3;
                     6-4-3
D-54     7-2-2019    8-7-2
                     9-15-1—
D-55     10-15-2019  9-15-6;
                     9-15-8—
                     9-15-10
D-59     2-4-2020    1-7-6
                     9-3-1;
                     9-3-2;
                     9-3-4;
D-62     6-16-2020   9-3-6;
                     9-4-1—
                     9-4-13;
                     9-5-1—
                     9-5-4
                     1-6-5;
                     1-13-3;
                     4-8-5;
                     7-2-33;
                     7-7-3;
D-063    8-4-2020    8-3-4—
                     8-3-8;
                     8-6-8;
                     9-8-1;
                     9-10-1;
                     9-13-15
                     9-15-6;
D-064    8-4-2020    9-15-7;
                     9-15-11
                     2-1-1;
D-065    8-4-2020    2-11-1—
                     2-11-11;
                     3-8-1
                     8-4-1;
D-066    8-18-2020   8-4-6;
                     8-4-7
D-067    9-1-2020    1-13-3
D-068    9-15-2020   7-2-21
D-074    4-16-2021   5-2-4
D-79     11-1-2021   9-10-1
                     3-1-3;
D-081    12-21-2021  3-2-1—
                     3-2-3
                     3-6-1—
D-081    12-21-2021  3-6-3;
                     5-2-1
D-082    12-21-2021  1-16-2;
                     1-16-3
                     7-5-1;
                     7-5-6;
D-083    1-4-2022    7-5-13;
                     7-5-14;
                     7-6-6;
                     7-6-7
D-084    2-1-2022    2-3-2
D-86     5-3-2022    1-16-2;
                     1-16-3
                     3-5-5;
D-87     5-3-2022    3-5-6;
                     3-9-1—
                     3-9-14
D-089    6-6-2022    8-7-1—
                     8-7-3
D-90     8-16-2022   1-4-2
D-91     9-6-2022    Appendix
D-92     11-1-2022   Appendix
D-093    12-20-2022  Appendix
D-094    12-20-2022  Appendix
                     7-2-33,
                     7-4-1,
                     8-10-10,
                     8-10-11,
                     8-13-1,
D-95     12-20-2022  9-7-4,
                     9-7-6,
                     9-7-9,
                     9-9-2,
                     9-10-1,
                     11-3-3
D-96     1-3-2023    Appendix
D-97     1-3-2023    7-2-47
D-098    1-3-2023    Appendix
D-099    - -         9-7-6
                     1-13-3;
                     2-1-1; 2-10;
D-100    7-5-2023    6-3-5;
                     6-3-6;
                     6-3-15;
                     6-5-76
D-101    7-5-2023    9-7-1—
                     9-7-15
D-102    8-1-2023    7-13-1—
                     7-13-13
                     1-4-2;
D-104    9-19-2023   7-2-3;
                     7-2-4
D-105    10-3-2023   Appendix
D-106    10-17-2023  Adopting Ordinance
---      - -         4-6-1 —
                     4-6-9
                     3-7-1—
                     3-7-10;
D-108    11-21-2023  3-10-1—
                     3-10-10;
                     3-10-99
D-109    3-19-2024   9-15-1—
                     9-15-11
D-110    4-2-2024    2-4-2—
                     2-4-6
D-111    4-16-2024   Appendix
D-112    5-7-2024    Appendix
D-113    5-21-2024   2-1-1
D-114    5-21-2024   2-9-1;
                     2-9-7
D-115    8-6-2024    Appendix
D-116    8-27-2024   Appendix
D-117    9-11-2024   Appendix
D-118    3-4-2025    Appendix
D-119    4-14-2025   Appendix
D-120    6-17-2025   Appendix
D-121    6-17-2025   Appendix
D-122    6-17-2025   7-12-1—7-21-7
D-123    6-17-2025   9-10-1
D-124    7-1-2025    Appendix
                    
 
 
