CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF
GARNER, IOWA
Adopted Janaury 12, 2021, by Ordinance No. 460
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
          165.02(74, 75);
          165.38(3)(J);
          165.39(3)(E-F);                           Limiting Ground Mounted
Apr-24    165.39(8);              461      11-22-22 Photovoltaic Systems
          165.41(2)(Q-R);
          165.42(2)(U-V);
          165.43(3)(L-M)
          Ch. 77                  462      7-26-22  Golf Carts
          Zoning Map              463      8-23-22  Rezoning from R-1 to I-1
          45.04;
          45.06;                  464      11-8-22  Open Container
          47.08
          Ch. 25                  465      11-8-22  Community Educatoin Center
                                                    Board
                                  466               Not Used
          Ch. 8                   467      5-9-23   May 2023 Addition to the
                                                    Garner Urban Renewal Area
                                                    Fire Department
          36.03                   468      3-12-24  Qualifications,
                                                    Appointment, and Removal
Jan-26    106.08                  469      5-28-24  Garbage and Recycling Fees
                                  470               Failed
          92.02(2)                471      7-9-24   Water Rates for Service
          92.02(2)                472      7-9-24   Water Rates for Service
          106.08                  473      5-13-25  Garbage and Recycling Fees
          105.09                  474      6-10-24  Refuse Container Usage
          41.14                   475      6-24-25  Fireworks
          91.07                   476      8-12-25  Right of Entry
          165.39(2)(E);
          165.39(3)(F);
          165.39(8);
          165.40(3)(F-G);         477      11-25-25 Photovoltaic Systems
          165.41(2)(Q-R);
          165.41(3)(B-C);
          165.42(2)(U-V);
          165.42(3)(B-C)
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01   TITLE.
   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Garner, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases
used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise
in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the City of Garner, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Garner, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Garner, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of Garner, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means Hancock County, Iowa.
   8.   “May” confers a power.
   9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
   10.   “Must” states a requirement.
   11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Garner, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve
and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its
residents and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City
whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to
have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
   All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of
a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of
Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure, building
or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to
permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a
duty, or obtain a license required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise
violating any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation
adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $855.00. 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 3.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Garner, Iowa.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five (5) Council Members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies
of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties                
 
3.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code
of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided
herein. 2
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
2 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
3.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
   A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding
the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03   PENALTIES.
   A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
(8) hours.
3.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.08 Resignations
5.02 Bonds                 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.03 Duties: General       5.10 Appointed Officials: Merger of Offices
5.04 Books and Records     5.11 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.12 Gifts
5.06 Meetings              5.13 Gender Balance
5.07 Conflict of Interest   
 
5.01   OATHS.
   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but
not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday
in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Garner
as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective office:
      A.   Mayor
      B.   City Clerk
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03   DUTIES: GENERAL.
   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
   Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   2.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   3.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   5.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   6.   Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means
only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a
public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is
filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   APPOINTED OFFICIALS: MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The Council may, at its discretion, by ordinance, combine and merge any
elective or appointive office or employment, except Mayor and Council Member,
with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more
of such offices or employments may be held by the officer or employee at the
same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be
construed to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be
limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation
of the officer or employee holding the merged and combined offices or
employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for
the salary or compensation of the offices or employments so merged and
combined.
5.11   VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled
in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.12   GIFTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
5.13   GENDER BALANCE.
   All appointive boards, commissions, committees, and councils of the City
shall be gender balanced in accordance with Section 69.16A of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals,
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than ten (10) eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy.
The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05   FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS.
   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of
such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by
the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose         7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control    7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control    7.08 Financial Reports
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Treasurer is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits liabilities and the related deferred
inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of resources,
in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Resolution Establishing Maximum Property Tax Dollars. The Council shall
adopt a resolution establishing the total maximum property tax dollars that may
be certified for levy that includes taxes for City government purposes under
Code of Iowa Section 384.1, for the City’s trust and agency fund under Code of
Iowa Section 384.6, Subsection 1, for the City’s emergency fund under Code of
Iowa Section 384.8, and for the levies authorized under Code of Iowa Section
384.12, Subsections 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 21, but excluding additions
approved at election under Code of Iowa Section 384.12, Subsection 19.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.15A)
      A.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
resolution before the date for adoption of the resolution and shall publish
notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
      B.   If the City has an internet site, the notice shall also be posted
and clearly identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning
on the date of the newspaper publication or public posting, as applicable.
Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on one or more
social media applications, the public hearing notice or an electronic link to
the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such account on the same day
as the publication of the notice. All of the following shall be included in the
notice:
         (1)   The sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property taxes
certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection and the
current fiscal year’s combined property tax levy rate for such amount that is
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
         (2)   The effective tax rate calculated using the sum of the current
fiscal year’s actual property taxes certified for levy under the levies
specified in this subsection, applicable to taxable property in the City other
than property used and assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
         (3)   The sum of the proposed maximum property tax dollars that may be
certified for levy for the budget year under the levies specified in this
subsection and the proposed combined property tax levy rate for such amount
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
         (4)   If the proposed maximum property tax dollars specified under
Subparagraph (3) exceed the current fiscal year’s actual property tax dollars
certified for levy specified in Subparagraph (1), a statement of the major
reasons for the increase.
Proof of publication shall be filed with and preserved by the County Auditor.
The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the public hearing
notice for cities and the form for the resolution to be adopted by the Council
under Paragraph C of this subsection.
      C.   At the public hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written
objections from any resident or property owner of the City. After all
objections have been received and considered, the Council may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed maximum property tax dollar amount for inclusion in the
resolution and shall adopt the resolution and file the resolution with the
County Auditor as required under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3.
      D.   If the sum of the maximum property tax dollars for the budget year
specified in the resolution under the levies specified in this subsection
exceeds 102 percent of the sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property
taxes certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection, the
Council shall be required to adopt the resolution by a two-thirds majority of
the membership of the Council.
      E.   If the City has an internet site, in addition to filing the
resolution with the Auditor under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3,
the adopted resolution shall be posted and clearly identified on the City’s
internet site for public viewing within 10 days of approval by the Council. The
posted resolution for a budget year shall continue to be accessible for public
viewing on the internet site along with resolutions posted for all subsequent
budget years.
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until adoption of the resolution
required under Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before March 31 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection and a copy of the resolution adopted under Subsection 4 of this
section must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and City Clerk and have a copy posted at one of the places designated for
the posting of notices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing or the applicable amount specified in the resolution adopted
under Subsection 4 of this section. Two copies each of the detailed budget as
adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the City
Administrator, Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem following Council approval, except as
provided by Subsection 5 hereof. Two signatures are required on all City checks
over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the City Administrator, Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem to issue checks for immediate
payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of
discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such
payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and
in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.
The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment
so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills,
contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed
with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 8
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
 
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
233           November 11, 1986 Urban Renewal Area I
292           May 25, 1999      Garner Urban Renewal Area 1999-1
328           June 10, 2003     Garner Urban Renewal Area 2003-1
367           November 27, 2007 2007 Addition to Garner Urban Renewal Area #1
373           November 25, 2008 2008 Addition to Garner Urban Renewal Area #1
401           November 26, 2013 2013 Amendment to Garner Urban Renewal Area
419           December 13, 2016 Garner Urban Renewal Area
428           October 24, 2017  2017 Amendment to the Garner Urban Renewal Area
467           May 9, 2023       May 2023 Addition to the Garner Urban Renewal
                                Area
 
CHAPTER 9
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
 
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
233           November 11, 1986 Revitalization Area No. 1
288           February 9, 1999  Garner Revitalization Area
375           January 26, 2009  Garner Revitalization Area
                               
                               
 
CHAPTER 10
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
 
10.01 Purpose     10.04 Effective Date
10.02 Definitions 10.05 Application
10.03 Eligibility  
 
10.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption for
speculative shell buildings constructed by community development organizations,
not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa,
or for-profit entities for speculative purposes in accordance with Section
427.1 of the Code of Iowa.
10.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, definitions found in Section 427.1[27] of the
Code of Iowa will apply.
10.03   ELIGIBILITY.
   The new construction of shell buildings by the community development
organization, not-for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the
Code of Iowa, or for-profit entity for speculative purposes is eligible for
property tax exemption. The exemption shall be for one of the following:
   1.   The value added by new construction of a shell building or addition to
an existing building or structure.
   2.   The value of an existing building being reconstructed or renovated, and
the value of the land on which the building is located, if the reconstruction
or renovation constitutes complete replacement or refitting of the existing
building or structure.
10.04   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   1.   If the exemption is for a project described in Subsection 1 of Section
10.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the
building is first assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in
which the addition to an existing building first adds value. If the exemption
is for a project described in Subsection 2 of Section
10.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year following the
assessment year in which the project commences. An exemption allowed under this
section shall be allowed for all subsequent years until the property is leased
or sold or until the exemption is terminated by ordinance of the City Council.
   2.   Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be
determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. However, an exemption shall
not be granted for a speculative shell building of a not-for-profit cooperative
association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or a for-profit entity if the
building is used by the cooperative association or for-profit entity or a
subsidiary or majority owners thereof for other than as a speculative shell
building. If the shell building or any portion of the shell building is leased
or sold, the portion of the shell building that is leased or sold and a
proportionate share of the land on which it is located, if applicable, shall
not be entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent years. Upon
the sale of the shell building, the shell building shall be considered new
construction for purposes of Section 427B.1 of the Code of Iowa if used for
purposes set forth in Section 427B.1.
10.05   APPLICATION.
   1.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 1 of Section
10.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427B.4 of the Code of
Iowa.
   2.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 2 of Section
10.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427.1[27] of the Code
of Iowa.
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments       
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give
direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment
or resolution within fourteen days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the
reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Mayor also appoints, with
Council approval, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   1.   Police Chief
   2.   Library Board of Trustees
   3.   Community Education Center Board
   4.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
   5.   Parks and Recreation Board
   6.   Veterans Memorial Recreation Center Building Commission
   7.   Revolving Loan Fund Boards
   8.   Visual Improvement Program Design Review Board
   9.   Vision Committee
15.04   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Mayor is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
year, plus forty dollars ($40.00) for each special Council meeting at which the
Mayor presides, and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each meeting attended as a
committee liaison member or meeting relating to City interests.
   Effective January 1, 2022
   The salary of the Mayor is three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00)
per year, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each special Council meeting at which
the Mayor presides, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting attended
as a committee liaison member or meeting relating to City interests.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the
Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the
Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and
upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five (5) Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based
upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])
   4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
   6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements
and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure
must be recorded. A measure that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage
shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s
veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-
thirds of all of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of
passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a
summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days
after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided
within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
   “All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does
not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the
Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council can compel
the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
   1.   City Administrator
   2.   City Clerk
   3.   City Attorney
   4.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   5.   Zoning Administrator
17.06   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of each Council member is nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00)
per year, plus forty dollars ($40.00) for each special Council meeting
attended, and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each meeting attended as a committee
liaison member or meeting relating to City interests.
   Effective January 1, 2022
   The salary of each Council member one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200.00) per year, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each special council
meeting attended, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting attended as
a committee liaison member or meeting relating to City interests.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication                  18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures              
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
   The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances,
and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
   Within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting, the Clerk
shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such
publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all
receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05   PUBLICATION.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than twenty (20) days before the date of
the election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFY MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating
to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public
bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real
property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by
ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of
the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFY APPOINTEES.
   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their position and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of
which are the words “GARNER, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words
“CITY SEAL.”
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation 19.04 Boards and Commissions
 
19.01   APPOINTMENT.
   The City Clerk shall serve as the City Treasurer and shall perform all
functions required of the position of Treasurer.
19.02   COMPENSATION.
   The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of
the Treasurer.
19.03   DUTIES OF TREASURER.
   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
   2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
   4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
   5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by
the Treasurer from special assessments.
   6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
   7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of
each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
   8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
   9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
19.04   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   The City Treasurer is the Treasurer of the Library Board of Trustees and
pays out all money under control of such board on orders signed by the Chairs
and Secretary of such Board, but receives no additional compensation for such
services.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City            20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.08 Prepare Documents
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may
desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving
an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, City Administrator, or Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms
and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
21.01 Office Created 21.04 Residency Requirement
21.02 Compensation   21.05 Bond
21.03 Duties          
 
21.01   OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of City Administrator. The office shall
be filled by a resolution adopted by a majority of the entire Council. The
person so appointed shall serve at the discretion of the Council and may be
appointed by resolution for a contract term not to exceed three (3) years at a
time. The City Administrator shall be subject to removal by a resolution
adopted by a majority vote of the entire Council. The qualifications for the
position include competency through education or experience to perform the
duties imposed upon the City Administrator by Section
21.03 of this chapter.
21.02   COMPENSATION.
   The compensation for the City Administrator, including expenses, shall be in
an amount and in the form as may from time to time be fixed by the Council by
resolution. The Council is hereby authorized, in its discretion, to enter into
employment contracts with the City Administrator as may be necessary for his or
her employment.
21.03   DUTIES.
   The duties of the City Administrator include the following:
   1.   Manage and supervise all departments and offices of the City to achieve
goals within available resources.
   2.   Plan and organize workloads and staff assignments.
   3.   Train, motivate and evaluate assigned staff and review progress and
direct changes as needed.
   4.   Provide leadership and direction in the development of short and long
range plans.
   5.   Gather, interpret and prepare data for studies, reports and
recommendations.
   6.   Provide professional advice to the Council and supervisors and make
presentations to the Council, Boards and the general public.
   7.   Assure that assigned areas of responsibility are performed within
budget; monitor revenues and expenditures; prepare annual budget requests and
assure effective and efficient use of budgeted funds, personnel, materials,
facilities and time.
   8.   Determine work procedures, work schedules and work flow; study and
standardize procedures to improve efficiency and effectiveness of operations.
   9.   Issue written and oral instructions and assign duties and examine work
for exactness, neatness and conformance to policies and procedures.
   10.   Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Council.
   11.   Appoint and remove employees of the City with the approval of the
Council.
   12.   Work with engineers and consultants in planning, scheduling and
contract compliance on City projects.
   13.   Work with City Attorney on legal matters.
   14.   Facilitate economic development (industry, commercial and residential)
activities for the City and other involved agencies and organizations.
   15.   Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the
City and supervise all purchases of materials and supplies for City operations.
   16.   Keep the Council fully advised of financial and other conditions and
make periodic reports in writing to the Council.
21.04   RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   The City Administrator shall, no later than sixty (60) days after
appointment, become a resident of the City, and continued residency shall be a
requirement for continued employment with the City.
21.05   BOND.
   The City Administrator shall be bonded for the performance of all duties in
favor of the City, in an amount to be determined by the Council by resolution,
but in no event shall the bond be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
The City shall pay the cost of the bond.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees       22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board        22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties                22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
 
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   The public library for the City is known as the Garner Public Library. It is
referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
shall consists of six (6) resident members and one non-resident member. All
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
   All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents
of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a bona fide citizen
and resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total
number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident
Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or
into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such
member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except
in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies
in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment
except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve
as Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board.
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian
to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that
prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds vote of
the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for
the care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the
Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by
the City by action against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
(5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
   The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08   EXPENDITURES.
   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of
fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.
22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to
the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11   THEFT.
   No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12   NOTICE POSTED.
   There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:
   1.   Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2)
months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more
after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence
of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment
is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the
materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies                       
 
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of five (5) members appointed by the Council. The
Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any
elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five (5) years.
The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one
year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise,
a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 24
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
 
24.01 Parks and Recreation Board Created 24.04 Reports
24.02 Board Organization                 24.05 Rules
24.03 Duties of the Board                24.06 Penalties
 
24.01   PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD CREATED.
   A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise on and recommend to
the Council the needed facilities to provide open space such as parks,
playgrounds and community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall
also plan and oversee City programs, subject to Council approval, and encourage
other programs to enhance the leisure time activities of the City’s residents
of all ages.
24.02   BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   The Board shall consist of five members. Four members must be residents of
the City and one person may be from outside of the City, appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council, for overlapping terms of three years. The
Board shall annually choose from its membership a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson. Members shall serve without compensation, but, at the discretion
of the Council, may receive reimbursement for expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment for the balance of the term.
24.03   DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   With Council approval, the Board has authority over parks and recreation
operations, subject to the limitation of expenditures for salaries and
supplies, contracts and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget
appropriated by the City Council for parks and recreation. The Board shall have
a duty to make plans for recreation programming and facilities, and revise and
update these plans as may be required from time to time. The Board shall
oversee the operations and maintenance of the Garner Aquatic Center, Recreation
Center and Park facilities. The Board shall cooperate with the City
Administrator in the oversight of personnel assigned to parks and recreation
operations. The Board shall oversee purchases made by City staff on behalf of
the parks and recreation operations, and assure that all applicable City
policies and procedures are followed.
24.04   REPORTS.
   The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from
time to time as it deems advisable, or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other
departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the
Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
24.05   RULES.
   The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use of parks
or other recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs,
subject to the approval of the rules by the Council. Such rules shall be either
posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate
notice to the using public.
24.06   PENALTIES.
   Violation of a rule which has been approved by the Council may be cause for
denial of use of the facility or participation in a program, but such denial
which extends for more than one day may be appealed to the Board or to the
Council for a hearing. The violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor if a
serious offense.
CHAPTER 25
COMMUNITY EDUCATION CENTER BOARD
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 465– Apr. 24 Supp)
CHAPTER 26
VMRC BUILDING COMMISSION
 
26.01 Veterans Memorial Recreation Center 26.03 Compensation and Vacancies
Building Commission
                                         26.04 Powers and Duties
26.02 Qualification and Appointment       26.05 Council Review of Contracts
 
26.01   VETERANS MEMORIAL RECREATION CENTER BUILDING COMMISSION.
   The Veterans Memorial Recreation Center Building Commission shall consist of
five members, with the Mayor and City Administrator as ex-officio members, and
shall be the custodian of the Veterans Memorial Recreation Center.
26.02   QUALIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT.
   Each Commissioner shall be an honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine,
airman, or Coast Guard member and a resident of the City. The Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered
terms of three (3) years.
26.03   COMPENSATION AND VACANCIES.
   Commission members shall receive no compensation for their services. A
vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.
26.04   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall oversee the maintenance of the Veterans Memorial
Recreation Center building, including the hiring of building maintenance
contractors, the monitoring of utility bills, the allocation of building
maintenance funds, and any long term lease agreements on the VMRC’s facilities.
The Commission shall also oversee veterans’ use of VMRC facilities, be
responsible for content of the veterans display case, and have control over the
use of the veterans meeting room. The Commission shall advise the Parks and
Recreation Board on matters related to the VMRC Building and appoint a
Commission member to serve on any future building expansion committees. The
Commission shall meet quarterly, select a Chairperson from among its members,
and keep minutes for their meetings.
26.05   COUNCIL REVIEW OF CONTRACTS.
   Contracts and agreements recommended by the Commission are subject to review
and approval by the Council, but when so approved and to the extent such
contact and agreements are otherwise valid by law, are valid and not voidable
by subsequent action of the City even if the Commission is dissolved, but no
such contract or agreement may conflict with the provisions of Division V,
Chapter 384, Code of Iowa, or Chapter 388, Code of Iowa, or any action taken
pursuant to the provision of the same.
CHAPTER 27
REVOLVING LOAN FUND BOARD
 
27.01 Board Created      27.03 Duties of the Board
27.02 Board Organization  
 
27.01   BOARD CREATED.
   A Revolving Loan Fund Board is hereby created to review applications for the
City’s Retail Revolving Loan Fund Program and Industrial/Commercial Revolving
Loan Fund Program, and to make recommendations to the City Council on the
lending of revolving loan funds.
27.02   BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   The Board shall consist of five (5) members from the Garner business
community appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for
overlapping three (3) year terms. The Board shall choose from its membership a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. Members shall serve without compensation but
may receive their actual expenses at the discretion of the Council. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
27.03   DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall review applications to the Revolving Loan Fund with respect
to the applicant’s business plan, financial pro-forma, credit history, business
history, business references, and loan collateral. The Board shall recommend to
the Council the amount of loan, length of loan, interest rate of loan, and
collateral and security of the loan.
CHAPTER 28
VISION COMMITTEE
 
28.01 Committee Created      28.03 Committee Duties
28.02 Committee Organization 28.04 Reports
 
28.01   COMMITTEE CREATED.
   The Vision Committee is hereby created to advise and recommend to the City
Council community beautification and enhancement projects and activities.
28.02   COMMITTEE ORGANIZATION.
   The Vision Committee shall consist of seven (7) members from the City and
rural community recommended by the Committee and appointed by the Mayor.
Members shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall annually choose
from its membership a Chairperson.
28.03   COMMITTEE DUTIES.
   The Vision Committee shall propose and carryout community beautification and
enhancement projects. All projects and activities on City property shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Council prior to commencement. The City may
provide funding for said projects and activities within the ability of its
annual budget.
28.04   REPORTS.
   The Committee shall make written reports to the City Council of its
activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request.
CHAPTER 29
VISUAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
 
29.01 Board Created      29.03 Duties of the Board
29.02 Board Organization  
 
29.01   BOARD CREATED.
   The Visual Improvement Program Design Review Board is hereby created to
advise and recommend to the City Council in relation to applications for
funding through the Visual Improvement Program (VIP).
29.02   BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   The Board shall consist of five members, appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council, for overlapping terms of three years. The Mayor shall
serve as Board Chairperson unless he or she designates a substitute, with
approval of the Council.
29.03   DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall review all applications for construction grant funding in a
timely manner to weigh eligibility and competitiveness under guidelines
established by the Council. The Board shall make recommendations to the
Council, with an emphasis on achieving the greatest return on investment for
the City’s tax dollars and the continued improvement of the appearance of the
City’s commercial zones.
CHAPTER 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
35.01 Department Established       35.06 Peace Officers Appointed
35.02 Organization                 35.07 Duties of Police Chief
35.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 35.08 Departmental Rules
35.04 Required Training            35.09 Summoning Aid
35.05 Compensation                 35.10 Taking Weapons
 
35.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The police department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
35.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
35.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
35.05   COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
35.06   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
   The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent
of a majority of the Council. Other members of the department shall be
appointed by the Council, except for the Police Sergeant, who shall be
appointed and serve at the discretion of the Police Chief, subject to Council
approval.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
35.07   DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the police chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and
materials of the department.
35.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code
of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.
35.09   SUMMONING AID.
   Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
35.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
CHAPTER 36
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
36.01 Establishment and Purpose       36.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
36.02 Organization                    36.09 Constitution
36.03 Qualifications, Appointment and 36.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
Removal
36.04 Training                        36.11 Liability Insurance
36.05 Compensation                    36.12 Calls Outside Fire District
36.06 Election of Officers            36.13 Mutual Aid
36.07 Fire Chief: Duties              36.14 Authority to Cite Violations
 
36.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
36.02   ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.03   QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department
until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the
Council members. In no case shall any person be recruited, selected or
appointed as a member of the department unless such person is a citizen of the
United States and a resident of the City or intends to become a resident upon
acceptance as a member of the department, except that at any given time up to
but not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the members of the department
may reside outside the corporate limits of the City, with further provision
that said members so residing outside the corporate limits shall nevertheless
each reside within a radius of eight (8) miles of the corporate limits of the
City so as to provide for appropriate response time to fires.
(Section 36.03 – Ord. 468 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
36.04   TRAINING.
   All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
36.05   COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.06   ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its
constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of the Fire Chief shall
be subject to the approval of the Council. In case of absence of the Fire
Chief, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all
the powers of Fire Chief.
36.07   FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES.
   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire
department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the
fire department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) has occurred as a
result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s
Division immediately. For all other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a
report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end
of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state
the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire,
the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of
the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
36.08   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
36.09   CONSTITUTION.
   The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated
to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
36.10   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
36.11   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or
members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
36.12   CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.
   The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
36.13   MUTUAL AID.
   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter
into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments.
Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
36.14   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
   Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.06 Vehicle Noise Limits
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to
that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct
any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent
or hinder its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])
   8.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
   9.   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during,
and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble together, with them
or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain
part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe
it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06   VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a public place or on any public
street, highway, alley or any parking lot in which a stereo, tape player,
compact disc player, radio or any other sound amplification device can be heard
a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the vehicle. The provisions of this
section may be enforced following personal observation/hearing of any police
officer or upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with the police department
by the person disturbed by such noise. The Police Chief may grant a temporary
variance to this section to facilitate special events, and the Police Chief is
specifically authorized to revoke a variance if the applicant fails to meet any
of the limitations placed upon the variance and/or other circumstances occur
subsequent to the granting of the variance requiring revocation.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.10 Barbed Wire and
                                                         Electric Fences
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.11 Discharging
Safety Entities                                          Weapons
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.14 Fireworks
                                                         41.15 Use of Lasers or
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    Simulated Laser
                                                         Devices
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.16 Possession of
Device                                                   Paint Balls and Paint
                                                         Ball Guns
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators              41.17 Electronic
                                                         Cigarette
41.09 Antenna and Radio Wires                             
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
   No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or
she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, or a person
performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the Code of Iowa,
in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or
authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, or person performing bailiff duties, or shall knowingly resist or
obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or
criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as
used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal
harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to
execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind
or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns,
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway
or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
   The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City are subject to the
following:
   1.   Definition. “Fireworks” or “Consumer Fireworks” as used in this
section, shall mean those items listed or referred to under the definition of
“First-Class Consumer Fireworks” and “Second-Class Consumer Fireworks” as set
forth under Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Use of Consumer Fireworks.
      A.   Except as provided in Subsection B, no person shall use, explode, or
discharge any consumer fireworks within the City limits.
      B.   Pursuant to Iowa Code Section 364.2 and amendments enacted in Senate
File 303 (2025), the use of consumer fireworks shall be permitted as follows
and may not be further restricted:
         (1)   July 3 from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., or until 11:00 p.m. if July
3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday.
         (2)   July 4 from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
         (3)   December 31 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. on January 1 of the
following year.
      C.   The use of consumer fireworks on any dates or times not listed in
Subsection B remains prohibited within the City.
   3.   Fireworks Permit for Display.
      A.   Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks shall be conducted by a
licensed pyrotechnic professional after issuance of the fireworks display
permit by the City. Applications shall have attached thereto proof of insurance
with limits not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00
aggregate.
      B.   No person shall use, explode, discharge, possess or display
fireworks or consumer fireworks on any publicly owned property unless
authorized under this section.
   4.   Fireworks Permit for Sale.
      A.   No person, retailer, consumer group or otherwise shall sell or display
any fireworks without possessing a consumer fireworks seller license as
required under Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The sale or display of fireworks shall only occur within permanent
primary structures located in the C-2 Highway Business District, I-1 Light
Industrial, and I-2 Heavy Industrial zoning districts, and between June 1st and
July 8th and December 10th and January 3rd. No sale or display of fireworks
shall occur on or within the following:
         (1)   Schools, child day care centers, day nurseries, and nursing
schools.
         (2)   Nursing homes, adult day care centers, hospitals, and medical
clinics.
         (3)   Gasoline, diesel, propane storage, and sales facilities.
   5.   Enforcement.
      A.   The Chief of Police or designees is charged with the duty of
enforcing these provisions.
      B.   The penalty for violation of this chapter shall include confiscation
or destruction of any fireworks or consumer fireworks and in addition fines up
to and including $500.00 per violation or in amounts not to exceed those
allowed for a municipal infraction.
      C.   The Police Department or Fire Department is authorized to enforce
said violation(s) as a municipal infraction as set forth in this Code of
Ordinances.
(Section 41.14 – Ord. 475 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
41.15   USE OF LASERS OR SIMULATED LASER DEVICES.
   1.   Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly
indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of
this section, have the following meanings.
      A.   “Laser” means any pointing device, siting device or other device
that converts incident electromagnetic radiation of mixed frequencies to one or
more discrete frequencies of highly amplified and coherent visible radiation.
      B.   “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
      C.   “Simulated laser” means any pointing device, siting device or other
device that emits a beam of light similar in effect or appearance to that of a
laser.
      D.   “Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a street, including a “motor
vehicle,” “motorcycle” or “bicycle.”
   2.   Pointing of Lasers at Individuals. No person shall use a laser or
simulated laser in such a manner as to cause the beam of such laser or
simulated laser to come into direct contact with another individual. A
violation of this provision may be classified as an “assault” under Section
40.01 of this Code of Ordinances or as “harassment” under Section
40.02 of this Code of Ordinances, and shall be punishable accordingly.
   3.   Pointing of Lasers at a Police Officer. No person shall use a laser or
simulated laser in such a manner as to cause the beam of such laser or
simulated laser to come into direct contact with a police officer employed by
the City, or any other police officer or law enforcement official on duty
within the City. A violation of this provision shall be classified as an
“assault” under Section
40.01 or “harassment” under Section
40.02 of this Code of Ordinances and shall be punishable accordingly.
   4.   Pointing of Lasers at a Vehicle. No person shall use a laser or
simulated laser in such a manner as to cause the beam of such laser or
simulated laser to come into direct contact with a vehicle. For purposes of
this provision, the term “vehicle” includes only those vehicles being operated
on a public street at the time it comes into contact with any laser or
simulated laser. A violation of this provision shall be classified as
“harassment” under Section
40.02 of this Code of Ordinances and shall be punishable accordingly.
   5.   Pointing of Lasers at a Police Vehicle. No person shall use a laser or
simulated laser in such a manner as to cause the beam of such laser or
simulated laser to come into direct contact with a vehicle being operated by a
police officer employed by the City, or a vehicle being operated by any other
police officer or law enforcement official on duty within the City. A violation
of this provision shall be classified as “harassment” under Section
40.02 of this Code of Ordinances. Any person found guilty of violating this
provision shall be punished with the maximum fine and jail time allowed by law.
   6.   Pointing of Lasers at a Public Building, Residence or Occupied
Structure. No person shall use a laser or simulated laser in such a manner as
to cause the beam of such laser or simulated laser to come into direct contact
with any public building owned or operated by the City, or any other
governmental entity or residence or occupied structure in the City. A violation
of this provision shall be classified as “harassment” under Section
40.02 of this Code of Ordinances. Any person found guilty of violating this
provision shall be punished with the maximum fine and jail time allowed by law.
   7.   Use of Lasers by Minors. No person shall furnish to any minor by gift,
sale or otherwise, any laser or simulated laser unless: (i) Said minor is on
the property of a school or other educational facility and actually
participating in a supervised school program at the time the minor is given
actual possession of the laser or simulated laser; or (ii) said minor is using
the laser or simulated laser on private property and in the direct supervision
of an adult.
41.16   POSSESSION OF PAINT BALLS AND PAINT BALL GUNS.
   1.   Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly
indicates a different intention, for the purposes of this section, the
following terms have these meanings:
      A.   “Course” means any designated area within the City that has been
registered with the Police Chief for use as a paint ball recreational area to
use paint ball guns.
      B.   “Paint ball” means any projectile containing paint, liquid dye or
other colored liquid used in paint ball guns.
      C.   “Paint ball gun” means any gun or device used to fire paint balls at
any object.
   2.   Possession of Paint Balls and Paint Ball Guns. No person shall have in
his or her possession a paint ball gun or paint balls unless said items are
being transported to an approved course within the City or to be used outside
the City limits. If transported in an automobile, said guns shall be stored in
the trunk of said vehicle or behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk.
   3.   Pointing of Paint Ball Guns at Individuals or Properties. No person
shall point a paint ball gun at any individual, occupied structure or occupied
building, or discharge paint balls by use of a paint ball gun, throwing paint
balls or otherwise causing paint balls to come into contact with any other
persons or property. A violation of this provision constitutes either assault
under Section 40.01 of this Code of Ordinances or criminal mischief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 715.1)
41.17   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE.
   It is illegal to use an electronic cigarette in any smoke-free place where
Chapter 142D of the Code of Iowa prohibits a smoking product. Electronic
cigarette means vapor product as defined in Section 453A.1(28) of the Code of
Iowa.
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Signs
42.04 Unauthorized Entry                42.08 Other Public Property Offenses
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft. A person commits theft when
the person does any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
   1.   Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in
the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof.
   2.   Misappropriates property that the person has in trust or property of
another which the person has in his or her possession or control, whether such
possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it in a
manner that is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the owner’s
rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates such
property to the person’s own use, when the owner of such property is known to
the person.
   3.   Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession,
control, or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of
property of another, by deception.
   4.   Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have
been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been
stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or
to deliver it to an appropriate public officer.
   5.   Takes, destroys, conceals, or disposes of property in which someone
else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party.
   6.   Makes, utters, draws, delivers, or gives any check, share draft, draft,
or written order on any bank, credit union, person or corporation, and obtains
property, the use of property, including rental property, or service in
exchange for such instrument, if the person knows that such check, share draft,
draft or written order will not be paid when presented.
   7.   Obtains gas, electricity, or water from a public utility or obtains
cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the
supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing, or
tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate
readings.
   8.   Knowingly and without authorization accesses or causes to be accessed a
computer, computer system or computer network, or any part thereof, for the
purpose of obtaining computer services, information, or property or knowingly
and without authorization and with the intent to permanently deprive the owner
of possession, takes, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of a computer,
computer system, or computer network or any computer software or computer
program, or computer data contained in a computer, computer system, or computer
network.
   9.   Obtains the temporary use of video rental property with the intent to
deprive the owner of the use and possession of the video rental property
without the consent of the owner, or lawfully obtains the temporary use of
video rental property and fails to return the video rental property by the
agreed time with the intent to deprive the owner of the use and possession of
the video rental property without the consent of the owner. The aggregate value
of the video rental property involved shall be the original retail value of the
video rental property.
   10.   Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of the Code of
Iowa.
42.07   SIGNS.
   It is unlawful to place or erect any sign on any public property, public
right-of-way, parking area or boulevard, except as listed below, and provided
that they do not obstruct any corner sight distance.
   1.   No signs of any type will be allowed on the Boulevard.
   2.   Temporary business signs are allowed to be placed in the parking area.
   3.   Non-business signs will be allowed in the parking area for no more than
a 72-hour period.
42.08   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   Chapter 22 – Library
      A.   Section
22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section
22.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
      A.   Section
105.07 – Littering Prohibited
   3.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section
136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section
136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section
136.16 – Defacing
      D.   Section
136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section
136.18 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section
136.19 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
43.01 Purpose                      43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   43.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
43.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent
to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
   The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the
term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
   Drug Paraphernalia means all equipment, products, or materials of any kind
used or attempted to be used in combination with a controlled substance, except
those items used in combination with the lawful use of a controlled substance,
to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do any of the following:
   1.   Manufacture of controlled substance.
   2.   Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance.
   3.   Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
   4.   Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture,
deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia. Drug paraphernalia does not
included hypodermic needles or syringes if manufactured, delivered, sold, or
possessed for lawful purposes.
43.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
   1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
   2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
   3.   Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space,
to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   4.   Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
   5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
   6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
   9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
   10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
   11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
   15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age            45.04 Public Possession of Open
                                         Container
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication 45.05 Social Host
45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles  45.06 Enforcement
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   1.   Definitions. As used in this section, “legal age” means twenty-one (21)
years of age or more.  The terms “alcoholic beverage,” “alcoholic liquor,”
“beer,” and “wine” are defined in Section 123.3 of the Code of Iowa. The word
“consume” refers to the ingestion of (or physical condition of having ingested)
any substance.
   2.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
   3.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from
any liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from
kindergarten through grade twelve.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   [See Section
62.01(49) and (50) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   PUBLIC POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER.
   Except as provided in Section
47.08, a person shall not possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage,
including but not limited to liquor, wine, or beer, on City property.
(Section 45.04 – Ord. 464 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
45.05   SOCIAL HOST.
   1.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following words, terms, and
phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      A.   “Adult person” means any person age 18 or older.
      B.   “Alcoholic beverage” means any beverage containing more than one-
half of one percent of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and
beer.
      C.   “Event, gathering, or party” means any group of three or more
persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social event or activity
where an underage person has consumed or possessed an alcoholic beverage and/or
an illicit drug.
      D.   “Illicit drug” means any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by
law, including drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of
or used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
      E.   “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile: (i) as
a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent; (ii) as a legal guardian; or
(iii) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
      F.   “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
      G.   “Premises” means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room. park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
      H.   “Social host” means any person who aids, assists, conducts, allows,
entertains, organizes, supervises, controls, or permits an event, gathering or
party. This includes, but is not limited to:
         (1)   The person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of
the premises where the event, gathering or party takes place;
         (2)   The person in charge of the premises; or
         (3)   The person who organized the event. If the social host is a
juvenile, then the parents of that juvenile will be jointly and severally
liable for any violation of this section.
      I.   “Underage person” means any individual under the age of 21.
   2.   Prohibited Acts. It is unlawful for any social host to host an event,
gathering, or party on premises when the person knows or reasonably should know
that an underage person has consumed an alcoholic beverage or illicit drug, or
possessed an alcoholic beverage or illicit drug with the intent to consume it,
and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or
consumption by the underage person. A social host who hosts such an event,
gathering or party does not have to be present at the time the prohibited act
takes place. A social host has an affirmative defense if the social host took
reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcohol, or
notified and allowed law enforcement to enter the premises for the purpose of
stopping illegal activities.
   3.   Exceptions; Protections. This section does not apply to conduct solely
between an underage person and his or her parents in the parents’ household, to
legally protected religious observances, and to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs
during the course and scope of employment. The exceptions outlined shall not
apply under circumstances in which the underage person leaves home, a religious
gathering, or place of employment and subsequently violates Section 123.46[2]
of the Code of Iowa. This subsection also protects adults whose children (18-
21) host a party containing alcohol and or illicit drugs, when they are unaware
it is taking place (on vacation, etc.).
   4.   Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by
officers of the Garner Police Department primarily or by any other law
enforcement agency, (municipal, county or state) which may be assisting the
Police Department in the scope of their duties.
   5.   Violations; Penalties. Violations of this section are declared to be
municipal infractions. A $500.00 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social
host’s first offense. A $750.00 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social
host’s second offense. A $1,000.00 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social
host’s third or subsequent offense. In determining if a violation charged is a
second or subsequent offense, conviction for violation of this section, Section
123.47 of the Code of Iowa, or an ordinance of any city or county in the State
of Iowa that substantially corresponds to this section or Section 123.47 of the
Code of Iowa shall be counted as previous offenses.
45.06   ENFORCEMENT.
Violation of any section of this chapter, except as provided in Section
45.05, is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
(Section 45.06 – Ord. 464 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco  
 
46.01   CURFEW.
   A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as
follows:
   1.   Definition. The term “minor” means in this section, any unmarried
person below the age of eighteen (18) years.
   2.   Time Limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of
the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of:
      A.   11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
evenings to 5:00 a.m. of the following morning; and
      B.   12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday evenings to 5:00 a.m. of the
following morning.
   3.   Exceptions. The restriction provided by Section 46.01(2) shall not
apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or other person
charged with the care and custody of such minor, or other responsible person
over eighteen (18) years of age, nor shall the restriction apply to any minor
who is traveling between his or her home or place of residence and the place
where any approved employment, church, municipal or school function is being
held.
   4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit
such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business, or
amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by Section
46.01(2), except as otherwise provided in Section
46.01(3).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 613.16)
   5.   Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is unlawful for any
persons operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor
to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated by them within the
curfew hours set by Section
46.01(2) except as otherwise provided in Section
46.01(3).
   6.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody,
the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as
soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the
minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such
time as the court may direct. If the minor is issued a citation to appear for a
violation of this section, a law enforcement officer shall notify the adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible, within twenty-four (24) hours of
the violation.
   7.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation
by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail, send to the
adult responsible for the minor, or by personal service upon the adult
responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that
any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable
penalties.
   8.   Responsible Adult’s or Minor’s Second Violation. Any violation of the
provisions of this section by a minor or responsible adult constitutes a simple
misdemeanor.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco product.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under eighteen (18)
years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                47.06 Parks Closed
47.02 Parks Identified       47.07 Animals in Parks
47.03 Use of Drives Required 47.08 Alcoholic Beverages and Glass Bottles
47.04 Fires                  47.09 Smoking Prohibited
47.05 Littering               
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   PARKS IDENTIFIED.
   The City of Garner’s parks are Cardinal Park, Central Park, Pool Park,
Ollenburg Park, Reichardt Park, and Tourist Park.
47.03   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.04   FIRES.
   No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.
47.05   LITTERING.
   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.
47.06   PARKS CLOSED.
   No person shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
47.07   ANIMALS IN PARKS.
   No animal shall be allowed in a City park unless it is attached to a leash
not more than ten (10) feet in length and of sufficient strength to restrain
the animal when the leash is held by a person capable of restraining and
controlling the animal. Leashes are not required in designated dog parks.
47.08   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND GLASS BOTTLES.
   Wine and beer, not including keg beer, is allowed in City parks during open
hours as defined in Section
47.06 and shall be in a non-glass container.
(Section 47.08 – Ord. 464– Apr. 24 Supp.)
47.09   SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking is prohibited in all City parks and recreation areas.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited    
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   4.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   5.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
   6.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
   7.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   8.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the City.
   9.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
   10.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly
established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial
navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure
constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   11.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on
or permitted to the disturbance of others.
   12.   Branch/Brush Collection. Placing branches or brush in the street curb
area for collection more than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the Friday pickup
date.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
   2.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
   3.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
   4.   Trees (See
Chapter 151)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section
50.07.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
   Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: 3   
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the
City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual
installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates
provided for assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
3 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the
requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to
municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance  
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel
or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware,
plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked
firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   2.   “Junk Vehicle” means any vehicle located within the corporate limits of
the City and not capable of being driven from the place of its location under
its own power without the addition of parts or repairs thereon, or any vehicle
not equipped with four inflated tires, or any vehicle not licensed for the
current year. “Junk vehicle” also includes any vehicle which has become the
habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or insects or any
vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety. A vehicle with any of the
following characteristics may also be considered a junk vehicle:
      A.   Has been placed on private property without the consent of the owner
or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours; or
      B.   Lacks an engine or other structural parts which renders the vehicle
totally inoperable; or
      C.   Has a broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight or taillight,
or any other cracked or broken glass; or
      D.   Has a broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering
wheel or trunk lid; or
      E.   Contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel; or
      F.   Because of its defective or obsolete condition, or in any other way,
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on
any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within a garage or other enclosed structure.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate abatement procedures as
outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 52
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
52.01 Definitions                     52.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
52.02 Authority to Take Possession of 52.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                    Vehicles
52.03 Notice by Mail                  52.08 Proceeds from Sales
52.04 Notification in Newspaper       52.09 Duties of Demolisher
52.05 Fees for Impoundment             
 
52.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or
more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a
police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
52.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority
may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private
entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person
in control of private property may employ a private entity that is a garage
keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into
custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a
police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the
police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses
of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
52.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
   The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other
known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle,
addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the abandoned
vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed.
The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set
forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform
the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and
personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice
upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from
placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The
notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants
to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants
of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and
that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to
the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a
demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If
the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a
police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity
may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of
Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity
hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming
rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the
planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or
private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to
contest those matters. If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing
or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer
have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the
expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
52.04   NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.
   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Section
52.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles
and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements
and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section
52.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
52.05   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay five dollars ($5.00) if claimed
within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional
day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or
towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle
shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage
charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
52.06   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or
not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
52.07   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
52.08   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner
of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then
shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any
vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police
authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
52.09   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate
issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 53
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 
53.01 Purpose                              53.04 Definitions
53.02 Interpretation                       53.05 Maintenance Standards
53.03 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. 53.06 Violations
 
53.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety, welfare,
esthetics and property values by establishing minimum standards for
maintenance, appearance, condition, and occupancy, and for essential utilities,
facilities, and other physical components and conditions to make residential
premises fit for human habitation, and to make non- residential premises fit
for use according to the purpose for which they were developed; by fixing
certain responsibilities and duties upon the owners and managers, and distinct
and separate responsibilities and duties upon the occupants; by authorizing and
establishing penalties for violations; and providing for proper repair,
demolition, or vacation of premises which do not comply with this Code.
53.02   INTERPRETATION.
   This provision of this Code shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal for any other power
granted by the Code of Iowa. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to
abrogate the Federal or State Constitutions, nor to grant power to the City
that are otherwise reserved by or for Federal and State government.
53.03   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not the intent of this Code to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law. Where two or more provisions apply the higher standard
shall prevail.
53.04   DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in the Code shall have the same meaning as that defined by the
Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise defined by this Code.
   1.   Abandoned Building. Any building or portion of a building under
construction which has stood with an incomplete exterior shell for more than
one year, or a building under construction, which has not had any work
performed for a period of 90 days, or any completed building or portion thereof
which has stood unoccupied for longer than six months.
   2.   Deterioration. A state of conditions caused by lack of maintenance or
excessive use, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling paint,
rusting, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect.
   3.   Enforcement Officer. The City Administrator or other City staff as may
be assigned.
   4.   Exposed to Public View. Any premises or any part thereof which may be
lawfully viewed by the public or from adjoining premises.
   5.   Exterior. Yards and other open outdoor spaces on premises, and the
external surfaces of any structure.
   6.   Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and
vermin.
   7.   Infestation. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests
on the premise to the extent that they constitute a health hazard, are deemed
by an Enforcement Officer to be in threat of spreading to adjoining premises or
are exposed to public view.
   8.   Junk. All old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rages, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris,
waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and
appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances, iron, steel or
other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tin ware, plastic
or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood
located on a side yard or rear yard is not considered junk.
   9.   Nuisance. Physical conditions that are dangerous or detrimental to the
health or safety of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist,
or anything that is injurious to the senses or interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.
   10.   Owner. Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others, holds
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof.
   11.   Premises. A lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land, contiguous and under
common ownership or control, together with the buildings and structures
thereon.
   12.   Public Authority. Any officer or any department or branch of the City,
County, or State charged with regulating health, fire, zoning, building
regulations, public safety or other activities concerning property in the City.
   13.   Refuse. Any material that has lost its value for the original purpose
for which it was created or manufactured, or for its resigned use, whether
putrescible or non-putrescible, combustible or non-combustible, which is not
securely stored in a building or legal outdoor storage yard for prompt disposal
or resale, including, but not limited to junk; paper or cardboard; plastic,
metals; glass; yard clippings, leaves, woody vegetative trimmings, and other
plant wastes which have not been properly composted; vegetable or animal waste
resulting from handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or
consumption of food crockery; bedding, furniture, or appliances; offal;
rubbish; ashes or incinerator residue; construction debris; accumulation of
animal feces; dead animals; or wastes from commercial or industrial processes.
   14.   Responsible Party. Any person having possession, charge, care, or
control of real or personal property, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner, including without limitation any one or more of the
following: owner, agent, property manager, contract purchaser, mortgagee or
vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or tenant, or any
other person, firm or corporation exercising apparent control over a property.
53.05   MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   1.   General. The exterior of every premises and structure shall be
maintained in good repair, to that end the premises and structures thereon
shall be preserved; adjoining properties protected from blighting influences;
and safety and fire hazards eliminated.
   2.   Maintenance of Premises. Each and every premise shall be kept free or
all nuisances, health, safety, and fire hazards, unsanitary conditions, and
infestation. It shall be the duty of the responsible party to keep the premises
free of all said conditions and to promptly remove and abate same, which
include but are not limited to the following declared nuisances:
      A.   Weeds or grasses allowed to grow to a height greater than eight
inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds or grass on any non-
farm property. This provision shall not apply to prairies, wetlands, or similar
area of naturalized perennial vegetation which are certified by an Enforcement
Officer to not constitute a nuisance.
      B.   No person shall permit garbage or recyclable materials to accumulate
upon premises owned or occupied by him or; nor shall any person deposit any
garbage or recyclable materials upon any other premises unless such person has
been authorized by the owner of the premises to deposit such materials there.
      C.   Any structure, which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is
unfit for human habitation or the use for which it was constructed; kept in
such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people
residing therein or in the vicinity thereof; or any structure defined as that
is defined as abandoned or a public nuisance by Chapter 657A, Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any nuisance as defined herein or described as such by Chapter 657
of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   Any alteration, modification, or obstruction which prevents,
obstructs or impedes the normal flow of runoff from adjacent lands, or any
alteration or modification which substantially concentrates or increases the
flow of water onto an adjoining premises to the extent of damaging or
saturating such premises.
      F.   Conditions which are conducive to the accumulation of weeds,
vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rodent
harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or
conditions on a premise which constitutes a fire, health or safety hazard.
      G.   Fences or retaining walls that are not structurally sound or which
are deteriorating, as may be evidenced by leaning or loose elements.
   3.   Building Maintenance. All buildings shall be maintained to be weather
and watertight. Broken windows, holes in roofs, missing bricks or blocks,
missing joint mortar, and missing siding shall be replaced with similar
materials to maintain the weather and watertight properties of the structure.
All wood including floorboards, decking, subfloors, joists, rafters, roof
sheathing, and siding shall be replaced when missing, rotted or damaged.
Materials and practices used in reconstruction and residing shall be of
standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character of house or
building. Their appearance, as judged under prevailing appraisal practices and
standards. Owners or responsible parties shall not use materials which would
depreciate the value of adjoining premises or the neighborhood. Painted
surfaces shall be maintained or repainted so that an individual wall surface
does not have peeling or missing paint in areas in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of that individual surface area. If a building appears not to meet the
standards set out above, the City may hire a construction contractor
experienced in housing or building construction to determine what work needs to
be completed to repair the building, and the building owner shall allow access
to the interior to do a full inspection as to the soundness of the structure.
53.06   VIOLATIONS.
   1.   Inspection Report. Whenever the City Administrator or other designated
City officer is informed that a nuisance or other condition exists which is
listed in this chapter, he or she shall provide that an inspection report be
prepared within a reasonable time and given to the Mayor and Council. The
report shall contain, but not be limited to:
      A.   A legal description of the property and a site map, if applicable.
      B.   Photos and a description of the nuisance and conditions that exist
that caused the nuisance designation to be applied.
      C.   A statement of the acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
condition.
      D.   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
      E.   An estimate of the cost to abate the nuisance. If the abatement
notice is regarding a dilapidated or junk building, the inspection report shall
compare the cost of abatement with a projected cost of reconstruction of the
structure.
   2.   Abatement of Nuisance or Condition.
      A.   Voluntary Abatement. The objective of this Code being the abatement
of violations, person violating this Code shall, except in emergency
situations, be given notice of the violation and allowed a reasonable amount of
time to voluntarily remedy the violation before action to assess costs or
penalties for committing a municipal infraction are undertaken. Consideration
will be given to evidence of a good faith effort to correct the violation;
whether an imminent health or safety hazard exists; whether the person has
previously been notified of or charged with violations of a similar nature; and
other factors.
      B.   Emergency Condition. If the Enforcement Officer determines that an
emergency exists which creates a dangerous and imminent health or safety hazard
to person, property or the general public which requires immediate action, the
City may order such action as may be necessary to meet the emergency. Any
orders issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be effective immediately or in
the time and manner prescribed in the order itself.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
      C.   Procedure. Whenever Enforcement Officer finds that a nuisance or
other condition that is listed in this chapter exists, the Enforcement Officer
has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to utilize the
nuisance abatement procedure described in Chapter 50 of this Code or the
municipal infraction procedure described in Chapter 3 of this Code.
   3.   Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice. Any nuisance, public or
private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this Section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
      A.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain:
         (1)   A legal description of the property and a site map, if
applicable.
         (2)   Photos and a description of the nuisance and conditions that
exist that caused the nuisance designation to be applied.
         (3)   A statement of the acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
condition.
         (4)   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
         (5)   An estimate of the cost to abate the nuisance. If the abatement
notice is regarding a dilapidated or junk building, the notice shall compare
the cost of abatement with a projected cost of reconstruction of the structure.
         (6)   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as
directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the
City will abate it and assess the costs against the property owner.
         (7)   Said notice may include an interior inspection when the
enforcement officer has determined that the interior of a building or structure
needs inspection pursuant to Section
53.05(3), and notice shall be given as set out here and after.
      B.   Method of Service. When service of a notice to abate is required,
the following methods of service shall be deemed adequate:
         (1)   By personal service upon the person or persons in possession of
the property in violation or the owner of the property upon which the nuisance
exists.
         (2)   If after reasonable effort, personal service cannot be made,
service shall be made by sending the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested to the last known address of person or persons in possession of the
property.
      C.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have
a hearing with the City Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for
a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City Clerk within the
time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the City
Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the City
Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be
ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
      D.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall pay
such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364. l 2[3h])
      E.   Collection of Costs. The City Clerk shall send a statement of the
total expense incurred by certified mail or by service in the manner of an
original notice to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the City Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer, and such
costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
      F.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $100.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
      G.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
   4.   Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure. In lieu of the abatement
procedures set forth in
Chapter 50, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the
procedures applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                      55.14 Annoyance or Disturbance
55.02 Animal Neglect                   55.15 Rabies Vaccination
55.03 Livestock Neglect                55.16 Owner’s Duty
55.04 Rescue of Threatened Animals     55.17 Confinement
55.05 Dangerous Animals Prohibited     55.18 At-Large: Impoundment and Fine
55.06 Vicious Animals Prohibited       55.19 Disposition of Animals
55.07 Exceptions to the Vicious Animal 55.20 Community Cats
Prohibition
55.08 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs     55.21 Violations
55.09 Seizure, Impoundment, and        55.22 Impounding Costs
Disclosure
55.10 Livestock                        55.23 Tampering with a Rabies
                                       Vaccination Tag
55.11 Leash Law                        55.24 Tampering with an Electronic
                                       Handling Device
55.12 Damage or Interference           55.25 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.13 Prohibited Acts                   
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this Chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag, or articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain
dogs or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   4.   “Attack” means any mauling, scratching, tearing, or damaging of
clothing or other items of personal property or the mauling of any domesticated
animals.
   5.   “At-large” means off the premises of the owner or custodian, and not on
a leash and under the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor
vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.
   6.   “Bite” means any puncturing of the skin or “bite marks” that are still
visible 24 hours later.
   7.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   8.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   9.   “Dangerous animal” means any undomesticated animals that have a natural
propensity to bite, scratch or otherwise cause injury to people.
   10.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   11.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   12.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an
animal’s health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or
organ, or the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   13.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   14.   “Owner/custodian” means the person who has the care, custody or
control of the animal at the time of being at-large or an attack, whether or
not the person is the actual owner of the animal.
   15.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   16.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   17.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   18.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   19.   “Vicious animal” means any animal which has known vicious
propensities, or which has been known to attack or injure any person who was
peacefully conducting himself/herself in a place where he/she may lawfully be.
An animal is deemed to be vicious, or have vicious propensities, when it meets
any one or more of the following:
      A.   Attacks and bites any person without provocation while at-large or
which could not be controlled or restrained at the time of the attack by the
owner/custodian to prevent the occurrence whether on or off the owner’s/
custodian’s property.
      B.   Bites more than one person during the animal’s lifetime, or bites
one person on two or more occasions during the animal’s lifetime.
      C.   Attacks any domesticated animal or fowl without provocation, causing
injury or death, while off the premises of the owner/custodian.
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant
to Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place
to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   RESCUE OF THREATENED ANIMALS.
   If the City’s police or other employees determine that Section
55.02 or
55.03 are being violated, they may take steps for the rescuing such animal(s)
under Section 717B.5 of the Code of Iowa.
55.05   DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or
act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such
animal for any other purpose or in any other capacity within the City.
55.06   VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITION.
   1.   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor an animal that has been found
to be vicious for any reason within the City.
   2.   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any animal in the City that
has previously been found to be vicious in violation of the ordinances, codes,
or statutes of any other political subdivision.
55.07   EXCEPTIONS TO THE VICIOUS ANIMAL PROHIBITION.
   1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
   2.   The keeping of guard dogs: however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times and any guard dog found at-large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
Any premises guarded with a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import.
The owner of such premises shall inform the local law enforcement officers that
a guard dog is on duty at said premises.
   3.   No animal shall be deemed vicious as a result of having attacked or
injured any person who at the time of such attack or injury, was committing a
willful trespass or was committing or attempting other criminal conduct while
on the premises occupied by the owner/custodian of such animal or was at the
time of the injury or attack, teasing, tormenting, abusing or physically
assaulting the animal.
   4.   No animal shall be deemed vicious as a result of having defended or
protected its owner/custodian from an unjustified attack or physical assault.
   5.   No animal shall be deemed vicious for causing injury or death to
another animal if it was defending itself from an unprovoked attack by such
other animal.
55.08   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
   1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody of the cat or dog.
   2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or that has been
issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and
Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.09   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.
   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at-
large upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property
of someone other than its owner/custodian, thereby creating a hazard to persons
or property, such animal may, at the discretion of a peace officer, be
destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty
to attempt the confinement or capture a dangerous animal or vicious animal
found at-large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner/custodian of such
animal prior to its destruction.
   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in the
City, the Police Chief or his designee shall cause the matter to be
investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person
named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or
vicious animal in the City, the Police Chief or his designee shall order the
person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or
destroy the animal within three days of the receipt of such an order. Such
order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal.
   3.   The notice to remove an animal from the City or have it destroyed shall
be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the
dangerous animal or vicious animal, and shall be served personally or by
certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous animal or vicious
animal shall not be required when such animal has caused serious physical hmm
or death to any person, in which case the Police Chief or his designee shall
cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure
and impoundment are not possible without risk or serious physical harm or death
to any person.
   4.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
Police Chief or his designee may be appealed to the City Council. In order to
appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within
three days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the
dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to file written notice of appeal shall
constitute a waiver of the right to appeal.
   5.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The person filing the notice of appeal mush be present at the hearing.
Failure to attend such appeal hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. At the conclusion of such
hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Police Chief or his
designee. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall
be filed with the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued
session thereof.
   6.   If the Council affirms the action of the Police Chief or his designee,
the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning,
sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such
animal from the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be
served upon the person who filed the appeal. Such notice shall be given in
writing and shall be served personally or by certified mail.
   7.   If the original order of the Police Chief or his designee is not
appealed and is not complied with within three days or the order of the Council
after appeal is not complied with within three days of its issuance, the Police
Chief or his designee is authorized to seize, impound or destroy such dangerous
or vicious animal. Failure to comply with an order of the Police Chief or his
designee issued pursuant to this chapter and not appealed, or an order of the
Council after appeal, constitute a simple misdemeanor.
55.10   LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning
regulations.
55.11   LEASH LAW.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner/custodian of any dog or other similar
animal to fail to keep the same from running at-large within the corporate
limits of the City. Every animal outside a structure, kennel, wholly enclosed
fenced yard or operating electronic invisible type animal control fence shall
be either on a tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal securely
fastened to an immovable object and not capable of letting the animal reach any
portion of the public sidewalk or City right-of-way, or on a fixed length leash
of not more than 10 feet in length and sufficient strength to restrain the
animal when the leash is held by a person capable of restraining and
controlling the animal. Voice command is not sufficient to meet the
requirements of this section. In addition, all dogs must at all times wear a
collar with a current rabies tag attached.
55.12   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner/custodian of an animal to allow or permit such
animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises.
55.13   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any owner/custodian of an animal to permit the animal to
discharge feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of
the owner of the animal, and not take immediate action to remove and clean up
the feces from such property. All feces removed shall be placed in a container
and shall be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container
until it is removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner.
55.14   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner/custodian of a dog to allow or permit such dog
to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent
and/or habitual howling, yelping, barking or otherwise; or, by running after or
chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.15   RABIES VACCINATION.
   Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It
is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession,
six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs
kept in kennels and not allowed to run at-large are not subject to these
vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.16   OWNER’S DUTY.
   It is the duty of the owner/custodian of any dog, cat or other animal which
has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is
the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health
the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.17   CONFINEMENT.
   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner/custodian to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If
the owner/custodian fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the
animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the
board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner/
custodian, the owner/custodian shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section
does not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement
agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.18   AT-LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT AND FINE.
   Animals found at-large in violation of this chapter may be seized and
impounded. At the discretion of the peace officer the owner/custodian may be
issued a $65.00 fine payable at the office of the City Clerk or served a
summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder. If
an animal at-large attacks or bites an individual or domestic animal and causes
injury or death, the peace officer shall issue the owner/custodian a summons to
appear before a property court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.19   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
given in not less than two days to the owner/custodian, if known. Impounded
animals may be recovered by the owner/custodian upon payment of impounding
costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated. If the
owner/custodian does not redeem the animal within seven days of the date of
notice, or if the owner/custodian cannot be located within seven days, the
animal may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
the Code of Iowa. The City may allow a veterinarian to release vaccinated and
spayed/neutered cats, only in coordination with a Garner veterinarian.
55.20   COMMUNITY CATS.
     Community cats shall be allowed as free roaming cats if all the following
are met: (i) no person owns the cat, (ii) cat has been assessed by a
veterinarian and deemed healthy, (iii) cat has been spayed or neutered, (iv)
cat has been vaccinated for rabies, feline rhinotracheitis, calcivirus, and
panleukopenia, and reasonable attempts to revaccinate cats in accordance with
the directions of a veterinarian, (v) cats must be ear tipped by the
veterinarian making the health assessment and after determining the cat is
spayed or neutered, has been properly vaccinated, and has no known owner.
   1.   Nuisance. Community cats that create a nuisance may be captured and
impounded. For the purpose of this section “nuisance” shall be defined as
anything which interferes with the enjoyment of life or property.
   2.   Determination. The City Administrator or Police Chief may determine if
a community cat is a nuisance and shall use information obtained from citizens
complaining about a community cat and his/her expertise to determine if a
community cat is a nuisance.
   3.   Returning Community Cat to Area. A community cat shall be returned to
the area where it was captured unless the property owner or the caretaker of
the property where the cat was captured requests that the cat not be returned,
or the cat is sick or injured.
   4.   Liability. The City shall have no liability for the disposition of any
community cat.
55.21   VIOLATIONS.
   Violation of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $65.00 and a
maximum fine of on more than $500.00.
55.22   IMPOUNDING COSTS.
   Impounding costs are set by the impounding facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
55.23   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
   It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.24   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
   It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.25   PETS AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.08 Parades Regulated
 
60.01   TITLE.
   Chapters 60 through
70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Garner Traffic
Code.”
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
      A.   State Street from Sixth Street to a point 3,450 feet north of
Highway 18.
      B.   Allen Avenue from Third Street to Highway 18.
      C.   3rd Street from Maben Avenue to Blackstone Drive.
      D.   Cottonwood Drive from State Street west to the end of Cottonwood
Drive.
      E.   4th Street from Maben Avenue to Bush Avenue.
      F.   5th Street from Maben Avenue to Bush Avenue.
   2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty
percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and
buildings in use for business.
   5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a
schoolhouse.
   6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the city not included in
the business, school or residence districts.
   10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or
alley.
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this chapter and State law relating to motor vehicles and law
of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event
of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05   TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the
City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES REGULATED.
   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
   1.   Definition. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented
or advertised to the public as a parade.
   2.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Police Chief. Such permit shall state the time and date
for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such
written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall
be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants
have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be
required for such permit.
   3.   Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
   4.   Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the
performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation of Traffic Control Devices 61.04 Traffic Lanes
61.02 Compliance                              61.05 Standards
61.03 Crosswalks                               
 
61.01   INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and
maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and
zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading
zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones
other than the above, truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield
right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic
and play streets. The Council shall also have the power to designate and
indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns
shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other
indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning at such intersections. The City shall keep a record of
all such traffic control devices.
61.02   COMPLIANCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.03   CROSSWALKS.
   The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04   TRAFFIC LANES.
   Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at such places as
traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05   STANDARDS.
   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Engine and Compression Brakes
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle       
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   35.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   36.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   37.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   38.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   39.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   40.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   41.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   42.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   43.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   44.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   45.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   46.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   47.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   48.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   49.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   50.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   51.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   52.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   53.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   54.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   55.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   56.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   57.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   58.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   59.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   60.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   61.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   62.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   63.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   64.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   65.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   66.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   67.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   68.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   69.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   70.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   71.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   72.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   73.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   74.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   75.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   76.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   77.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   78.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   79.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   80.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   81.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   82.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   83.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   84.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   85.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   86.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   87.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   88.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   89.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   90.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   91.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   92.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   93.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   94.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   95.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   96.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   97.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   98.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   99.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   100.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   101.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   102.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   103.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   104.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   105.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   106.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   107.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   108.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   109.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   110.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   111.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   112.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   113.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   114.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   115.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   116.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   117.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   118.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   119.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   120.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   121.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   122.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   123.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   124.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   125.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   127.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   128.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   129.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   130.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   131.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   132.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   133.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   134.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
   135.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   136.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   137.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   138.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   139.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   140.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   141.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   142.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   143.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   144.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   145.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   146.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   147.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   148.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   149.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   150.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   151.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   152.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   153.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   154.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   155.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   156.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   157.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   158.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   159.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   160.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof
a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs
are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.  
   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate—or cause to
be used or operated—within the City limits any engine brake, compression brake,
or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of
any vehicle which results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from
such vehicle. The use of such brakes in a manner so as to be audible at a
distance of 100 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute evidence of a
prima facie violation of this section.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                            63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits            63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots  
 
63.01   GENERAL.
   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
   2.   Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
   3.   Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.
   A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park,
cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 20 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 20 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof Monday
through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. when school is in session.
      A.   On West 11th Street from Center Street to Elm Street.
      B.   On Division Street from West 9th Street to West 12th Street.
   2.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   On North Street from 1,540 feet north of Highway 18 intersection to
North State Street’s end at the north City limits.
      B.   On Taft Avenue from North State Street to Country Club Drive.
   3.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 45 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   On Highway 18 from the east corporate limits to the west corporate
limits.
   4.   Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 50 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   Highway 18 eastbound from 125 feet east of railroad tracks to 400
feet east of Country Club Drive.
      B.   Highway 18 westbound from 50 feet east of Country Club Drive to 250
feet east of the railroad tracks.
      C.   Highway 69 northbound from 300 feet south of West Lyon Street to
West 8th Street.
      D.   Highway 69 southbound from 100 feet south of West 8th Street to 300
feet south of West Lyon Street.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent
to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require,
that a different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles
turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no
driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as
directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection,
however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop or Yield                 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops                  65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk  
 
65.01   STOP OR YIELD.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic control
devices posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02   SCHOOL STOPS.
   At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have
passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need
be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk
or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets    
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by such signs erected in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
   The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor,
issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are
erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
   Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than
the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs, in accordance
with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable distances
ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and
no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge
in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTE.
   When truck routes have been designated in accordance with Chapter 61, any
motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply with the
following:
   1.   Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those
streets within the City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or
empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and
shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to
its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking        
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
   Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or along a street, walk on
the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
   When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in Chapter 61 of this
Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move
only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Stopping, Standing and Parking
                                    Prohibited; No Signs Required
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb          
69.03 Parking on One-Way Streets    69.08 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.04 Angle Parking                 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking       69.10 Snow Removal
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes  69.11 Snow Routes
Illegal
 
69.01   PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.
   Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by
designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this
Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of any
such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer.
69.02   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of
the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of
angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter
provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04   ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
   1.   State Street, from 6th Street to Cottonwood Street.
   2.   West 5th Street, on both sides, from State Street to the alley between
State Street and Bush Avenue.
   3.   East 5th Street, on both sides, from State Street to Maben Avenue.
   4.   West 4th Street, on both sides, from State Street to the alley between
State Street and Bush Avenue.
   5.   East 4th Street, on the north side, from State Street to the alley
between State Street and Maben Avenue.
   6.   East 4th Street, on the south Side, from State Street to Maben Avenue.
   7.   West 3rd Street, from State Street to Bush Avenue.
   8.   East 3rd Street, from Maben Avenue west to alley.
   9.   East 3rd Street, on the north side, from State Street to the alley
between State Street and Maben Avenue.
   10.   West 8th Street, on the south side, from Rose Avenue to Front Street.
   11.   East 8th Street, on the south side, from State Street to Grove Avenue.
   12.   East 8th Street, on the north side, from State Street to the alley
between State Street and Maben Avenue.
   13.   6th Street, on the south side, from Bush Avenue to Allen Avenue.
   14.   Allen Avenue, on the east side, from 6th Street to 7th Street.
   15.   Front Street, on the east side, from 8th Street to the south end of
the athletic field.
   16.   Bush Avenue, on the west side, from 6th Street to 7th Street.
   17.   West 8th Street, on the south side, from State Street to the north
drive of St. Paul’s Church.
   18.   Allen Avenue, on the east side, from 3rd Street to the railroad
tracks.
   19.   Park Avenue, from 11th Street to 12th Street.
   20.   Bush Avenue, on the west side, from 13th Street to 115 feet south of
13th Street.
   21.   Seymour Avenue, on the west side, from 125 feet south of 11th Street
to 13th Street.
   22.   West 3rd Street, from Center Street east 120 feet.
   23.   State Street, on the west side, from 50 feet south of Henschen Street
to 150 feet south of Henschen Street.
   24.   Tourist Park on West 11th Street and Front Street.
   25.   West 11th Street, on the north side, from Division Street to Center
Street.
   26.   Bush Avenue, on the west side, from 30 feet south of West 13th Street
to 110 feet south of West 13th Street.
   27.   West 8th Street, on the south side, from 215 feet east of Highway 69
to 360 feet east of Highway 69.
69.05   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load
thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the
roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles
to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of Section 69.01 of this chapter,
or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the Code
of Ordinances.
69.07   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no signs are required to
make it illegal to stop, stand or park in a vehicle contrary to the provisions
of this section. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is
so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on
the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
   10.   Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign
posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty (50)
feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre,
auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital,
nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large
assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked
as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in
taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length
of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley which is
eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked to deliver
goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
   17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
   18.   In More than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
   19.   Parked in Direction of Traffic. On any street in such a manner that
the vehicle is headed other than in the direction of traffic and with the
right-hand wheels of said vehicle more than eighteen (18) inches from the edge
of the right-hand curb.
   20.   Forty-Eight-Hour Limit. Upon any street, unless a different parking
time limit is required, for a period of time exceeding forty-eight (48) hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   21.   Allow for Free Movement of Traffic. On any street in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than fifteen (15) feet of the
width of the roadway portion of any street for free movement of vehicular
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   22.   Commercial and Other Large Vehicles. Upon any street for a commercial
vehicle, implements of husbandry, semi-tractor, semi-trailer or combination
thereof; two- or four-wheel trailer; motorized home; travel trailer, pickup
coach, school bus or school bus converted for recreational or other purposes,
for more than four (4) consecutive hours, unless the parking of any of the
above is necessary to services being performed or operations being carried on
upon adjacent or nearby premises. The Police Chief, upon request, may permit
parking of any of the above for a period of up to twenty-four (24) hours,
provided all other provisions of this Code are complied with.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.08   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
   No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle
with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery
trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Residential Areas. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended
in any residential area.
   2.   Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall
park or leave unattended such vehicle on any streets within the business
district. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic.
   3.   Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any
street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station
in any commercial area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the
engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other
device in operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of a
service station when actually being serviced, and then in no event for more
than thirty (30) minutes.
   4.   Warning Lights. No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked upon
any street or alley in any commercial area for a period of time longer than one
hour, beginning one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise without
having displayed warning lights or having placed lighted flares, either of
which must be plainly visible for a distance of three hundred (300) feet in
front of and behind said vehicle.
   5.   Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any
street, alley or highway in any commercial area for a period of time of more
than thirty (30) minutes.
69.10   SNOW REMOVAL.
   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during the period of time
when snow is falling and for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after cessation
of snowfall unless the snow has been removed or plowed from said street, alley
or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall. The parking restriction
contained herein is not applicable to Fourth Street between Maben Avenue and
Bush Avenue, in order to accommodate residents of apartments on State Street.
69.11   SNOW ROUTES.
   The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate, or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
   For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
$20.00 for all violations except snow route parking violations and improper use
of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within
thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The simple notice of a fine
for emergency snow route parking violations is $50.00, and the simple notice of
a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is
$100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
   1.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   5.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 74
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLES
 
74.01   Definitions            74.03    Violations
74.02   Operation on City Stree 
 
74.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-
terrain vehicle” means a motor vehicle with not less than three and not more than six
wheels, a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for
steering control, as more particularly described in the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(4) & 321I.1(1)(a))
   2.   “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motor vehicle with not less than
four and not more than eight wheels, a seat that is of bucket or bench design,
not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control
levers for control, as more particularly described in the Iowa Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(47A) & 321I.1(18)(a))
   3.   “ATV” means both an “all-terrain vehicle” and an “off-road utility
vehicle” for purposes of simplicity within this Chapter.
74.02   OPERATION ON CITY STREETS.  
   A person shall be allowed to operate an ATV on City streets only when in compliance with the following requirements:
   1.   The operator shall possess a valid driver’s license and be eighteen
years of age.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234A(2))
   2.   The operator shall not travel on or across U.S. Highway 18 or Iowa
Highway 69 including any portion of their rights-of-way.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234A & 321I.10(5))
   3.   The ATV must be registered annually through the County Recorder.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.3(1), 321I.4(1), & 321I.10(3))
   4.   The ATV shall have suitable and effective muffling devices that comply with the sound level
standards and testing procedures established by the society of automotive engineers under
SAE J1287.  An ATV shall not be operated in a manner that emits
noise in excess of 96 decibels as measured on the A scale of SAE J1287.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.12(1) & Iowa Administrative Code 571-46.1)
   5.   The ATV shall be equipped with a lighted headlight when operated from sunset to sunrise
and at such other times as conditions provide insufficient lighting to render clearly
discernable persons and vehicles at a distance of five hundred feet ahead.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.13 and 321I.14(1)(d))
   6.   The ATV
shall be equipped with a lighted taillight when operated from sunset to sunrise and at such other times as conditions provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernable
persons and vehicles at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I. 13 and 321I.14(1)(d))
   7.   The ATV shall be equipped with brakes and require the use of hand
signals for turning.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.13)
   8.   A person shall not operate an ATV with more persons on the vehicle than it was designed to
carry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14(3)(a))
   9.   The ATV shall be insured with financial liability coverage and proof of such insurance coverage shall be kept in the ATV.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.2(248) & 321.208)
   10.   A person operating an
ATV upon City streets shall comply with all City and State motor
vehicle laws to the same extent as any other motor vehicle.  
74.03   VIOLATIONS. 
   A violation of this chapter is punishable per Section
1.14 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 75
SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose             75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.02 Definitions         75.05 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.06 Accident Reports
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of snowmobiles
within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48
inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed
for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle
that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or
treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City in violation of the
provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules
established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural
Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
      B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees
(90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
   5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.05   NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of a snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the snowmobile. The owner of a
snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was
the operator of the snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if
the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18)
75.06   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the
operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an
accident report, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles                
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street
or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall be
subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2)
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05   SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   The following shall apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
   1.   Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of
Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   3.   Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   TOWING.
   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured
for such use.
76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.
   No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.11   PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
   1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on
the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear
except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from
all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in
front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in
lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
   2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a
second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 77
GOLF CARTS
 
77.01  Purpose                         77.06 Hours of Operation
77.02 Definitions                      77.07 Speed
77.03 Operationof Golf Carts Permitted 77.08 Parking Prohibited
77.04 Prohibited Streets               77.09 Penalty
77.05 Unlawful Operation                
 
77.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on
certain streets in the City, as authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended. This chapter applies whenever a golf cart is operated on any
street or alley of the City of Garner, Iowa.
77.02   DEFINITIONS.
   1.   “Golf cart” means a four-wheeled recreational vehicle generally used
for transportation of person(s) in a sport of golf that is either electric
powered or gas powered with a ground speed limited to 25 mph.
77.03   OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED.
Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons possessing a
valid Iowa driver’s license, and at least eighteen (18) years of age. Operators
must comply with all applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Garner and Code of Iowa related to motor vehicle traffic and parking
regulations.
77.04   PROHIBITED STREETS.
Golf carts shall not be operated on the following streets, except to cross said
streets:
   1.   State Highway 18 throughout the Garner City limits.
   2.   State Highway 69 throughout the Garner City limits.
77.05   UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   1.   No golf cart shall be operated or parked upon City sidewalks or trails.
   2.   No golf cart shall be operated while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming drugs.
   3.   No person shall operate a golf cart in a careless, reckless, or
negligent manner endangering the person or property of another or causing
injury or damage to same.
   4.   No golf cart shall carry more passengers than for which the vehicle is
designed.
77.06   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   1.   Golf carts may be operated on City streets and alleys between sunrise
and sunset.
   2.   Golf carts may be operated on City streets and alleys after dark if
equipped with headlights taillights.
77.07   SPEED.
No golf cart shall be operated on any City street at a speed in excess of
twenty­ five (25) miles per hour. Posted speed limits must be followed in
accordance with the Code of Iowa and the City of Garner Code of Ordinances
77.08   PARKING PROHIBITED.
Golf carts shall not be parked overnight on City streets or alleys at any time.
77.09   PENALTY.
A person who violated this chapter is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable
as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code. Schedule of City fines:
   1.   First offense – seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
   2.   Second offense – one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Chapter 77 – Ord. 462– Apr. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 78
SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR CONVEYANCES
 
78.01 Operation Prohibited  78.03 Yield Right-of-Way
78.02 Operation on Roadways 78.04 Double Riding Prohibited
 
78.01   OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   Skateboards, roller blades, roller skates, manually powered scooters, and
similar conveyances shall not be operated on the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
parking lots of the following portion of the downtown business district:
An area bounded by Highway 18 on the north, 6th Street on the south, the east
line of the alley between State Street and Maben Street on the east, and the
west line of the alley between State Street and Bush Street on the west.
or in any other area designated by the City Council. The Council may
temporarily allow such conveyances to use specific portions of the above area
for special events.
78.02   OPERATION ON ROADWAYS.
   Skateboard operators and operators of similar conveyances on roadways shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians who are not operating a skateboard or similar
conveyance, as per
Chapter 67 of this Code of Ordinances.
78.03   YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, skateboard operators and
operators of similar conveyances shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicular
traffic and to all other pedestrian (non-skateboard and similar type
conveyance) traffic upon the sidewalk.
78.04   DOUBLE RIDING PROHIBITED.
   No more than one person shall operate or ride on a skateboard or similar
type conveyance at one time.
CHAPTER 80
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
 
80.01 Definitions         80.03 Crossing Maintenance
80.02 Obstructing Streets 80.04 Speed
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
80.02   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess of
ten (10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
   1.   Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting
the safety of the movement of trains.
   2.   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person
on the track.
   3.   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
   4.   Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
   5.   In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in
switching operations.
   6.   No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.
80.03   CROSSING MAINTENANCE.
   Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973[1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
80.04   SPEED.
   It is unlawful to operate any railroad train through any street crossing
within the platted areas of the City at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles
per hour.
(Girl vs. United States R. Admin., 194 Iowa 1382, 189 N.W. 834,[1923])
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                   90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties     90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections         90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections         90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit                        90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit                90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required              90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                   90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains                  
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Irrigation meter” means a water meter connected to the public water
system and used solely to measure water used for a yard sprinkler system.
   4.   “Superintendent” means the Water/Sewer Supervisor of the City or any
duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.
   5.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   6.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   7.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
   All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended
or used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public
water system. No new wells are allowed unless approved by the Council.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight, at the property
owner’s expense.
90.05   PERMIT.
   Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within sixty (60) days after
the permit is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or
unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person making the
application, an extension of time within which to complete the work may be
granted. The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation of these
chapters.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT.
   Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay
fifty dollars ($50.00) to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
   All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision
of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building, or premises has its own curb stop valve.
   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in
diameter shall receive no larger than a three-fourths (3/4) inch tap. All mains
of over six (6) inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap.
Where a larger connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two (2) or more small
taps or saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in
the mains shall be made in the top half of the pipe, at least eighteen (18)
inches apart. No main shall be tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in
the main.
   3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
   4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting may be of whatever
pipe material is determined sufficient by the property owner. Pipe must be laid
sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement
or freezing.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the water main to the building
served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of
the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails
to correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14   CURB VALVE.
   There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off
valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.
The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the
pavement or ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
   There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
   Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for twenty-four
(24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the
water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the
right to finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to
the property owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must
pay the costs before receiving another permit, and the plumber's bond or cash
deposit shall be security for the assessment. If the property owner is
assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as
general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because
of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at
the curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City,
shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose
whatsoever.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                          91.05 Meter Setting
91.02 Water Use Metered                91.06 Meter Repairs
                                       91.07 Right of Entry and Noncompliance
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems-Exception with Water Meter Replacement
                                       Requirements
91.04 Location of Meters               91.08 Meter Installation Fee
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
   All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by
the City, installed by a plumber, and inspected by the City.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - EXCEPTION.
   Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No open
connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves
except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be
sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
   All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter
readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
   The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for
proper setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the
meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and
shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER REPAIRS.
   Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY AND NONCOMPLIANCE WITH WATER METER REPLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   Right of Entry. The Superintendent or designee shall be permitted to
enter the premises of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove,
inspect, maintain, or replace a water meter.
   2.   Failure to Provide Access. If access to a water meter is required for
maintenance or replacement and the property owner fails to provide such access
after notice, the following provisions shall apply:
      A.   Final Notice Requirements. A final notice shall be provided by the
City consisting of:
         (1)   A written notice posted on the property at the location of the
water meter; and
         (2)   A certified letter mailed to the record title owner(s) of the
property as listed with the County Assessor’s Office.
         Receipt of such notice shall be deemed effective regardless of actual
delivery, physical receipt, or signature confirmation.
      B.   Monthly Service Fee for Noncompliance. If access is not granted
within thirty (30) days following the date of posting or postmark of the
certified letter, whichever is later, a monthly service fee shall be assessed
to the property. This fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council, shall
be in addition to regular monthly water charges, and shall continue until
access is granted and the meter is replaced.
      C.   Disconnection of Service. In addition to the service fee, the City
may disconnect water service to the property until such time as the meter
replacement is completed.
      D.   Additional Remedies. Nothing in this section shall limit the City’s
right to pursue any other remedies available under law, including but not
limited to administrative citations, liens, or legal action to compel
compliance.
(Section 91.07 – Ord. 476 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
91.08   METER INSTALLATION FEE.
   There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new installation
of a water meter in accordance with the schedule of such fees approved by
resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Other Service Rates       92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.09 Temporary Vacancy
92.05 Service Discontinued       
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
   Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon
use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   $6.60 for the first 1,000 gallons used per month, with a minimum bill
$6.60, and
   2.   $5.00 per 1,000 gallons on all usage over 1,000 gallons per month.
(Subsection 2 – Ord. 472 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
92.03   OTHER SERVICE RATES.
1.   Outside the City. Water service may be provided to any customer located
outside the corporate limits of the City which the City Council has agreed to
serve at rates 150 percent of the rates provided in Section
92.02. No such customer, however, will be served unless the customer shall have
signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and
regulations applying to water service established by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 and 384.84)
   2.   Bulk Water Rate. Bulk water may be purchased at 200% of the normal
water rate stated in Section
92.02, with a minimum of $20.00 per load.
   3.   Irrigation Meter Rate. Water use measured through irrigation meters
shall be at the same rates provided in Section
92.02.
   4.   Rates for Multi-Family-Owned Residential Units.
      A.   Water service shall be furnished to condos, duplexes, and other
multi-family-owned residential units constructed before January 1, 2003, at the
following rate: If the building is serviced by one water meter, the actual
monthly usage shall be divided by the number of units to determine average unit
usage. The rates listed in Section
92.02 shall then apply to these calculations.
      B.   Water service shall be furnished to condos, duplexes, and other
multi-family-owned residential units constructed after January 1, 2003, at the
following rates:
         (1)   Each unit in the building shall be serviced by a water meter
complete with corporation stop, curb stop valve, and inside shut off valve. One
service line for the building may be approved by the City provided it is of
sufficient size and each unit has its own curb stop valve, inside shut off
valve, and water meter.
         (2)   Rates for service for each meter shall be charged as outlined in
Section
92.02.
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Meters Read. Water meters shall be read monthly.
   2.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on or before the first day of each month.
   3.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by the fifteenth (15th) of the month.
   4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 10% of the amount due shall be
added to each delinquent bill. Government account are exempt of such payment
penalties.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service
will be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service
account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified
in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnected.
   2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
   3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the
shut off, the Clerk shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a
determination as to whether the disconnection or disconnected is justified. If
it is found that disconnection or disconnected is justified, then such
disconnection or disconnected shall be made, unless payment has been received.
   4.   Fees. A delinquent account fee of $40.00 shall be charged at the time
the shut-off list of delinquent accounts is compiled. An additional $25.00 fee
shall be assessed in the event the turn-on is requested after 3:45 p.m. or
otherwise requires call-in or off-duty staff to perform the turn-on.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.
   A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
   A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and
shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time. There shall be a ten dollar ($10.00) fee collected for
shutting the water off at the curb valve and a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee for
restoring service. During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as
provided herein there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not
drain pipes or pull meters for temporary vacancies.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Abandoned Connections
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Service Outside the City
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Right of Entry
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Use of Easements
95.05 Sewer Connection Required 95.10 Special Penalties
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5)
times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   22.   “Superintendent” means the Water/Sewer Supervisor of the City or any
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within ninety (90)
days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said
public sewer is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of
such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such
sewage as may be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin
the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When an existing sanitary sewer connection is abandoned or a service is
renewed with a new connection to the main, all abandoned connections with the
mains shall be permanently capped off with an absolutely watertight cap.
95.07   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
95.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.09   USE OF EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.10   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
   The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served
by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                  96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee              96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required        96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations             96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations
 
96.01   PERMIT.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit
shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected
with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete
construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within
sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property
owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s
control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an
extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be
granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation
of these chapters.
96.02   PERMIT FEE.
   The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least ten
(10) feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be
less, provided the water service line is located at one side and at least
twelve (12) inches above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4) inches.
   6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight
line to meet the following:
      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth (¼) inch per foot.
      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot.
      C.   Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer half full.
      D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the
written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved
fittings.
   7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code
except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public
sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following:
      A.   Clay sewer pipe - A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
      B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe - A.S.T.M. A-74.
      C.   Ductile iron water pipe - A.W.W.A. C-151.
      D.   P.V.C. - SDR26 - A.S.T.M. D-3034.
   10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within
three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
   11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
   12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six (6)
inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall
rest on firm, solid material at either end.
   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and
service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required, such
interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
“Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty (30) days after date
of official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Storm Water           97.05 Restricted Discharges - Powers
97.02 Sump Pumps            97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01   STORM WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm
water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as
are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SUMP PUMPS.
   1.   Definition and Method. No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump
pump, footing tile, swimming pool, or other natural precipitation shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewage system. Dwellings and other buildings and
structures which require, because of the infiltration of water into basements,
crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge excess water shall
have a permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time
discharge water into the sanitary sewage system, except as provided herein. A
permanent installation is one which provides for year-round discharge
capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building, or structure or is
connected to the City storm sewer system. If there is no sub-drain available,
the surface discharge point shall be located no closer than four (4) feet from
any property line or traveled portion of any street, except the drain hose may
not be laid across a sidewalk or in a driveway, allowing the water to run down
a sidewalk, driveway, or other hard surface. It shall consist of a discharge
line, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge.
If a storm sewer inlet is adjacent to a property, with City permission and
inspection, the property owner may connect his or her sump pump discharge hose
to the back side of this inlet.
   2.   Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges
into the City’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the City to
inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Further, every person shall allow
said employee access to test by televised scoping or otherwise the sewer
service line. In lieu of having the City inspect the property, any person may
furnish a certificate from a plumber approved by the City certifying that said
person’s property is in compliance with this section. Any person refusing to
allow his or her property to be inspected or refusing to furnish a plumber’s
certificate within fourteen (14) days of the date City employees are denied
admittance to the property, shall immediately become subject to the surcharge
hereinafter provided for. Any owner of property found to violate this section
shall make the necessary changes to comply with this section and furnish proof
of the changes to the City within forty-five (45) days from the date the
violation was identified.
   3.   Future Inspections. At any future time, if the City has reason to
suspect that an illegal connection may exist in a premises, the owner, by
written notice, shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   4.   Penalty. A surcharge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month may be
imposed and added to every sewer billing to property owners who dispose of
water in violation of Subsection 2 herein. This surcharge may be levied monthly
to those properties found not to be in compliance.
   5.   Street Discharge. No discharge of water as defined in Subsection 2
shall be discharged on the City streets after November 15, 1998. However,
existing houses that currently discharge water on to City streets shall be
exempted from this provision upon registering with the City by November 15,
1998, and paying a fee of $25.00. All such exempted properties shall have
buried hoses or pipes, which discharge the water into the street. Such
residences shall not discharge water into the street from and after November 15
of each year until April 1 of each year.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams per liter
as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per
liter or six hundred (600) milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble
matter.
   3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
   4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
   5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
   7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may
be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
   12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
   13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES - POWERS.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
   4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required               98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required             98.08 Disposal of Septage
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
   When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate, or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.05 Payment of Bills
99.02 Other Service Rates            99.06 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Special Rates                  99.07 Special Agreements Permitted
99.04 Private Water Systems           
 
99.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
   Sanitary sewer service shall be provided within the City based upon monthly
water usage at the following monthly rates:
   1.   A monthly service fee of $2.80 per customer/account,
   2.   $12.30 for the first 1,000 gallons used per month, with a minimum bill
of $12.30,
   3.   And $4.60 per 1,000 gallons on all usage over 1,000 gallons per month.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02   OTHER SERVICE RATES.
   1.   Irrigation Meter. Irrigation meters are not subject to sewer charges.
   2.   Rates for Multi-Family-Owned Residential Units.
      A.   Sewer service shall be furnished to condos, duplexes, and other
multi-family-owned residential units constructed before January 1, 2003, at the
following rate: If the building is serviced by one water meter, the actual
monthly usage shall be divided by the number of units to determine average unit
usage. The rates listed in Section
99.01 shall then apply to these calculations.
      B.   Sewer service shall be furnished to condos, duplexes, and other
multi-family-owned residential units constructed after January 1, 2003, at the
rate outlined in Section
99.01.
99.03   SPECIAL RATES.
   Where, in the judgment of the Superintendent and the Council, special
conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges
provided in Section
99.01 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a
special rate shall be proposed by the Superintendent and submitted to the
Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
   Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay
sewer charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense. Any negotiated, or agreed upon sales or charges shall be
subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.05   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued or
disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be
certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
   No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 100
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
 
100.01 Purpose and Findings            100.07 Billing
100.02 Definitions                     100.08 Delinquency, Collection, Interest
                                       and Penalties
                                       100.09 Request for Service,
100.03 Storm Water Utility Established Disconnection From Service; Termination
                                       of User Charges
100.04 Charges and Fees                100.10 Adoption of Rules;
                                       Interpretations and Appeals
100.05 Storm Water Utility User Charge  
100.06 Calculation of Equivalent        
Service Units and Amount of Charge
 
100.01   PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the Storm Water Drainage
Utility, authorize charges, rates and fees for use of, and discharge to, the
public storm water drainage system, to provide a process for appeals from
certain decisions of the Council relating to such charges, and to provide for
collection of delinquent charges. The Council finds that the construction,
operation and maintenance of the City’s storm water system should be funded
through use charges imposed for the discharge of storm and surface water
system, thereby charging those persons and activities using or receiving
service from that system. The City may be required to provide increased
quantity or quality controls to mitigate those impacts of pollutants from
discharging storm and surface waters into the storm water system. Therefore, it
is appropriate to impose a storm and surface water user charge upon all users
of property which may discharge, directly or indirectly into the storm water
system.
100.02   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words shall have the following definitions when used in this
chapter, and any resolution and order adopted pursuant hereto, unless the
context requires otherwise or unless such word is expressly defined otherwise:
   1.   “Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a public
storm sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing side sewer, for the
purpose of connecting private impervious surface or other storm and surface
water sources or systems to the public storm and surface water system. It also
includes creation or maintenance of impervious surface that causes or is likely
to cause an increase in the quantity or decrease in quality or both from the
natural state of storm water runoff, and which drains, directly or indirectly,
to the storm and surface water system.
   2.   “Date of imposition” or “imposition date” means July 1 of each fiscal
year or such other date designated by the Council at which time a charge is
imposed and becomes the legal obligation of the user. The obligation may
include the cost of services to be provided during the billing period or for
services previously provided to the same person under this chapter.
   3.   “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.
   4.   “Equivalent service units” or “ESU” means a measurement unit based on
the impervious surface area of an average improved single-family dwelling lot
or parcel within the City (as determined by a statistical sampling performed by
the City) added to the approximate total of impervious street surface divided
by the number of users. Except as provided in Section 100.05 of this chapter,
one equivalent service unit shall be deemed to be 5,750 square feet of
impervious surface. As of December 13, 1996, the impervious surface area of an
average improved single-family dwelling lot or parcel within the City was
calculated to be 2,574 square feet. The approximate total of impervious street
surface of 3,549,560 square feet was divided by 1,122 users to arrive at 3,164
square feet per user. Adding 2,574 and 3,164 produces a square footage of 5,738
which was rounded to 5,750 square feet.
   5.   “Impervious surface area” means all land area that has been altered
from its natural state such that it does not allow the infiltration and
retention of water equivalent to that of undisturbed soil. This includes, but
is not limited to: pavement, buildings, decks, parking areas, and compacted
gravel areas. “Impervious surface” does not include improved public streets,
roads, sidewalks and bike paths; railroad beds or quarry excavation areas and
temporary service roads in the excavation areas. Rather such facilities are
deemed to be a part of the public surface water drainage conveyance system or
to constitute non-impervious surfaces.
   6.   “Improved single dwelling parcel” means a lot or parcel on which a
single-family dwelling or duplex exists at any time during the same years as
the imposition of the charge.
   7.   “Occupant” means the person residing or doing business on the property.
In a family or household situation, the occupants responsible for the
obligation herein imposed are the adult heads of the household, jointly and
severally. In a dwelling or office sharing situation, the adult occupant
legally responsible for the management or condition of the property shall be
responsible.
   8.   “Owner” means the legal owner(s) of records as shown on the tax rolls
of Hancock County, or where there is a recorded land sale contract, the
purchaser thereunder.
   9.   “Person” means any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, governmental agency, municipality, partnership, association, firm,
trust, or any other legal entity whatsoever.
   10.   “Rule” means any written standard, directive, interpretation, policy,
regulation, procedure or other provision, adopted by the Council as a
resolution and order to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   11.   “Storm and surface water drainage system” means any combination of
publicly-owned storm and surface water quantity and quality and quality
facilities, pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and
culverts, open channels, creeks and rivers, force mains, laterals, manholes,
catch basins and inlets, including the grates and covers thereof, detention and
other retention facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and any other
publicly-owned facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and
disposal of storm and surface water comprising the total publicly-owned storm
and surface water system with the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are not
intentionally admitted.
   12.   “User” means any person who uses property which maintains connection
to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for surface
water management. The occupant of occupied property is deemed the user. If the
property is not occupied, the person who has the right to occupy it shall be
deemed the user.
100.03   STORM WATER UTILITY ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84 of the Code of Iowa, as amended,
the Council hereby establishes a storm water utility in the City. The entire
City, as increased from time to time, shall constitute a single storm water
drainage system district.
100.04   CHARGES AND FEES.
   The Council may adopt by rule, charges, rates, and fees for the use of the
City’s storm and surface water system, and for services provided by the City
relating to that system. Such rules may include delinquency and interest
charges and penalties. Such charges and fees shall be just and equitable based
upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension and
replacement of the City’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation,
administration, and services of the City’s storm and surface water system and
program, and for services of the City. Except as specifically provided in this
chapter or by resolution and order, all charges and service fees shall be due
and payable in advance of provision of service. All billing procedures shall be
the same as for water usage and may be billed on the same bill.
   1.   Service Charge. Each customer shall pay for public storm water drainage
$6.25 per month per equivalent service unit or ESU as defined in Section 100.02
of this chapter.
   2.   As needed, the City may amend this chapter to change the Storm Water
Drainage System rates.
100.05   STORM WATER UTILITY USER CHARGE.
   1.   There is hereby established a storm water utility system user charge.
This charge hereby is imposed on every user within the City of the storm and
surface water system on the imposition date. The charge may be required to be
paid in advance of the provision of service for the billing period. The charge
due for the billing period shall be the obligation of the user of the public
storm system on the imposition date, notwithstanding whether the user is the
addressee of the bill.
   2.   The charge shall be the personal obligation of the user on the
imposition date, regardless of whether that person has any ownership interest
in the property. This charge shall constitute a debt due the City as of the
date of imposition.
   3.   Any person who has paid the full amount due in advance of receiving
service shall be entitled to a refund if the person ceases to be the user. The
refund shall be effective on the date the property is vacated or sold and based
on the number of days remaining in the billing period. The refund is waived
unless a written request for refund is filed within thirty (30) days of
vacating or selling the property. The request shall include documentation
reasonably deemed adequate by the Council. Notwithstanding any other provision,
the new user shall be responsible for the remaining balance of the service
charge, which may be billed immediately or added to the bill for the next
period.
   4.   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner of the real
property, as shown in the records of the County Assessor, is the occupant.
   5.   The storm water utility user charge shall be imposed upon any person
who uses or discharges to the public storm and surface water system by:
      A.   Maintaining impervious surface connected to (directly or indirectly)
and capable of discharge to the public surface water management systems; or
      B.   Actually discharging storm or surface water into the system; or
      C.   Making a specific request for storm and surface water management
service.
Said charge shall be charged for all users of properties covered in part by
impervious surface area within the boundaries of the City. A property
containing impervious surface is presumed to discharge storm water to the storm
and surface water drainage system, and to generate a demand for storm and
surface water drainage services, unless that property has an on-site disposal
system which meets the standards of Section
100.09 of this chapter and any rules adopted thereunder.
100.06   CALCULATION OF EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNITS AND AMOUNT OF CHARGE.
   This section shall be used to determine the number of equivalent service
units (ESUs) for a property for purposes of determining the amount of storm
water utility (SWU) service charges and the water quantity component of the
SWU.
   There are two types of uses: flat rate uses and measured uses. These are
defined as follows:
   1.   Flat Rate Uses. Properties that qualify under this section as flat rate
uses shall be charged at the rate of one ESU per dwelling unit. The following
uses shall be defined as flat rate uses:
      A.   A “flat rate use residence” is a residential structure not attached
to another residential structure on one or more parcels of land, providing
there are no more than two residential structures on one parcel. Flat rate use
residences shall have impervious surfaces totaling no more than 5,750 square
feet in area. This definition also includes trailers, mobile homes, and
manufactured homes, if on separate parcels. Two separate dwelling units on a
single parcel shall be charged one ESU per dwelling unit. Three or more
residential dwelling units on one parcel, whether attached or unattached, shall
be considered a multiple-family residential use, and shall be a measured use,
as defined below.
      B.   A “duplex” is two dwelling units joined to each other with a common
wall, or one above the other, on one or two parcels. The units may be under the
ownership, or owned separately. Each dwelling unit of the duplex shall be
charged one ESU.
      C.   “Trailer parks” and “mobile home parks” include trailers and mobile
homes on a single tax lot (even if there are more than two per tax lot) under
one ownership, where spaces are leased or rented for a mobile home or trailer
to be placed. Each space of a trailer park or mobile home park shall be charged
one ESU whether or not there is a trailer or mobile home on the space. Other
impervious areas within the boundaries of the trailer park or mobile home park
shall not be measured. The owner of the tax lot shall be deemed the lessor.
   2.   Measured Uses. Properties that are not flat rate uses shall be measured
uses. For such uses, the impervious surfaces of the property, as defined by
agency rule, shall be measured. The area shall be estimated using one or more
of the following: aerial photographs, assessment records, building permits,
construction plans, site visits, ad valorem property tax records, storm and
surface water system connection permits, field surveys or other sources deemed
reliable by the City. This area shall then be divided by 5,750 square feet, the
area of one equivalent service unit within the City. Any ESU’s above 15 shall
be multiplied by 0.25 and added to the original 15 ESU’s before rounding to
determine the total. Fractional values shall be rounded down if below 0.5 and
up if 0.5 or above. The minimum value shall be 0.5 ESU’s. The ESU’s for all of
the uses in this subsection shall be determined by measuring the impervious
area.
      A.   A “multi-family residential use” is:
         (1)   A group of residential dwellings on one parcel including three
or more units, whether or not the units are attached; or
         (2)   Three or more attached units on one or more parcels. This
definition includes triplexes, townhouses, apartments, condominiums, hotels,
motels, recreational vehicle parks, and similar uses.
      B.   “Commercial, industrial and institutional” categories include the
entire range of office, manufacturing service, sales, restaurant, day care,
nursery, warehouse, churches, schools, utilities, public service buildings,
parks, hospital, nursing home, rest home, retirement home, and other similar
uses.
      C.   A “measured use residence” is a residential property with impervious
surface totaling more than 5,750 square feet.
   3.   General Policies.
      A.   Multi-Family Residential Use. The total charge for a multi-family
residential use shall be calculated for the entire complex by measurement of
the total impervious surface area, including the garages and common areas. The
total ESUs shall be divided equally among all units if the units have separate
water billings. If the complex is billed under one water billing, the recipient
of that bill shall be deemed the user and receive the total ESU charge for the
complex. “Units” are defined as living units and do not include supporting
uses, such as garages, even though they may be on separate parcels.
      B.   No Limit on Charge for a Measured Use. Flat Rate Residences and
duplexes are not individually measured. All other uses are individually
measured. If a use is a measured use, its charge shall not be limited to one
ESU, even if it is residential.
      C.   Community Facilities. The flat rate category includes typical
residential uses within a parcel or single ownership, as defined above. If a
community or neighborhood recreation center or similar facility exists within a
subdivision, even if associated with the single-family or duplex properties,
that property shall be measured and charged separately to the user of that
property as provided in this chapter.
      D.   Seasonal Impervious Area. Properties which have areas that are
impervious for only a portion of the year shall constitute seasonal impervious
area. For example, a greenhouse that is covered six (6) months, and open with a
pervious floor for six months. If an impervious area is in place for more than
one month per year, it shall be included in the impervious area measurement,
unless exempted under the policy for “Spreading of Runoff to Pervious
Surfaces.”
      E.   Miscellaneous.
         (1)   No credits, exemptions, or reductions shall be given for
impervious surfaces that are submerged for a portion of the year.
         (2)   If impervious areas are so small they cannot be detected on
aerial maps at a scale of 1" = 50', then they shall not be included in the
total impervious area.
         (3)   A flat rate use residence (or a duplex unit) and garage, under
one ownership, shall be charged one ESU (two for a duplex), even if on two
adjacent parcels.
         (4)   Swimming pools (not including the impervious deck around the
swimming pool) are exempted from SWU fees providing the filter drains are
connected to the sanitary sewer system.
         (5)   No waiver shall be given for small impervious areas on a large
pervious property.
   4.   Exclusion from Impervious Surface Measurement.
      A.   Roads.
         (1)   Public roads shall not be included in the measurement of
impervious surface areas.
         (2)   All private roads are to be included in the measurement of
impervious surface areas, except private roads that serve flat rate uses
(single-family, duplex and trailer park properties). Private roads are defined
as all roads and driveways which have not been dedicated to the public and
accepted for public use, and which are defined as an impervious surface under
other City rules.
      B.   Determination of Impervious Surfaces – Roadways. All roadways,
whether dirt, gravel, or paved, shall be considered impervious, and unless a
part of an exempted category of road, or a part of a flat rate use, shall be
included in the impervious area measurement. A “roadway” is defined as an area
intended for the purpose of providing access for motor vehicles. Motor vehicles
shall include automobiles, trucks and tractors if similar or larger in size and
weight to a passenger automobile. Roadways shall include such things as roads,
streets, alleys and driveways.
      C.   Determination of Impervious Surfaces – Parking and Storage Areas.
         (1)   All parking and storage areas, whether dirt, gravel or paved,
shall be deemed impervious. A parking area is defined as an area where motor
vehicles are parked temporarily. This includes such areas as public and private
parking lots (regardless of frequency of use), and storage areas.
         (2)   A dirt or gravel area that is not accessed by motor vehicles, or
is not otherwise highly compacted, shall be considered not impervious. This
includes such uses as landscaping, and gravel or dirt areas accessed only by
foot traffic, or small vehicles, as defined above.
         (3)   A user may submit information for City review showing that the
conditions of Subparagraph (2) above are valid. The City shall review such
information and may perform a site inspection. If, based upon objective,
verifiable information presented, or upon the site inspection performed, the
City may modify the ESUs for the property to conform to the actual impervious
surface. Failure to permit the City to perform a site inspection of the
property shall be grounds to deny an application for review under this
subsection.
      D.   Spreading of Runoff to Pervious Surfaces. Impervious areas shall be
excluded from measurement and charge if the runoff is spread to a pervious area
that does not otherwise receive rainfall. For properties which meet the
criteria of this subsection, all or part of the impervious area may be excluded
from measurement and charge, as appropriate. For such property, the following
criteria shall apply:
         (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide
documentation as required by the City to demonstrate that the criteria are met.
         (2)   The area of impervious area that can be exempted is limited to
the area of the pervious area where the runoff is effectively spread.
         (3)   To qualify, the runoff from an impervious area must not be
concentrated but must remain as “sheet flow,” or be spread so it is in sheet
flow; the runoff must pass through the pervious area before it is collected in
a drain or channel system and carried away; and there cannot be any barriers
such as a concrete foundation preventing the sheet flow runoff from passing
through the impervious area.
      E.   Quarry Property. Permanent roadways, parking areas, and structures
shall be included in the impervious area measurement. The actual excavated area
from which material is being taken, and the temporary service roads in the
excavation area shall be excluded as not being impervious.
   5.   Exemption from SWU Service Charges.
      A.   Users of properties for which all storm water is disposed of on-
site, as defined by City standards, may request an exemption from SWU service
charges. No partial exemptions for disposal of only a portion of the storm and
surface waters on-site, shall be allowed. In order to qualify for a service
charge exemption, the user must design, construct and maintain an on-site
facility that keeps all storm and surface water for the full range of storms
during the year. This applicant for exemption must pay an initial inspection/
review fee. For the purpose of this section, the term “property” means a parcel
of land, or a group of adjacent parcels working in cooperation. The term “on-
site disposal” means on the parcel, or on another parcel in the near vicinity
of the parcel requesting the exemption. In order to qualify for the exemption,
the on-site system must encompass the entire property (except for incidental
impervious areas as defined below), must be completely separated from the
public system, and must provide adequate on-site disposal. Incidental areas
such as sidewalks, decks, and driveway aprons, shall not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the total impervious area. On-site disposal facilities that may
qualify are dry wells, injection wells, retention basins with percolation/
evaporation capacity, and retention basins with capacity large enough to
accommodate the total of all storms through the year. Many of these may have a
possible adverse effect on ground water, and some techniques may require
approval of State, federal and local agencies.
      B.   To qualify, an applicant must submit a request to the City for a
waiver of monthly service charges relating to the property. This request shall
include a certification from an engineer, or other evidence acceptable to the
City, that shows the system is separate and will dispose of the full range and
volume of storm water through the year on-site. The applicant shall also submit
a maintenance plan for assuring the system will function as designed. The
application must be signed by the property owner. An inspection/review fee
shall be paid at the time of application. If the application is denied, the
inspection/review fee will be credited to the service charges due. If the
request for the waiver is made as part of the construction plans, this fee
shall be waived. A decision denying an exemption may be appealed following the
procedures in this chapter. If approved, the waiver will be effective for the
next billing cycle.
      C.   The City retains the right to inspect the on-site measures to assure
they are functioning as designed. If at any time the measures are found to not
be effective, the exemption shall cease.
   6.   Credits for Water Quantity Portion of the SWU.
   New developments that provide on-site retention, disposal, or detention, or
provide off-site conveyance system enlargements are entitled to a credit in SWU
fees. To be eligible, new development, or portions of new development, must
include design and construction of a facility that meets one of the following
standards:
      A.   Retention facility sized to accommodate the full volume of storm
water through the year with no overflow or release into the SWU system.
Eligible facilities shall be exempt from SWU fees.
      B.   A disposal facility which keeps all storm and surface water
separated from the public system, and disposes of it on site for the full range
of storms during the year, including the winter, through on-site disposal (dry
wells, injection wells, percolation/evaporation basins). Eligible facilities
shall be exempt from SWU fees.
      C.   A detention facility which meets or exceeds the standards defined in
City rules for on-site storm water detention facilities. Eligible facilities
shall be entitled to a reduction of one-half of the actual number of ESUs
calculated.
      D.   Upsizing of the downstream conveyance system. Credit shall be
determined by the City on a case-by-case basis.
The term “on-site” means on the parcel, or on another parcel in the near
vicinity of that for which the credit or reduction is requested. To be eligible
for a credit (reduction) of the SWU fees, the request must be submitted prior
to, or as part of, the development process, but in all cases the request must
be made prior to the payment of the SWU fees. To be eligible for a credit, the
request can be made at any time, in accordance with this chapter. The request
shall demonstrate the property meets one of the above conditions. For on-site
facilities, the City reserves the right to inspect the facilities installed at
any time. If it is found that the system no longer functions, then the SWU fees
that were waived will become due and payable.
The rate for the service charge shall be established in accordance with Section
100.04 and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter and is,
on a fiscal year basis, the estimated storm water utility system actual costs,
less other projected revenue, divided by the estimated total number of ESUs
connected to the City storm water utility system. The City may prescribe by
rule further detail regarding determination, calculations, and classification
of impervious surfaces; and for payment of a deposit not to exceed one year’s
estimated storm water utility service charge as a condition of connection of
property to the City’s water system, or for continued maintenance of connection
to the system.
100.07   BILLING.
   1.   The City shall send a bill for the amount due by regular mail to every
user in the City. Mailing to the owner of record as shown in the assessor
records shall satisfy this requirement. The billing period shall be the same as
for water usage.
   2.   The bill date shall state that the recipient has thirty (30) days from
the billing date to file a notice of non-occupancy. The notice shall indicate
the relationship of the recipient to the property (e.g. owner, lessor,
mortgagee), whether on the imposition date the property was occupied, and if
so, by whom.
   3.   Upon receipt of the notice, the City shall determine who is obligated
for payment. Based on this determination, the City shall:
      A.   Issue a new bill to the occupant if the property was occupied by
someone other than the original recipient;
      B.   Reissue the bill to the recipient if it is found that that person
was the occupant;
      C.   Issue a bill to the owner as the user, if the property was not
occupied.
The City may take into account any reasonably reliable information available to
it, including utility or water district records.
   4.   Failure to file the notice such that it is actually received by the
City within the thirty (30) days of the mailing date of the bill shall
conclusively establish that the original addressee was the user on the
imposition date.
   5.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person may
agree in writing to be responsible for payment of the charge. Upon filing of
such a writing with the City, subsequent bills shall be sent to that person,
and that person shall be deemed to be the user.
   6.   It is a violation of this chapter to knowingly provide false
information to the City regarding any fact related to billing of a storm water
utility service charge or other charge of the City.
100.08   DELINQUENCY, COLLECTION, INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   1.   Charges imposed under this chapter are deemed delinquent when not paid
in full by the due date provided in a billing for the charge.
   2.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
discharge wastewater into the City’s storm water utility system. It is also
unlawful and a violation of this chapter to maintain a connection to or use the
City’s storm water utility system without paying the appropriate charges and
fees established in this section or any rule adopted pursuant hereto. If no
billing is sent, such charges are deemed delinquent thirty (30) days from the
date services were provided to a user.
   3.   Delinquent charges may be collected pursuant to the same procedure as
with delinquent water bills by the City, with the assistance of City legal
counsel, without further action or authorization by the Council.
   4.   Delinquent charges may be recovered by the City in the same manner as
provided in
Chapter 92.
   5.   In addition to remedies provided for collection of a debt, the City may
seek a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting continued occupancy of
premises, requiring disconnection of the premises from the public storm water
utility system, and termination of water and sewer service to the user’s
premises.
   6.   The Council may prescribe, by resolution and order, a schedule of
interest and penalty charges to be imposed upon delinquent charges.
   7.   In a collection action under this chapter, the City shall be entitled
to its costs and reasonable attorney fees, including at trial and on appeal, if
it is the prevailing party.
   8.   In addition to the right of the City to bring a civil action to collect
any delinquent charges or enforce any provision of the chapter, the City may
take any of the following actions to secure payment:
      A.   The City may refuse to issue any permit to any person who is
delinquent in any payment due under this chapter.
      B.   The City may terminate provision of storm and surface water service
to premises used by the user.
      C.   The City may terminate sanitary sewer service to premises used by
the user.
      D.   The City may terminate water service to the premises used by the
user.
Termination of service pursuant to this subsection shall be according to
procedures adopted under Section
100.09. If the City terminates service as provided in this section, the cost of
such disconnection shall be added to the amount of any other delinquent charges
and shall be recoverable in the same manner as are such charges.
   9.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to make the owner of property
responsible for the storm utility user charge of a tenant unless the owner
agrees in writing to be so liable; to require any person to pay the charges
incurred by prior occupant or user of property; or to require any person to pay
to reconnect service where that service was terminated due to the delinquency
of the account of a prior occupant or user.
   10.   A lien against property shall exist from the date the bill was last
brought current in the same manner as with a lien for water service. The
provisions of Section
92.08 of this Code of Ordinances shall apply to delinquent storm water utility
bills.
100.09   REQUEST FOR SERVICE; DISCONNECTION FROM SERVICE; TERMINATION OF USER
CHARGES.
   1.   The issuance of a storm water utility system connection permit relating
to impervious surface on a property or parcel shall be deemed to be a specific
request for provision of storm and surface water service to that property.
   2.   Any user of the public storm water utility system may disconnect
property served by the system from service and terminate further user charges
by utilizing the procedure in this section.
   3.   A person desiring to disconnect property from the system shall make
application on a form provided by the City and pay the fee established
therefor. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property; shall
provide evidence of demolition or removal of any impervious surface on the
property, or of installation of an approved on-site storm and surface water
retention or infiltration system serving the property. Such on-site system
shall be designed and operated to retain or dispose of on-site all storm and
surface waters generated by impervious surfaces on the property, through the
full range of storm events prescribed by City rule. The Council may, by rule,
adopt additional criteria and administrative procedures to provide for
disconnection from storm water utility service, and suspension or termination
of user charges.
   4.   Upon receipt of a complete application for disconnection, and
verification of information thereon, and installation of the on-site system or
demolition of impervious area as provided in Subsection 3 of this section, the
City shall issue a permit for disconnection. Whether performed by the City or
other person, the City shall inspect the disconnection.
   5.   The City may inspect the on-site system at any time. If at any time the
system fails to perform to the standard specified in subsection 3 above, the
City shall notify the owner to correct the system. If the system is not
corrected to meet on-site retention or infiltration standards within thirty
(30) days of such notice, the City may treat such deficiency as a reconnection
to the storm water utility system and as a specific request for storm water
utility service. Service fees shall then relate back to the earliest date on
which the system failed to meet applicable performance standards for on-site
retention or disposal.
100.10   ADOPTION OF RULES; INTERPRETATIONS AND APPEALS.
   1.   Adoption of Rules.
      A.   The Council may, by resolution and order, promulgate rules
pertaining to matters within the scope of this chapter.
      B.   Any rule adopted pursuant to this section shall require a public
hearing. Not less than four (4) or more than twenty (20) days before such
hearing, public notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City. Such notice shall include the
place, time and purpose of the hearing and the location at which copies of the
full text of the proposed rules may be obtained.
      C.   At the public hearing, the Council shall hear testimony concerning
the proposed rules. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall
either adopt the proposal, modify or reject it. If a modification is made, an
additional public hearing shall be held but no additional notice shall be
required if such additional hearing is announced at the meeting at which the
modification is made. All rules shall be effective upon adoption by the Council
and shall be filed in the office of the City.
      D.   Notwithstanding paragraphs B and C of this subsection, a rule maybe
adopted without prior notice upon a finding that failure of the Council to act
promptly will result in serious prejudice to the public interest or the
interest of the affected parties, including the specific reasons for such
prejudice. Any rule adopted pursuant to this subsection shall be effective for
a period of not longer than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   2.   Appeals. The following may be appealed to the City Council:
      A.   A determination that the person is obligated to pay the service
charge imposed herein.
      B.   A dispute as to the proper calculation of the amount due from the
person. This does not include, however, an objection to the overall
establishment of the storm water utility charge or the amount per ESU
established by the Council or the establishment of classes of impervious
surface area pursuant to this chapter.
      C.   A discretionary decision implementing a rule adopted by the Council
if an appeal is provided in the Order adopting the rule.
   3.   The appeal shall be filed in writing and must be actually received by
the City no later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the action appealed. The
30 days shall be calculated from the due date of the original or reissued bill
in response to a notice of non-occupancy, whichever is later.
   4.   The appeal shall be heard by the Council in an informal proceeding. The
appellant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to submit written and oral
support for the appellant’s position. The Council shall issue a written
decision within 30 days of the proceeding. The written decision of the Council
may be appealed to the District Court of Hancock County by writ of review.
Failure to properly exhaust the administrative remedy provided for herein shall
constitute a bar to judicial relief.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                       105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required        105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted           105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required  
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result
from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
   2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
   3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   8.   “Recyclable materials” means the following materials: plastic, glass,
metal, magazines and catalogs, corrugated cardboard, newsprint, boxboard and
junk mail. Residents in the City shall be notified in more detail from time to
time as to the types of materials which are to be recycled.
   9.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   10.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and each
individual unit in a multiple-family dwelling and each mobile home in a mobile
home park.
   11.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
   12.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   13.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
   14.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   15.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty
(30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such
nuisances in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
   1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of
any structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
   2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings
at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in
compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
   3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
   4.   Yard Waste. The open burning of yard waste is prohibited without the
express written permission of the Police Chief, in consultation with the City
Administrator or designee of the City Council.
   5.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
   6.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of
public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
   7.   Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning
of paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing
organic forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium or arsenic) and
seed corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if
burned in accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3h])
   8.   Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if
in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3i])
   9.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of
a demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Fire Chief,
provided that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and
limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3j])
   10.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[2])
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises
or placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection by public or
private haulers. As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as
grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not
include tree stumps. Branches or brush shall not be placed for collection more
than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the pickup time.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means
waste materials, including (but not limited to) poisons, pesticides,
herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive
materials, and similar harmful waste that requires special handling and that
must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect
the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises,
dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with
the following specifications:
      A.   Residential. Residential waste containers are provided by the
contract hauler. Said containers shall remain the property of the hauler and
shall remain at the property at all times. The property owner shall be
responsible for maintaining the container in good working order and shall be
responsible for the costs of replacing any container that becomes unusable for
any reason whatsoever, in the hauler’s sole discretion, or if such container is
lost or stolen.
      B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall
be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
   3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb or alley line by
the owner or occupant of the premises served. Such containers shall not be set
out earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled
collection and must be removed no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day following
collection.
   4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not
in compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
(Section 105.09 – Ord. 474 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
105.11   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
   The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Landfill of North Iowa are
hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the
disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish            
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
   The City shall provide by contract for the collection of solid waste, except
bulky rubbish as provided in Section
106.05, from residential premises only. The owners or operators of commercial,
industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid
waste produced upon such premises.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03   LOADING.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
   Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council.
106.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property
for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this
chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or
other residential buildings.
106.07   CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City
without first entering into a contract with the City. This section does not
prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises
owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is
not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material
from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such materials are
conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained
that none of the material being transported is spilled upon any public right-
of-way.
106.08   COLLECTION FEES.
   The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the
following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
   1.   Schedule of Fees. The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, used or available, are:
      A.   For each residential premise there shall be a flat service charge of
$12.00 per month plus $6.00 per month recycling fee, which shall be billed to
the owner, renter or occupant of said property.
      B.   The owners of multi-family units shall pay a flat rate service
charge of $12.00 per month plus $6.00 per month recycling fee for each dwelling
unit. The owners of trailer parks shall pay a flat service charge of $12.00 per
month plus $6.00 per month recycling fee for each trailer.
      C.   For commercial, industrial, and institutional premises, as
negotiated by the owner or operator and the collector.
(Section 106.08 – Ord. 473 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
106.09   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the
owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and
severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal. Fees
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
 
110.01 Franchise Granted      110.06 Continuous Service
110.02 Mains and Pipes        110.07 Franchise Fee
110.03 Excavations            110.08 Term of Franchise
110.04 Location of Facilities 110.09 Severability
110.05 Right-Of-Way Vacation  110.10 Entire Agreement
 
110.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and Light Company, hereinafter
refenced to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the light, privilege
and non-exclusive franchise for the term of twenty-five (25) years from and
after the passage, adoption, approval and acceptance of this Chapter, 4  to lay
down, maintain and operate the necessary pipes, mains and other conductors and
appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues, alleys and public places
in the City as now or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of distributing,
supplying and selling gas to said City and the residents thereof and to persons
and corporations beyond the limits thereof; also the right of eminent domain as
provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa. The term “gas” as used in this
franchise shall be construed to mean natural gas only.
 
Notes
4 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 431 adopting a natural gas franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on May 8, 2018.
110.02   MAINS AND PIPES.
   The mains and pipes of the Company must be so placed as not to interfere
unnecessarily with water pipes, drains, sewers and fire plugs which have been
or may hereafter be placed in any street, alley and public places in said City
nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary
drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City.
The Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless
from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in
the laying down, operation and maintenance of said natural gas distribution
system.
110.03   EXCAVATIONS.
   In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place, Company,
its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by
guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall backfill all openings in such manner as to prevent settling
or depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations with same
materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical. The Company shall
not be required to restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks or other
areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its
immediate previously existing condition.
110.04   LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing facilities
or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the
street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about any such street
or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. If the City requires the Company to relocate facilities in the
public right of way that have been relocated at Company expense at the
direction of the City during the previous ten years, the reasonable costs of
such relocation will be paid by the City. If the City orders or requests the
Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment for any reason other
than as specified above, or as the result of the initial request for a
commercial, private or other non-public development, the Company shall receive
payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its
existing facilities or equipment. The City shall consider reasonable
alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority
under this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative
location for the Company’s facilities as part of its relocation request.
110.05   RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley or public
ground where the Company has gas facilities, the City shall grant the Company a
utility easement for said facilities. If the City does not grant the Company a
utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street,
avenue, alley or public place, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain
easements for existing Company facilities.
110.06   CONTINUOUS SERVICE.
   Said Company, its successors and assigns, shall throughout the term of the
franchise distribute to all consumers gas of good quality and shall furnish
uninterrupted service, except as interruptible service may be specifically
contracted for with consumers; provided, however, that any prevention of
service caused by fire, act of God or unavoidable event or accident shall not
be a breach of this condition if the Company resumes service as quickly as is
reasonably practical after the happening of the act causing the interruption.
110.07   FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of zero percent (0%) upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of natural gas by the Company within the corporate
limits of the City. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise fee upon
receipt of written approval of the required tax rider tariff from the Iowa
Utilities Board. The amount of the franchise fee shall be shown separately on
the utility bill to each customer. The Company shall remit franchise fee
receipts to the City no more frequently than on or before the last business day
of the month following each calendar year quarter. The Company shall not, under
any circumstances be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have
been collected from customers and remitted to the City. In the event the
Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the City's
imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in
identifying customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or
individual customers the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses
incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.
110.08   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and
after its written acceptance by the Company. The acceptance shall be filed with
the City Clerk within ninety (90) days from passage of this Chapter.
110.09   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section or provision of this chapter is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or portions and to this end each section and provision of this
ordinance is severable.
110.10   ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
   This Chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be supplemented, superseded, modified, or otherwise amended without the
approval and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no
event shall the City enact or maintain any ordinance or place any limitations,
either operationally or through the assessment of fees, that create additional
burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
 
111.01 Franchise Granted                111.07 Appliable Regulations
111.02 Poles and Wires; Indemnification 111.08 Continuous Service
111.03 Excavations                      111.09 Franchise Fee
111.04 Construction and Maintenance     111.10 Term of Franchise
111.05 Right-Of-Way Vacation            111.11 Entire Agreement
111.06 Vegetation                        
 
111.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and Light Company, hereinafter
referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the right and non-
exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, erect, maintain and
operate in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of
electricity and a distribution system for electric light, heat and power and
the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and
other appliances for the distribution of electric current along, under and upon
the streets, alleys and public places in the said City to supply individuals,
corporations, communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of said
City with electric light, heat and power for the period of 25 years; 5 also the
right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.
 
Notes
5 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 432 adopting an electric franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on May 8, 2018.
111.02   POLES AND WIRES; INDEMNIFICATION.
   The poles, lines, wires, circuits, and other appliances shall be placed and
maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said
streets, alleys, and public places in said City nor unnecessarily interfere
with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the
sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City. The said Company, its
successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages
to the extent arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in
the erection or maintenance of said system.
111.03   EXCAVATIONS.
   In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place, Company,
its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by
guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent settling
or depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations with same
materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical. The Company shall
not be required to restore or modify public right of way, sidewalks or other
areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its
immediate previously existing condition.
111.04   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing facilities
or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the
street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about any such street
or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement. If the City requires the Company to relocate facilities in the
public right of way that have been relocated at Company expense at the
direction of the City during the previous ten years, the reasonable costs of
such relocation will be paid by the City. If the City orders or requests the
Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment for any reason other
than as specified above, or as the result of the initial request for a
commercial, private or other non-public development, the Company shall receive
payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its
existing facilities or equipment. The City shall consider reasonable
alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority
under this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative
location for the Company’s facilities as part of its relocation request.
111.05   RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley or public
ground where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities. If the City does not grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating
a street, avenue, alley or public place, the City shall at its cost and expense
obtain easements for existing Company facilities.
111.06   VEGETATION.
   The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company
expense any tree extending into any street, alley or public grounds to maintain
electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs,
branches or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the
Company. The pruning and removal of trees shall be performed in accordance with
Company’s then current line clearance vegetation plan as filed and approved by
the Iowa Utilities Board, as well as all applicable codes and standards
referenced therein.
111.07   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy
in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board and
the Company’s tariffs. The Company will maintain compliance with Iowa Utilities
Board regulatory standards for reliability.
111.08   CONTINUOUS SERVICE.
   Service to be rendered by the Company under this franchise shall be
continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as
quickly as is reasonably possible.
111.09   FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of zero percent (0%) upon the gross
revenue generated from sales of natural gas by the Company within the corporate
limits of the City. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise fee upon
receipt of written approval of the required tax rider tariff from the Iowa
Utilities Board. The amount of the franchise fee shall be shown separately on
the utility bill to each customer. The Company shall remit franchise fee
receipts to the City no more frequently than on or before the last business day
of the month following each calendar year quarter. The Company shall not, under
any circumstances be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have
been collected from customers and remitted to the City. In the event the
Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the City’s
imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in
identifying customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or
individual customers the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses
incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.
111.10   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after written
acceptance by the Company. The acceptance shall be filed with the City Clerk
within 90 days from passage of this chapter.
111.11   ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
   This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be supplemented, superseded, modified, or otherwise amended without the written
approval and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no
event shall the City enact or maintain any Ordinance or place any limitations,
either operationally or through the assessment of fees other than those
approved and accepted by the Company within this Chapter, that create
additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
CHAPTER 112
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(TRANSMISSION SYSTEM)
 
112.01 Franchise Granted     112.07 Non-Exclusivity
112.02 Indemnification       112.08 Undergrounding
112.03 Relocation            112.09 Term of Agreement
112.04 Modern System         112.10 Future Developments
112.05 Vegetation Management 112.11 Entire Agreement
112.06 Continuous Service     
 
112.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to the Company the right and franchise to acquire, construct,
erect, maintain and operate
in the City of Garner, Hancock County, Iowa, a transmission system for electric
power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines,
wires, conduits and other appliances
or equipment and substations for the transmission of electric current 
(collectively, the “Facilities”) along, under and upon the streets,
avenues, alleys and public places in the
City of Garner, Hancock County, Iowa; also the right to erect and maintain
upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public  places, transmission
lines through the City of Garner, Hancock County,
Iowa, for the period of 25 years; 6
 also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of
Iowa.  City agrees to not permit or grant approval for any development or
construction that would result in
the Company’s facilities violating the National Electric Safety Code, as it exists at the
time of the permit or approval.
 
Notes
6 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 444 adopting an electric franchise for the
  City, was passed, and adopted on February 26, 2019.
112.02   INDEMNIFICATION.
   The facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on
the streets, alleys,
and public places in the City nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use
of the
same, including ordinary drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the
City, and the Company shall hold the City
free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of
the Company in the erection or maintenance of the transmission system.
112.03   RELOCATION.
   Except as provided herein below, the Company shall, at its cost and expense,
locate and relocate its facilities in, on, over or under any public street or
alley in the City in such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably
require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of, in
or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient
operation of any such improvement. If the City orders or requests the Company
to relocate its facilities for the primary benefit of a commercial or private
project, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or private
developer or other non-public entity, the Company shall receive payment for the
cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities. The
City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works
projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable additional
expense in exercising its authority under this section. The City shall also
provide a reasonable alternate location for the Company’s facilities. The City
shall give the Company reasonable advance written notice to vacate a public
right-of-way. Vacating a public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of
its right to operate and maintain existing facilities until the reasonable cost
of relocating the same are paid to the Company.
112.04   MODERN SYSTEM.
   The system authorized by this chapter shall be modern and up-to-date and
shall be kept in a modern and up-to-date condition.
112.05   VEGETATION MANAGEMENT.  
   To promote public safety in proximity to its facilities and to maintain
electric reliability, the Company is authorized and empowered to remove, cut,
trim, destroy, or otherwise control any tree, shrub, brush or pails thereto
located within or extending into any street, alley, right-of-way or public
grounds. In addition, the Company is authorized to remove, cut, trim, destroy,
or otherwise control any tree, located adjacent to any street, alley, right-of-
way, or public grounds that, in the sole and absolute judgment of the Company
may interfere with the safe maintenance, operation, or use of its facilities or
which in falling might touch the facilities. The foregoing vegetation
management shall be completed in accordance with the most current nationally
accepted safety and utility industry standards, as revised and updated from
time to time.
112.06   CONTINUOUS SERVICE.
   Service to be rendered by the Company under this franchise shall be
continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, Acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties; or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as
quickly as is reasonably possible.
112.07   NON-EXCLUSIVITY.  
   The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.
112.08   UNDERGROUNDING.
   The City may request estimates for the undergrounding of replacement lines,
upgrades or new lines, including lines to be adjusted for road moves or for
other specific projects. When requested, the Company will provide to the City
two estimates: i) An estimate for the cost of the project with overhead
construction and ii) An estimate for the cost of the project with underground
construction. The City will have no more than 60 days from the estimate date to
determine if it wants the line built overhead or placed underground. If the
City chooses underground construction for such project, the City will be
responsible for the incremental cost of undergrounding, if and to the extent,
such costs are not already part of or included in a precondition payment for
relocation pursuant to Section
112.03. The incremental cost of undergrounding is defined as the differential
between the estimate for underground construction and the estimate for overhead
construction. Upon receipt of the City’s payment for the incremental cost of
undergrounding, the Company will install the underground facilities. The
Company reserves the right to bill City for the amount that the incremental
cost associated with installation exceeds its estimate. The City reserves the
right to a refund of overpayment if the incremental costs are less than the
amount billed in the estimate. If the City wishes to have a line not scheduled
for replacement or upgrade placed underground, the City shall contact the
Company to make such a request. The City shall cover all costs related to his
work. If undergrounding of transmission lines requires entities interconnecting
with the Company to make adjustments to their electrical systems, the City
bears the responsibility of communication with those entities and, if it
chooses, the cost of converting their facilities from overhead to underground.
The Company reserves the right to review all of the City’s communications with
the affected entities.
112.09   TERM OF AGREEMENT.  
   The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights
granted thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after its acceptance by
the Company,
as herein provided.  The anniversary date shall be the date this franchise is filed with the City Clerk or
otherwise becomes effective by operation of law.
112.10   FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS.
   The City agrees it will not permit any real estate developments or land uses
in the City that would cause the Company’s Facilities to violate the setback or
safety requirements of the National Electric Safety Code or any law, regulation
or chapter of the State of Iowa, Hancock County or the City.
112.11   ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
   This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the approval and
acceptance of the Company. Upon acceptance by the Company, this Chapter shall
supersede, abrogate, and repeal any prior electric system chapter between the
Company and the City as of the date this chapter is accepted by the Company.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City enact any chapter or
place any limitations, either operationally.
CHAPTER 115
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
115.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation 115.09 City Construction and Paving
115.02 Franchise, License or Easement     115.10 Design Notice to City
Required
115.03 Fees Required                      115.11 Assignment
115.04 Limit on Term                      115.12 Forfeiture
115.05 Placement of Facilities            115.13 Application
115.06 Indemnification                    115.14 Home Rule
115.07 Regulation by the City             115.15 New Technologies
115.08 Construction and Excavation by      
Holders
 
115.01   PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform rules and controls to
ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by the City and
others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for the delivery of
utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment,
ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety and welfare
of the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the
public streets and other public property and secure the rights of the City to a
return on its investment in public property. This chapter is to be interpreted
in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the
streets and other public property.
115.02   FRANCHISE, LICENSE OR EASEMENT REQUIRED.
   No person or other entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public
property without first obtaining a franchise, license or easement from the
City. The City shall not enter into or issue any franchise, license or easement
that grants exclusive rights.
115.03   FEES REQUIRED.
   No franchise, license or easement for the use of public right-of-way or
other public property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to
pay a reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of public right-of-
way or other public property.
115.04   LIMIT ON TERM.
   No franchise, license or easement for use of the public right-of-way or
other public property shall be granted for a term of more than twenty-five (25)
years.
115.05   PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   The facilities, fixtures and equipment of the distribution, transmission or
sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or easement,
shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably
interfere with the travel on the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges
and public places in the City, nor shall such facilities, fixtures and
equipment unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with the proper use of the
same, including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of
the sewers, underground pipe or other property of the City. In the event that
facilities, fixtures and equipment of any person or other entity located within
a public right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road construction or
road reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction or the
construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public
works or the construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City-owned
utility, such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be
completed by the owner of such facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall
upon request of any person or other entity holding a franchise, license or
easement, review any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures and
equipment within the public right-of-way and advise the person or other entity
of any conflict such construction may have with planned or anticipated public
improvements, but failure of the City to so advise such person or other entity
will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this
chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City engineer may require placement
of equipment or facilities belonging to any holder of a franchise, license or
easement be limited to locations designated by the Council if such limitation
is deemed by the engineer to be necessary to protect the integrity of use of
present and future users of the public right-of-way or other public property.
115.06   INDEMNIFICATION.
   The holder of any franchise, license or easement shall indemnify and hold
the City harmless at all times during the term of the franchise, license or
easement from and against all claims for injury or damage to any person or
property caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of its
facilities, fixtures or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its
employees. In case of any suit or action at law being commenced against the
City, upon any claim for damage arising out of any loss, injury or damage
claimed to have been caused by any installation, improvement, obstruction or
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the City, and
which installation, improvement, obstruction or excavation was made or left in,
under or upon such street, sidewalk, alley or public place by the holder of a
franchise, license or easement, its agents, contractors or employees, upon
being notified in writing by the City of such action or proceeding, the holder
of said franchise, license or easement shall appear and make proper defense
thereto at the expense of the holder of the franchise, license or easement; and
if any judgment or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the City
therein, the holder of said franchise, license or easement shall assume, pay
and satisfy such judgment or decree, with the cost thereof.
115.07   REGULATION BY THE CITY.
   The City reserves the right to make reasonable general regulations for the
use of streets and other public property which unless otherwise specifically
provided shall apply to any holder of a franchise, license or easement.
115.08   CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS.
   A written permit will be obtained from the City engineer whenever it becomes
necessary for the holder of any franchise, license or easement to excavate in
streets or public grounds of the City. Such permits shall state a particular
part or point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length
of time in which such permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception
to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency involving
public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest
opportunity after the work has started. In making excavations in the streets,
the holder of any franchise, license or easement shall proceed with such work
as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. The holder of any
franchise, license or easement shall properly protect, according to safety
standards generally accepted at the time of placement as may be determined from
time to time by the City engineer, all excavations and obstructions by proper
placement of shoring, surface plates, barricades, warning lights and such other
or additional devices as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the
City engineer such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely
protected, the engineer shall notify such holder of a franchise, license or
easement, who shall immediately comply with such reasonable instructions.
Immediately after use, any trenches for excavations which the holder of a
franchise, license or easement has opened shall be filled. However, no trench
or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered without giving the City
the right to inspect the same. All backfilling in streets will be according to
City specifications. Temporary street surfacing will be placed in such
excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened,
disturbed or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like
materials at the expense of the holder of a franchise, license or easement and
left in as good condition as before the opening, disturbance or damage
occurred. In the event like replacement materials are not available, the holder
of the franchise, license or easement shall notify the City engineer, who must
approve the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder of a
franchise, license or easement fails to comply with the provision of this
section, after having been given reasonable notice, the City may do such work
as may be needed to properly repair such pavements, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters or other portions of streets and public places and the cost thereof
shall be repaired to the City by the holder of the franchise, license or
easement. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of street
paving or sidewalks, but causes greater disturbance than to just the area cut,
rather than replace only the area cut, the holder of a franchise, license or
easement shall replace that area as may be ordered by the City engineer, which
in no event shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed.
115.09   CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING.
   Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade
line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any
conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other City-owned
public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any
franchise, license or easement, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its
service lines and other property in the streets or other public places at its
own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or
public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so
constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements,
including but not limited to urban renewal projects, the City may require the
holder of a franchise, license or easement to relocate its poles, service lines
and appurtenances in the streets at the owner’s expense. The City may at its
discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and related work being
performed by the holder of a franchise, license or easement. Should the holder
of the franchise, license or easement fail or refuse to do and perform the
things provided in this chapter, the City may, after reasonable notice, perform
the work and charge the expense thereof to the holder of the franchise, license
or lease and the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall promptly
pay said charges.
115.10   DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY.
   The holder of a franchise, license or easement shall promptly, upon request,
furnish the Council a detailed map or maps of its distribution system both
within the City limits and the area within two miles surrounding the City. The
holder of a franchise, license or easement shall thereafter update the map or
maps upon request, but not more often than every year, showing all subsequent
additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation by
the City or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any
franchise, license or easement regarding current information on the location of
underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to
contact the holder of a franchise, license or easement under this section shall
be satisfied if contact is made with the corporation organized pursuant to Code
of Iowa Chapter 480 or an entity with a similar function utilized by both the
City and the Company, currently the Iowa One Call System.
115.11   ASSIGNMENT.
   No sale, assignment or lease of any franchise, license or easement of the
use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective
until it is approved by the Council and until the holder thereof has filed in
the office of the Clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer,
disposition or assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the proposed
procedure and the terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the City shall
not be unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee or lessee shall
similarly file an instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting
the terms of the franchise, license or lease and agreeing to perform all of the
conditions thereof.
115.12   FORFEITURE.
   The violation of any material portion of a franchise, license or easement by
the holder thereof or its successors or assigns or its failure promptly to
perform any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of
said franchise, license or easement and the termination of all rights
thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City
after written notice to the holder thereof and a continuation of the violation,
failure or default specified on the notice for at least thirty (30) days from
the date the notice was served.
115.13   APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all franchises, licenses and easements granted
by the City, including all existing franchises, licenses and easements.
115.14   HOME RULE.
   This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on
the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City
reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate
and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City
shall be enforceable against the holder of any franchise, license or easement.
115.15   NEW TECHNOLOGIES.
   Should, within the term of any franchise, license or easement, developments
within the field for which the grant was made offer to the holder thereof the
opportunity to effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers
through use of a substance or material other than those for which the grant was
originally made, then the holder of the franchise, license or easement may
petition the Council, which, with such requirements or limitation as it deems
necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of
such substances under the terms and conditions of the franchise, license or
easement.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit,
the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred
in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine
if they conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve
an application for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform
to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a liquor
control license, a retail wine permit, or a retail beer permit and shall
endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the
application, necessary fee, and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the
Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such
further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   A person holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the
person’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday
and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a liquor control
license or retail wine or beer permit granted the privilege of selling
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, wine, or beer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of
the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor
control license or the holder of a Class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New
Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00
a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the
day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b] & 123.150)
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.    Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the
Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except
mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not
for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to
rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of
the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic
liquor in any bottle or other container that is designed for the transporting
of such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
   12.   Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to
remain upon licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar
volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of
prepared foods. This provision does not apply to holders of a Class “C” beer
permit only.
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   The following provisions pertain to electronic or mechanical amusement
devices, which are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license or
beer permit as specifically authorized in Section 99B.10 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C)
   1.   As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical amusement device”
means a device that awards a prize redeemable for merchandise on the premises
where the device is located and that is required to be registered with the Iowa
Department of Inspection and Appeals.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to
participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing an electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing an
electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person under
the age of 21 to participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical
amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of an electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of
21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration  
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
   A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed,
and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of
such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:   FEE:
July, August or September     $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March    $ 37.50
April, May or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within 30
days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil
penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension
of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty
(30) days. The retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied
under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a
copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application
for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and
the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
   Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions              122.12 Notice
122.03 License Required         122.13 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.15 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.17 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction          
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of
a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a
transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of five
dollars ($5.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover
the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
   The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance
of any license.
   1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of twenty dollars
($20.00) per year.
   2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
      A.   For one day               $    10.00
      B.   For one week            $    50.00
      C.   For up to six (6) months         $   200.00
      D.   For one year or major part thereof   $   350.00
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
   A waiting period of not less than three (3) business days
from the date of the application shall be in effect to provide sufficient time
to complete a background check. If after that time the Clerk finds the
application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter,
the facts stated therein are found to be correct and the license fee paid, a
license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
   All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are
in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   After notice and hearing, the Clerk may revoke any license issued under this
chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or
morals.
122.12   NOTICE.
   The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the
possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the
complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
122.13   HEARING.
   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.14   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.15   APPEAL.
   If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall
have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The
Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority
vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out the decision
of the Council.
122.16   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.17   REBATES.
   Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to
a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it
expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total
license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then
multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at
least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to
cover administrative costs.
122.18   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the Garner-Hayfield-Ventura School
District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the
school.
   5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
122.19   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of
Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the Clerk
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the
Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.15 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Time Limit
123.03 Application         123.09 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Overhead Wires
123.06 Permit Issued        
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
   A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks,
dollies or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or
similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 100 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03   APPLICATION.
   Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the
Clerk. The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a
corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the
shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to
issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment
for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that
the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily Injury - $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.
   2.   Property Damage - $50,000 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT ISSUED.
   Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate,
the Clerk shall issue a permit. A separate permit shall be required for each
house, building or similar structure to be moved.
123.07   PUBLIC SAFETY.
   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag
persons at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.08   TIME LIMIT.
   No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve
(12) hours without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.09   REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation
of Section
123.08 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.10   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
   It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.11   OVERHEAD WIRES.
   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 124
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
 
124.01 Purpose                       124.04 Development Design Standards
124.02 Definitions Related to Adult- 124.05 Responsibilities of the Operator
Oriented Establishments
                                    124.06 Minors
124.03 Location Restrictions         124.07 Hours of Operation
 
124.01   PURPOSE.
   The Council finds:
   1.   Adult-oriented establishments require special consideration in order to
protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such
establishments as well as the citizens of the City.
   2.   Adult-oriented establishments, because of their very nature, have a
detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and surrounding
residential areas adjacent to them.
   3.   The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health
concern of the City which demands reasonable regulation of adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the health and well-being of the community.
   4.   Adult-oriented establishments, due to their very nature, have serious
objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area.
   5.   The City wants to prevent these adverse effects and thereby protect the
health, safety, and welfare of its residents; protect residents from increased
crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character
of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight.
   6.   It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact content neutral regulations that
address the secondary effects of adult-oriented establishments as well as the
health problems associated with such establishments.
124.02   DEFINITIONS RELATED TO ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   1.   “Adult bookstore” means an establishment that has a facility or
facilities, including (but not limited to) booths, cubicles, rooms, or stalls
for the presentation of adult entertainment, including adult-oriented films,
movies, or live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an
establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books, films, video
cassettes, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined below.
   2.   “Adult entertainment” means any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display, or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme or
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below.
   3.   “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building used for
presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below for
observation by patrons of the building.
   4.   “Adult novelty shop” means an establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade and sales in novelty
or other items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or
design for sexual activity or simulating such activity.
   5.   “Adult-oriented establishment” means any premises, including, without
limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, or adult novelty
shops. It further means any premises to which public patrons or members are
invited or admitted and which are physically arranged so as to provide booths,
cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the
premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein
an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a
patron, or a member, where such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated, or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. “Adult-oriented
establishment” further includes, without limitation, any premises physically
arranged and used as such whether advertised or represented as an adult
entertainment studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity
studio, or any other term of like import.
   6.   “Operator” means any person, partnership, or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
   7.   “Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, buttocks, female breasts below the areola, or male
genitalia.
   8.   “Specified sexual activities” means simulated or actual: (i) showing of
human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) acts of sexual
activity, sodomy, or sadomasochism; or (iii) fondling or erotic touching of
human genitals, buttocks, or female breasts.
124.03   LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   An adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted within the City only in
an I-2 Heavy Industrial District upon receipt of a site plan and approval of a
special exception use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this Code of Ordinances, and only if it meets all of the location requirements
set forth below. Distances provided shall be measured by following a straight
line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the
property parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be
located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district
boundary line from which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be
separated.
   1.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of the
road right-of-way for Highway 18 and for Highway 69 within the City limits.
   2.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited in or within 1,000 feet of
the borders of a residential district.
   3.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of religious worship.
   4.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
public or private school offering general education for students from
kindergarten to twelfth grade or any public library or museum.
   5.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
registered daycare home or registered daycare business.
   6.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
public park or playground. For purposes of this section, bike paths, trails,
waterways, and boat launches shall not be deemed a public park.
   7.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
other adult entertainment business.
   8.   Adult-oriented establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises.
124.04   DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   1.   Exterior. It is unlawful for an owner of an adult-oriented
establishment:
      A.   To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside the establishment.
      B.   To allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      C.   To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other
than a single color.
   2.   Signage. The display surfaces of the sign shall not contain any
flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
124.05   RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR.
   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to
supervise the employee’s conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
124.06   MINORS.
   It is unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of
age to enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment at any
time that the establishment is open for business. The operator must ensure that
an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at all times during regular
business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed that an
attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished a valid driver’s license issued by a
state and reflecting that person’s age.
124.07   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   An adult-oriented establishment may remain open for business no longer than
the hours from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, seven days a week.
CHAPTER 125
HOTEL MOTEL TAX
 
125.01 Definitions 125.04 Collection
125.02 Tax Imposed 125.05 Use of Tax Revenue
125.03 Exemptions  125.06 Effective Date of Tax Imposition
 
125.01   DEFINITIONS.
   “Renting” and “rent” as used in this chapter, including any kind of direct
or indirect charge for the use of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping
quarters.
125.02   TAX IMPOSED.
   There is imposed a seven percent hotel motel tax upon the gross receipts
from the renting of any and all sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping
quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house,
manufactured or mobile home which is tangible personal property, tourist court,
or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests
for rent, whether with or without meals.
125.03   TAX EXEMPTION.
   All of the following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter and
from the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section
125.02:
   1.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive
days, except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section.
   2.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for the period beginning after 90
consecutive days of rental by such person, if the rental is a room, apartment,
or sleeping quarter in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, or rooming
house, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to a
transient guest.
   3.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1[8] of the Code of
Iowa, and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat
or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
   4.   The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and
in memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the City.
   5.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a nonprofit
lodging provider and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for the
friends and family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the
patient and the length of stay is based upon the needs of the friends, family,
or patient. For purposes of this subsection, “nonprofit lodging provider” means
a nonprofit entity which is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code that maintains an established
facility that provides lodging to friends and family of a hospital patient
during a time of medical need of the patient.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.5)
125.04   COLLECTION.
   The tax imposed in this Chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.
125.05   USE OF TAX REVENUE.
   The revenue derived from the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be used as
follows:
   1.   At least 50% of the revenues derived there from for the acquisition of
sites for, or constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing,
operating, or maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment
facilities including but not limited to memorial buildings, halls and
monuments, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and
parking areas or facilities located at those recreation, convention, cultural,
or entertainment facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due,
on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the county or City for
those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities; or for the
promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the City or
county and surrounding areas.
   2.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the City which levies the tax
for any City operations authorized by law as a proper purpose for the
expenditure within statutory limitations of City revenues derived from ad
valorem taxes.
125.06   EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE AND TAX IMPOSITION.
   This Chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its final
passage, approval, and publication as provided by law, and upon ratification by
a majority of the eligible electors for the City of Garner, Iowa, voting on the
question of imposition as provided by Section 423A.4 of the Code of Iowa, 2016.
7  The tax shall be imposed beginning on the 1st day of July 2017, following
the required notice of at least 45 days to the Director of Revenue and Finance
as provided by Section 423A.4 of the Code of Iowa, 2016.
 
Notes
7 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 422 adopting the Hotel Motel Tax, was passed and
  adopted on May 9, 2017. A special election was held May 2, 2017.
CHAPTER 126
MARIJUANA GROWING AND SALES
 
126.01 Purpose                      126.05 Responsibilities of Seller
126.02 Definitions                  126.06 Minors
126.03 Location Restrictions        126.07 Hours of Operation
126.04 Development Design Standards 126.08 Enforcement
 
126.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter to set forth where marijuana may be grown and/or
sold in the City if its sale is legalized.
126.02   DEFINITIONS.
   1.   “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis, its roots, stalks,
leaves, flowers, and seeds, whether growing or not, and any resin, compound,
cake, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant.
   2.   “Marijuana products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana
extracts, have a measurable THC concentration greater that three-tens of one
percent, and are intended for human consumption or application, including, but
not limited to edible products, tinctures, and lotions.
126.03   LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   Any person or business growing and/or selling marijuana and marijuana
products in the City shall only do so from a permanent building in an I-2 Heavy
Industrial District upon receipt of a site plan and approval of a special
exception use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code
of Ordinances, and only if it meets all of the location requirements set forth
below. Distances provided hereafter shall be measured by following a straight
line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the
property parcel upon which the proposed marijuana sales business is to be
located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district
boundary line from which the proposed marijuana   growing and/or sales business
is to be separated.
   1.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the road right-of-way for Highway 18 and for Highway 69 within
the City limits.
   2.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited in or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the borders of a residential district.
   3.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of
religious worship.
   4.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any public or private school offering general education for
students between the years of kindergarten and twelfth grade, public library or
museum.
   5.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any registered daycare home or registered daycare business.
   6.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any public park or playground. For purposes of this section,
bike paths, trails, waterways, and boat launches shall not be deemed a public
park.
   7.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any other marijuana growth and/or sales business.
   8.   Marijuana growth and/or sales shall be prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages for
consumption on premises.
126.04   DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   1.   Exterior. It shall be unlawful for any person or business growing and/
or selling marijuana:
      A.   To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside the establishment,
      B.   To allow the exterior portion of the growing and/or sales premises
to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner of the sales product,
      C.   To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other
than a single color.
   2.   The display surfaces of the sign shall not contain any flashing lights
or photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any
manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
126.05   RESPONSIBILITIES OF SELLER. 
   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s
negligent failure to supervise the employee’s conduct, and the operator shall
be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator
committed the act or caused the omission.
126.06   MINORS. 
   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18)
years of age to enter or be on the premises of marijuana growth and/or sales
business at any time that the establishment is open for business. The business
owner/operator must ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public
entrance at all times during regular business hours. The attendant shall
prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) from entering the
establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under
the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a
valid drivers license issued by a state reflecting that person’s age.
126.07   HOURS OF OPERATION.  
   A marijuana sales business may remain open for business no longer than the
hours from between 10:00 a.m. to midnight, seven days a week.
126.08   ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation of this ordinance by the owner or operator shall be a criminal
penalty that would be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine up to $625.00
plus statutory surcharge and court costs, or a municipal infraction with a
scheduled civil penalty as follows: first offense $200.00, second offense
$500.00, third offense $1,000.00.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.09 Excavations
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.04 Playing In                 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded    135.13 Accumulation of Snow at Corners
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.14 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles           135.15 Driveway Entrance Openings
135.08 Burning Prohibited          
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or
member of the fire department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley
for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking
or alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit therefor. A written application for such permit shall be
filed with the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the
City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
   5.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
   6.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street
or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is
desired.
   7.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours
after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly
done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and
charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
   8.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   9.   Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement
of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   10.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way. 8
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
8 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s
  responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   ACCUMULATION OF SNOW AT CORNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push or place, or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed any ice or snow from private property at the corners
of intersections of traveled streets so as to obstruct the view of motorists as
they approach the corner, except where in the cleaning of a large commercial
driveway or parking lot it is absolutely necessary to move the snow into the
corner temporarily, such accumulations shall be moved promptly by the property
owner or agent, at the owner’s cost. Arrangements for such prompt removal of
the accumulation at the corners shall be made prior to moving the snow into the
corner.
135.14   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.15   DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE OPENINGS.
   When a driveway entrance opening is needed or desired, the property owner
shall, at the owner’s expense, have the curb saw cut so as not to disturb any
part of the curb flow line. Removal of any portion of the flow line is strictly
prohibited.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                                136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                              Improvements
136.02 Definitions                            136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 136.13 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for  136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                 136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered          136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required                        136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                     136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights          136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade          
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement
or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize
the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one (1) inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more and at
least four (4) inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk
with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of
the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more.
      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths (¾) inch per foot.
   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice
and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove
snow, ice or accumulations within a reasonable time, the City may do so and
assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner
as a property tax. In the case of a sidewalk ordered by the Council to be
constructed directly adjacent to a curb, the Council may grant an exemption to
the removal of excess snow from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause
to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks
and maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of a curb, any
sidewalk between the property line and that portion of the public street used
or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner may be liable
for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to benefitted property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.
136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three (3) inch sub-base of
compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil
drainage is to be determined by the City.
   4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
   5.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four
(4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than six (6) feet in
length.
      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to
the curb. Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6)
feet in length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness.
   6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the
Council or Public Works Director establishes a different distance due to
special circumstances.
   7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street
which shall be the established grade.
   8.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even
with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for
each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
   9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward
the curb.
   10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood float”
finish.
   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a
street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped
area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street,
road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built
or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed
at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.
Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall
be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12   AWNINGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet
above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck,
canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely
fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct
the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods
or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with
the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied
for such purposes.
136.19   SALES STANDS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand
for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of
the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council.
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is
referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
   No street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
 
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
114           August 2, 1961                   
115           December 11, 1961                
133           October 2, 1967                  
144           November 3, 1969                 
152           March 22, 1971                   
155           August 9, 1971                   
187           May 3, 1977                      
192           May 23, 1978                     
195           June 12, 1979                    
211           April 14, 1981                   
215           January 26, 1982                 
216           June 8, 1982                     
238           January 26, 1988                 
239           May 24, 1988                     
295           July 27, 1999                    
315           February 12, 2002                
324           February 25, 2003                
331           August 12, 2003                  
370                                           
376           June 9, 2009                     
379           September 22, 2009               
391           September 13, 2011               
393           November 22, 2011                
400           April 23, 2013                   
404           May 13, 2014                     
438           December 11, 2018                
455           April 14, 2020                   
457           May 12, 2020                     
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
 
138.01   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
   The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as
official grades.
138.02   RECORD MAINTAINED.
   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
 
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
34            March 5, 1927                   
116           December 11, 1961               
121           February 26, 1964               
129           August 11, 1966                 
172           January 22, 1974                
181           August 17, 1976                 
207           September 9, 1980               
234           April 14, 1987                  
244           July 25, 1989                   
285           November 25, 1997               
354           May 23, 2006                    
458           July 14, 2020                   
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names   
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of Garner, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
   All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided
with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a
hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose
of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
   “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of
the following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii)
faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion
of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
(6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
   The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building
or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such
is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such
reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure
or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90)
days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement
officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure,
or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the
enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate. 9
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
9 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
  procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
   The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF GARNER,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
   Costs incurred under Section
145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to
the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against
the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover
costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property  
 
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
   1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of
land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
   4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon
which three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of
any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
   A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured
home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being
placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes
except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
   1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private
property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place
for human habitation.
   2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from
the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is
relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)
CHAPTER 147
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
 
147.01 Purpose                                     147.07 Ownership by City
147.02 Definitions                                 147.08 Private Ownership
147.03 Areas Requiring Storm Water Management Plan 147.09 Further Requirements
147.04 Storm Water Management Requirements         147.10 Exemptions
147.05 Management Plan Design Requirements         147.11 Penalties
147.06 Submission and Approval of Plan             147.12 Objections
 
147.01   PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish policies to manage and
control Storm Water Runoff occurring from new development of commercial,
industrial, governmental, institutional, and in some cases residential areas,
all of which are located within City’s corporate limits. The goal is to reduce
storm water runoff caused by development of the land. This will result in cost
savings to the overall existing municipal storm sewer collection system by
either eliminating the need to make improvements to the existing municipal
storm sewer collection system or by reducing the size of improvements required.
In addition, increased public safety and sediment and erosion control are
expected benefits.
147.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever used in the Chapter and printed with an initial capital letter, the
terms listed below shall have the meanings indicated. Words using the present
tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the plural; the
plural shall always include the singular. The term ‘shall’ is always mandatory
and the term ‘may’ is permissive.
   1.   “Capacity (of a storm water facility)” means the volume or rate of
conveyance available in a storm water management facility, including freeboard,
to store or convey storm water without damage to public or private property.
   2.   “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Iowa to practice in the field of civil works.
   3.   “Control structure” means part of a storm water management facility
designed to regulate the storm water runoff release rate.
   4.   “Design storm” means a storm with characteristics of the average storm
for the desired return frequency.
   5.   “Detention basin” means any facility designed for the purpose of
temporarily holding water which is then released at a predetermined rate and
controls the flow of storm water downstream.
   6.   “Development” means the changing of land from its existing state or an
area of land use change, usually involving the building of housing, commercial,
industrial, governmental, institutional, and infrastructure structures.
   7.   “Developed condition” also referred to as “Post-developed condition”
means the hydraulic and hydrologic site characteristics that occur upon
completion of a development.
   8.   “Drainage area” means an area of land contributing to storm water
runoff.
   9.   “Green infrastructure” means natural drainage ways, wetlands,
infiltration systems, open green space, etc.
   10.   “Green space” means that area in and around a development which is
covered with grass, trees, shrubs, and other natural plantings that naturally
absorbs storm water.
   11.   “New development” means the platting of land for the establishment of
residential, commercial, industrial and/or agricultural lots or improvements to
existing platted parcels of land which contribute to use and benefit of the
land.
   12.   “Overflow path” means the path taken by storm water runoff as a result
of flows exceeding the capacity of the underground drainage system or detention
basin. The path may include streets, channels, drainage ways or areas of sheet
flows, and be located on public property or private property within an
easement.
   13.   “Pre-developed condition” means the hydraulic and hydrologic site
characteristics that occur prior to a proposed development, including natural
storage areas, drainage ways, drainage tiles and highway drainage structures.
   14.   “Regional storm water management facilities” means those facilities
designed to handle storm water runoff from several lots which may include the
entire subdivision, or multiple subdivisions, and may include existing
developed areas.
   15.   “Retention basin” means storm water management practice that captures
storm water runoff, and does not directly discharge to a surface water body.
Water that is “retained” is “discharged” from the basin either by infiltration
or evaporation.
   16.   “Return frequency” means the statistic parameter that defines the
average occurrence time for a storm of a given magnitude.
   17.   “Site” means a lot, parcel or tract of land (or portion thereof) where
development is occurring or has occurred and which may or may not require
additional permits.
   18.   “Site plan” means an overall plan of the area to be developed
including, but not limited to: proposed building location, proposed parking and
drive locations, proposed utilities including storm sewer components and
subsurface drain tile, proposed ground elevations with drainage patterns
highlighted, roof drainage outlet locations, other underground utilities, and
property boundaries.
   19.   “Storm sewer system” means facilities for the conveyance of storm
water runoff, a series of conduits and appurtenances, to accommodate frequent
storms not generating large peak discharges. These facilities usually include
conduits, street gutters and swales.
   20.   “Storm water management facilities” means a detention/retention basin
and the associated appurtenances to make the system functional.
   21.   “Storm water management plan” means a site plan certified by a Civil
Engineer, including materials, construction phasing, grading activities, and
methods used for mitigation of increased storm water runoff from the site.
   22.   “Storm water runoff” means the flow of water resulting from
precipitation upon a surface area, not absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   23.   “Subdivision” refers to Section
166.01(23) of this Code of Ordinances.
147.03   AREAS REQUIRING STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   A storm water management plan shall be required for the following:
   1.   New residential subdivisions and re-subdivisions larger than one acre
in size and all new commercial, industrial, governmental, and institutional
subdivisions of any size.
   2.   Multi-residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, and
institutional developments 10,000 square feet in size and larger.
   3.   Phased developments under one acre in size for residential, and under
10,000 square feet in size for commercial, industrial, governmental,
institutional developments which are a part of a larger planned development.
   4.   Other developments may be required to submit a Storm Water Management
Plan at the discretion of the City Council. No subdivision or development plan
will be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an appropriate
storm sewer, drainage watercourse, or storm sewer management facility.
   5.   At the discretion of the City Council, a fee may be charged the
developer in lieu of providing storm water management facilities. This may be
utilized when the City is constructing a larger regional storm water management
facility to handle multiple existing or proposed developments.
147.04   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The storm water management plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
   1.   Peak discharges for pre-developed and post-developed conditions based
upon the design storms.
   2.   Individual parameters used for determining discharges shall be listed.
   3.   Hydraulic capacity of storm sewer inlets, pipes, open channels or other
means of conveying water.
   4.   Detention/retention basin design with capacity listed.
   5.   Control structure/outlet design.
   6.   Review of existing or proposed downstream conveyance capacities.
   7.   Storm water runoff calculations. Said calculations shall be made
utilizing one of the following approved methodologies:
      A.   Rational Formula,
      B.   TR-55 Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds as developed by the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service,
      C.   Hydrographs.
   8.   The calculations shall be certified by an engineer, architect, or
landscape architect licensed in the State of Iowa and familiar with such
calculations.
147.05   MANAGEMENT PLAN DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The design requirements of the storm water management plan are as follow:
   1.   For new developments where storm water management facilities are
required as set forth in this ordinance, the maximum allowable storm water
runoff from the site in the post-developed condition as calculated for a 25
year design storm shall be limited to the storm water runoff rate for the site
in the pre-developed condition based on a five year design storm. The discharge
rate shall be controlled at the detention/retention facilities outlet and NOT
by the size of the storm sewer pipe serving the site. Retention facilities may
be used in lieu of detention facilities with approval from the building
official.
   2.   A safe overflow path shall be designed for storms exceeding the
capacity of the detention/retention basin.
   3.   Regional storm water management facilities are encouraged.
   4.   For new residential developments, storm water detention is not allowed
within any front or side yard setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance, or
within 25 feet from the estimated rear building line. A single lot detention or
retention will not be allowed within three feet of rear building lot line.
   5.   Dry-bottomed detention basins shall be oversized by 10% to help offset
anticipated sedimentation. An alternative to over-sizing is the construction of
a series of sediment trapping fore bays in the basin with firm bottoms which
allow routine removal of sediment.
   6.   Maximum side slopes of detention/retention basins shall not exceed 3:1.
   7.   Provisions shall be made to keep the bottom of the detention basin dry
unless a permanent pond or lake is being utilized for detention.
   8.   The proposed development shall be designed with proper regard to
topography, surface drainage, natural drains and streams, wooded areas, and
other natural features. The design of the proposed improvements shall make
adequate provisions for surface and subsurface drainage so as to NOT increase
the danger of erosion, flooding, landslide or other endangerment of adjoining
or surrounding property.
147.06   SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLAN.
   A site plan shall be a required attachment to a proposed storm water
management plan, all of which is to be submitted to the City Administrator for
review. The storm water management plan, including proposed storm water
detention or retention facilities, shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Administrator (or those chosen by the Administrator) prior to the issuance of
any building permit for the proposed development. The City may inspect the site
at any time to determine compliance with this chapter. Upon determination that
a site is not in compliance with this chapter, the City may issue a stop work
order until compliance is achieved. The order shall describe the problem,
specify a completion date, and indicate the penalties to be assessed for
further noncompliance.
147.07   OWNERSHIP BY CITY.
   Regional storm water management facilities which are of sufficient size may
be deeded to the City to be maintained by the City. The conditions for City
ownership will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The City is under no
obligation to accept ownership of the facility. If the City elects to obtain
ownership of the facility, the property owner shall dedicate to the City any
property on which public storm sewer detention/retention basins will be located
with a 25-foot perimeter (subject to change) to establish and maintain a
vegetative buffer. Ingress-egress easements for maintenance of public
facilities shall be provided prior to final approval.
147.08   PRIVATE OWNERSHIP.
   For sites on which privately owned storm water detention or retention
facilities are located, the property owner will be responsible for the
following:
   1.   All future grading, repairs, and maintenance.
   2.   Maintenance of the minimum storm water detention capacity, as
originally designed.
   3.   Maintenance of the detention/retention basin control structures and
discharge pipes to insure the maximum theoretical design release rate is not
increased.
   4.   The property owner shall not place fill material, or erect any
buildings, obstructions, or other improvements on the area reserved for storm
water detention or retention purposes, unless approved in writing by the City.
   5.   Maintenance of the facility so as to be in compliance with Section
50.02 “Nuisances Enumerated” of this Code of Ordinances.
147.09   FURTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Compliance with this chapter does not relieve the developer or property
owner of other responsibilities relating to storm water discharge. This
includes, but is not limited to, obtaining NPDES storm water discharge permits
regulated by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and other State of Iowa
and Federal requirements such as storm water pollution prevention plans and
generally accepted erosion control measures.
147.10   EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the requirements of the chapter:
   1.   Agricultural use of land.
   2.   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or
substantial flood or fire hazards.
   3.   Areas deemed appropriate by the City Council.
147.11   PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall engage in development of a site within the area of
jurisdiction of this chapter before meeting the requirements of this chapter
shall be subject to the following: No foundation permits or building permits
shall be issued for the property in question until the violations are
corrected. Nothing contained herein shall limit the right of the City to any
other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this chapter,
including the use of municipal infractions. Enforcement of this section shall
be the responsibility of the City.
147.12   OBJECTIONS.
   Any objections to decisions made pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed
by the City Council Business Activities Committee and final approval from the
City Council.
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Map
150.02 Owner Requirements  
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than four (4) inches in height, one-
half (½) inch in width, and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being
notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the
assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING MAP.
   The Clerk shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a building
numbering map.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition            151.04 Trimming Trees to be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees    151.06 Inspection and Removal
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
   For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
   No tree shall be planted in any parking or right-of-way except in accordance
with the following:
   1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any right-of-way shall be planted in
the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the
event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten (10)
feet from the property line.
   2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is less than
nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of
exposed soil surface per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than twenty
(20) feet from street intersections (property lines extended) and ten (10) feet
from driveways. If it is at all possible trees should be planted inside the
property lines and not between the sidewalk and the curb.
   3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any right-of-way any fruit-
bearing tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box
elder, Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, black walnut, ash, or nut-bearing trees
or bushes.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least fifteen
(15) feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the
sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may
serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken
within five (5) days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City
may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. No topping or
dehorning of trees is permitted except by special written permission of the
Council. Trees becoming stag-headed may have the dead portions removed back to
sound green wood with a proper 45º cut only.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
   Except as allowed in Section
151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
   Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect
or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
   The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in
the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
   1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
   2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within
fourteen (14) days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in
charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice,
the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed
against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                      160.06 Establishment of Variance
                                        Procedures
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of 160.07 Nonconforming Uses
Fact and Purpose
160.03 General Provisions               160.08 Penalties for Violation
160.04 Administration                   160.09 Amendments
160.05 Floodplain Management Standards
 
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood”).
   3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   6.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of
160.05(4)(A) of this chapter; and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement, as defined in this section.
   7.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   8.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   9.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   10.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also includes
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   11.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
   12.   “500-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a two-
tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
   13.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   14.   “Flood insurance rate map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   15.   “Flood insurance study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   16.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   17.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
   18.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   19.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   20.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the special flood hazard
area outside the floodway.
   21.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   22.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   23.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition
of “enclosed area below lowest floor” are met.
   24.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   25.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   26.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means
those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
   27.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   28.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis;
      B.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   29.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding;
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
      C.   Basement sealing;
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
   30.   “Special flood hazard area” (SFHA) means the land within the City
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the City’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
   31.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   32.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities
and/or other similar uses.
   33.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   34.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure taking
place during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which, equals or exceeds
50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (i) before the start of
construction of the first improvement of the structure; or (ii) if the
structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
      B.   The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of a historic
structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as a historic structure.
      C.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   35.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   36.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
   1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 364, Code of Iowa,
as amended, delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and perform any
function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges
and property of the City or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by: (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Paragraph 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
      A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      C.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands and development having special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City. For the purpose of this chapter, the special flood
hazard areas are those areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Hancock County and Incorporated Areas, City of Garner, Panels
19081C0326D. 0327D, 0328D, and 0329D, dated April 4, 2018, which is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study for Hancock
County is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this chapter for
the purpose of administering floodplain management regulations.
   2.   Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries. The boundaries of
the Special Flood Hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   3.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   4.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   5.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   6.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated special flood hazard areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
   7.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Administrator.
      A.   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of: (i) the elevation (in relation
to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures; or (ii) the elevation to which
new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of potential conflict.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the Floodway results in an increase
in the base flood elevations or alteration to the floodway boundary.
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
material and equipment, excavation or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988 of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
structure floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   All development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and meet the following applicable performance standards. Where base flood
elevations have not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to determine: (i) whether
the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway
fringe; and (ii) the base flood elevation. The applicant will be responsible
for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination. Review by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources is not required for the proposed construction of new or
replacement bridges or culverts where: (i) the bridge or culvert is located on
a stream that drains less than two square miles; and (ii) the bridge or culvert
is not associated with a channel modification that constitutes a channel change
as specified in 567 IAC 71.2(2).
   1.   All Development. All development within the special flood hazard areas
shall:
      A.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
      B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
      D.   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
   2.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevations. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevations and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable
consideration by the City Council, where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces
and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures located in
areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be
provided with a means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply where the
Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for the
protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
   3.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood proofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of
Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      C.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities elevated or flood proofed to a minimum of one foot
above the base flood elevation.
   5.   Factory-Built Homes.
      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
      B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by the State
Building Code.
   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   7.   Storage of Materials and Equipment. Storage of equipment and materials
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
(i) not subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due
to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
   8.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   9.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   10.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses. Detached garages, sheds, and
similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the
base flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
      A.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of the
structure located less than one foot above the BFE must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials.
      B.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
      C.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      D.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      E.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
      F.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Subsection 4(A) of this section.
Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure
and its contents.
   12.   Recreational Vehicles.
      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days; and
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
   13.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   14.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood; and
that the structure, below the base flood elevation is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North American
Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are flood proofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2% chance flood elevation data has not
been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make such determinations.
160.06   ESTABLISHMENT OF VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   1.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific
cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage; and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Factors upon Which the Decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment Shall
Be Based. In passing upon applications for variances, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of
this chapter and:
      A.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      B.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      C.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      D.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      E.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
      F.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      G.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      H.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      I.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      J.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      K.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      L.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
      M.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   3.   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      A.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      B.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      C.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      D.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      E.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Council shall require that the applicant submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
160.07   NONCONFORMING USES.
   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
      A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   2.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the
cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
160.08   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
160.09   AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS                  165.22 Dwellings Above Commercial and
                                         Industrial Structures
165.01 Purpose                           165.23 Double Frontage Lots
165.02 Definitions                       165.24 Side Yard and Front Yard on
                                         Corner Lot
                                        165.25 Side Yard Reduction
PERMITS, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION 165.26 Front Yard Adjustment
165.03 Zoning Administrator              165.27 R-1 District Fence and Wall
                                         Height
165.04 Building and Utility Permit       165.28 Lot to Provide Own Space
Required                                 Requirements
165.05 Board of Adjustment               165.29 Construction in Progress
165.06 Amendments                        165.30 Building Height Limitation
165.07 Building Permit Required          165.31 Structures Considered Part of
                                         Building
165.08 Violation; Penalty                165.32 Livestock and Poultry
                                        165.33 Nonconforming Uses
GENERAL PROVISIONS                       165.34 Planned Unit Development
165.09 Application of Regulations         
165.10 Compliance Required               DISTRICT REGULATIONS
165.11 Annexations                       165.35 Districts Established
165.12 Street Vacations                  165.36 Map
165.13 Minimum Dwelling Size             165.37 District Boundaries
165.14 Mobile Home Parks                 165.38 AG-1 – Agricultural District
165.15 Basement or Cellar Occupation     165.39 R-1 – Residential District
165.16 Accessory Building in Rear Yard   165.40 C-1 – General Business District
165.17 Accessory Buildings               165.41 C-2 – Highway Business District
165.18 Unobstructed Yard Required        165.42 I-1 – Light Industry District
165.19 Two-Family or Multiple Dwelling   165.43 I-2 – Heavy Industry District
Considered as One Building
165.20 One Main Building on Lot          165.44 Tower/Antenna Regulations
165.21 More than One Main Building on     
Lot
 
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
165.01   PURPOSE.
   These regulations are adopted for the purpose of promoting public health,
safety, comfort, order, and general welfare to conserve and protect natural and
manmade environment; to secure and provide the social and economic advantages
resulting from an orderly, planned use of land resources; and to facilitate
adequate but economical provisions for public improvements, all in accordance
with and as permitted by the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
165.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
As used herein, the word “building” includes “structure.”
   1.   “Accessory building” means a subordinate building which is incidental
to and customary in connection with the principal building or use of the
premises.
   2.   “Accessory use” means a subordinate use which is incidental to and
customary in connection with the principal building or use of the premises.
   3.   “Administrative Officer” means the individual designated by this
chapter to administer the Zoning Ordinance and who is responsible for the
enforcement of the regulations imposed by said Ordinance. This person may also
be referred to as the “Zoning Administrator.”
   4.   “Apartment house” - see “dwelling, multiple.”
   5.   “Basement/cellar” means that portion of the structure that is partially
or wholly below grade.
   6.   “Bed and breakfast home” means a private residence which provides
lodging and breakfast, which is owner-occupied and in which no more than two
guest families may be lodged at the same time. There shall be one space of off-
street parking per guest room in addition to two spaces for the owners.
   7.   “Bed and breakfast inn” means a commercial facility used primarily for
guest lodging, usually with several rooms for that purpose. Because it is a
commercial enterprise, a bed and breakfast inn is subject to the same
licensing, inspection, and taxation requirements as hotels or motels and
restaurants.
   8.   “Board of Adjustment” means a Board created under this chapter which
acts on variances, special uses, and conditional uses consistent with
provisions found elsewhere in this chapter, all as provided for in Chapter 414
of the State Code of Iowa.
   9.   “Building” means any structure having a roof and designed or intended
for the support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, or property.
   10.   “Building permit” means a certificate issued by the administrative
officer stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   11.   “Clinic” means an establishment where patients are not lodged
overnight but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians or dentists practicing medicine together.
   12.   “Conditional use” means a use of property that will be permitted by
the Board of Adjustment subject to the applicant meeting certain conditions and
safeguards which will assure that the use will be in harmony with the general
intent and purpose of these zoning regulations.
   13.   “Convenience store” means any retail establishment offering for sale
food produce, household items and other goods commonly found in grocery stores,
as well as retail gas sales.
   14.   “Deck/patio” means a covered or uncovered platform area or surfaced
outdoor living area which projects from a building. Decks and patios are
accessible at or from above grade and are attached to the ground.
   15.   “Dwelling” means any building, earth sheltered home, or manufactured
housing designed and used exclusively for residential purposes.
   16.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building arranged,
designed, and intended to be occupied as the residence of a single family and
having no party wall in common with an adjacent house or houses.
   17.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a detached building that is arranged,
designed, or intended to be occupied as the residence of two families or
housekeeping units living independently of each other.
   18.   “Dwelling, multiple” means a building designed for or occupied
exclusively by more than two families. This definition includes, but is not
limited to, such buildings as are commonly referred to as apartment buildings,
high-rises, or condominiums.
   19.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling occupied or
intended to be occupied as separate living quarters by a single family as
defined herein.
   20.   “Earth sheltered home” means a building designed to be used as a
dwelling utilizing earth to shelter the building. The roof can be of
conventional construction or covered with earth, but not of a temporary nature.
   21.   “Family” means a group of persons occupying a dwelling unit as an
individual housekeeping organization. A family may include not more than four
(4) persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal process.
   22.   “Family home” means a community-based residential home which is
licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 414.30 of the Code of
Iowa, to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation service, and
supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than four
developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel. However,
“family home” does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed
under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa.
   23.   “Farm” means an area which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products such as vegetables, fruit, trees, and grain and their storage on the
area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm
animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep, and swine. “Farming” includes the
operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including dairy
farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, the operation of the accessory uses shall be secondary to
that of the normal farming activities, and provided further, “farming” does not
include the feeding of collected garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
   24.   “Filling station” means any building or premises primarily used for
the sale, at retail, of motor vehicle fuels, oils or accessories, or for
servicing or lubricating motor vehicles or installing or repairing parts and
accessories, but not including the repairing or replacement of bodies or
fenders of motor vehicles, or painting motor vehicles, and excluding public
garages.
   25.   “Floor area” means the total number of square feet of floor space
within the exterior walls of a building, not including space in cellars or
basements; however, if the cellar or basement is used for business or
commercial purposes, it shall be counted as floor area in computing off-street
parking requirements.
   26.   “Frontage” means all the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street, but not
including property more than 400 feet distant on either side of a proposed
building or structure.
   27.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building or portion of a building
in which one or more motor vehicles are housed but in which no business service
or industry connected with motor vehicles is carried on.
   28.   “Garage, public” means any building or premises except those used as a
private or storage garage used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling, or
storing motor driven vehicles. The term “repairing” does not include an
automotive body repair shop or the rebuilding, dismantling, or storage of
wrecked or junked vehicles.
   29.   “Grade” means the average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building, except when any wall
approximately parallels and is not more than five (5) feet from a street line.
Then the elevation of the street at the center of the wall adjoining the street
shall be grade.
   30.   “Home occupation” means any occupation or profession carried on by a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises in connection with
which there is used no sign other than a nameplate not exceeding two square
feet in area, provided that:
      A.   The occupation or profession does not occupy more than the
equivalent of 20 percent of the floor area of one story of the dwelling;
      B.   There is no display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in whole or part for any purpose other than that of
a dwelling;
      C.   No more than one person not a member of the family residing on the
premises is regularly employed;
      D.   The building includes no features of design not customary in
buildings for residential use, and there is no emission of odor, gas, smoke,
dust, or noise that will be detrimental to the residential character of the
neighborhood; and
      E.   No addition shall at any time be added to the residence or any
accessory building to be used for this home occupation or be added to
compensate for the area used for the home occupation. Only one home occupation
per household is permitted.
   31.   “Hotel” means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to
the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding house or lodging house.
   32.   “Institution” means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or
a nonprofit establishment for public use.
   33.   “Junk yard” means an area of any lot which is used for the storage,
abandonment or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or scrap material, or
for the abandonment or dismantling of machinery, automobiles, or other vehicles
or parts thereof.
   34.   “Lodging house” means a building or place where lodging and boarding
are provided (or which is equipped regularly to provide lodging and boarding by
pre-arrangement for definite periods) for compensation, for three or more but
not exceeding 12 individuals, not open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to hotels open to transient guests.
   35.   “Lot” means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a
use permitted in this chapter, including one main building, together with its
accessory building, open spaces, and parking spaces required by this chapter
and having its principal frontage upon a street.
   36.   “Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
   37.   “Lot, depth of” means the horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
   38.   “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having a frontage on two
nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   39.   “Lot lines” means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
   40.   “Manufactured home” is a factory-built structure built under authority
of 42 U.S.C.§5043, is required by federal law to display a seal from the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and was constructed on or
after June 15, 1976. If a manufactured home is placed in a mobile home park,
the home must be titled and is subject to the mobile home square foot tax. If a
manufactured home is placed outside a mobile home park, the home must be titled
and is to be assessed and taxed as real estate.
   41.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for habitation by one or more
persons; but shall so include any vehicle with motive power not registered as a
motor vehicle in Iowa. A “mobile home” is not built to a mandatory building
code, contains no State or federal seals, and was built before June 15, 1976.
   42.   “Mobile home lot” means a parcel of land for placement of a single
mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   43.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available. The
term “mobile home park” is not to be construed to include mobile homes,
buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual,
educational institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively
to house their own labor or students.
   44.   “Mobile home park development plan” means a custom-made design for a
specific site or area consisting of drawing, maps, and engineering details
setting forth the boundary, topography, and overall park design, including
streets, parking facilities, mobile home lot locations, and services
facilities.
   45.   “Modular home” means a factory-built structure which is manufactured
to be used as a place of human habitation, is constructed to comply with the
Iowa State Building Code for modular factory-built structures, and must display
the seal issued by the State Building Code Commissioner. If a modular home is
placed in a mobile home park, the home is subject to the annual tax as required
by Section 435.22. If a modular home is placed outside a mobile home park, the
home shall be considered real property and is to be assessed and taxed as real
estate.
   46.   “Motel, motor court, motor lodge, or tourist court” means any building
or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of
which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the
building with garage or parking space conveniently located on the lot, and
designed, used, or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of
transients.
   47.   “Nonconforming use” means any building or land lawfully occupied by a
use at the time of passage of these zoning regulations or amendment thereto,
which does not conform with the use regulation of the district in which it is
situated.
   48.   “Nursing home” means a home for the aged or infirm in which three or
more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided with
food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals,
clinics, or similar institutions.
   49.   “Office” means a place where chattel or goods, wares, and merchandise
are not commonly created, sold, or exchanged.
   50.   “Parking lot” means a parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking
spaces.
   51.   “Parking space” means an area of not less than 200 square feet plus
necessary maneuvering space for the parking of a motor vehicle. Space for
maneuvering, incidental to parking or leaving the parking space, shall not
encroach upon any public right-of-way.
   52.   “Planning and Zoning Commission” or “Commission” means that Commission
appointed by the Council under the provisions of Chapter 414.6 of the Code of
Iowa.
   53.   “Principal permitted uses” means those uses of property which may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator if the other requirements of this chapter
are met, as differentiated from a conditional use that can only be approved by
the Board of Adjustment after it has set conditions which must be met by the
applicant to ensure that the intent and purpose of this chapter be met.
   54.   “Regulatory flood” means a flood which is representative of large
floods known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur in a particular stream. The
regulatory flood generally has a frequency of approximately 100 years,
determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams
in the same general region.
   55.   “Regulatory flood protection elevation” means the elevation to which
uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated or flood-proofed.
   56.   “Right-of-way” means the land area where the right to possession of
which is secured or reserved by the contracting authority for road purposes.
   57.   “Setback line” means a line parallel with the street line and at a
distance equal to the depth of the front yard required by this chapter.
   58.   “Sign” means an identification, description, illustration, or device
which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity,
person, institution, or business.
   59.   “Site plan” is a drawing containing the following: the lot lines with
the footage measurement of each boundary, the existing buildings and their
location with footage measurement, and the proposed addition and location with
footage measurement. The proposed addition or new structure shall be in broken
lines. While the plan does not need to be to scale, it should be of sufficient
detail that the Zoning Administrator can determine that the proposed addition
or building and its location conforms to these regulations.
   60.   “Special use” means conditional use for purposes of this chapter.
   61.   “Story” means that portion of a building, other than a basement/
cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it or each 12 feet of height of the building.
   62.   “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four (4) feet above
the top floor level.
   63.   “Street” means a public way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
   64.   “Structural alteration” means any change, except those required by law
or ordinance, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
   65.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which
required permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground. Structures include (but are not limited to)
buildings, sheds, advertising signs, billboards, storage tanks, fences, decks,
pergolas and similar structures, walls used as fences, backstops for tennis
courts, and towers.
   66.   “Trailer” means mobile home.
   67.   “Utility permit” means a permit issued by the City authorizing the
applicant to connect to the City water and/or sewer system.
   68.   “Variance” means an exception to the distance and height requirements
of this chapter, granted by the Board of Adjustment, in appropriate cases and
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards.
   69.   “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of the structure from the ground upward, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   70.   “Yard, front” means a yard across the full width of the lot extending
from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
   71.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending the full width of the lot between
the main building and the rear lot line.
   72.   “Yard, side” means a yard between the main building and the side line
of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   73.   “Zoning Administrator” means the administrative officer appointed by
the Council to administer and enforce the regulations contained in this
chapter.
   74.   “Ground mounted photovoltaic system” Photovoltaic system that is
freestanding directly installed to the ground and is not supported by any
building, accessory, or dwelling. For purposes of this chapter, solar powered
lights used to illuminate exterior areas should not be included in this
definition.
   75.   “Roof mounted photovoltaic system” A photovoltaic system mounted
directly to the roof.
(Subsections 74 and 75 – Ord. 461 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
PERMITS, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION
165.03   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrator who shall act as
administrative officer. It is the duty of said officer to administer and
enforce the regulations contained herein.
165.04   BUILDING AND UTILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to commence or to proceed with the erection, construction,
reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement, extension, raising or
moving of any building or structures, or of any portion thereof, without first
having applied in writing to the Zoning Administrator for a permit to do so and
a permit has been granted therefor. The construction or erection of items such
as sidewalks, driveways, retaining walls less than four feet high, ornamental
yard features, play structures, play houses under 16 square feet, dog houses
under 10 square feet, and steps are exempt from the permit requirements of this
section, but shall comply with any applicable regulations found elsewhere in
this Code of Ordinances.
   1.   Application Contents. Every application for a building and utility
permit shall be in writing and delivered to the Zoning Administrator and shall
be accompanied by a detailed site plan. Said application shall be on forms
prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
   2.   Application Forms. Blank forms shall be provided by the Zoning
Administrator for the use of those applying for permits as provided for in this
chapter. Any permits issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be on standard
forms for such purpose and furnished by the City.
   3.   Record. A careful record of all the applications, plans, and permits
shall be kept in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
   4.   Fees. The fees to be charged for building and utility permits issued
under this chapter shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.
165.05   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   1.   Creation and Membership. A Board of Adjustment, to be hereinafter
referred to as the Board, is established. The Board shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council. Terms
shall be for five (5) years and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
terms of any member whose office becomes vacant. Members shall be removable for
cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearing. All members of the Board shall serve without compensation. The Board,
subject to the approval of the Council, may employ such clerical and technical
assistance as may be needed to carry on its work. The Board shall adopt its own
rules of procedure, not in conflict with this chapter or the Code of Iowa, to
enable it to perform its functions and duties. The Board shall elect its own
Chairperson, who shall serve for one year. Such Chairperson, or in the
Chairperson’s absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Clerk, or such other
City employee as the Board may designate, shall serve as the Secretary of the
Board. In the absence of the Secretary, the Chairperson of the Board may
appoint one of the members of the Board to act as Secretary Pro Tem for the
meeting. The Board shall have the power to call on any City department for
assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such
department to render such assistance as may reasonably be required. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board.
   2.   Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected
by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board by filing, with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
      A.   Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of
the Council to be paid by the appellant to the Clerk. In addition, the
appellant shall have a signed consent to the variance by the neighboring
property owner(s) who is affected by the requested variance.
      B.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give public notice thereof, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
      C.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative officer certifies to the Board, after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such officer, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer’s opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record on application or notice to the administrative officer
and on due cause shown.
      D.   The Council shall review variances granted by the Board of
Adjustment before their effective date and the Council may remand a decision to
grant variance to the Board of Adjustment for further study. The effective date
of the variance is thirty (30) days from the date of the remand.
      E.   Variances from setbacks for side, rear, and front yards shall be
granted by the Board of Adjustment upon the condition that the lot lines will
be established by a registered surveyor. The survey pins on the lot lines will
be “flagged” by the surveyor. The Zoning Administrator, or designee, will be
contacted by the surveyor to inspect where the property pins and flags are
located. Such person shall also contact the two property owners to make sure
they are both in agreement with the location of the property pins. The surveyor
only needs to locate the pins on the affected property lines where the Board of
Adjustment has granted a variance. In the event the property owners do not
agree to the lot line, the applying property owner will be required to obtain a
formal survey.
   3.   Jurisdiction. The Board shall have the following powers:
      A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative
officer in the enforcement of this chapter or any ordinance adopted pursuant
thereto.
      B.   To hear and decide special exceptions.
      C.   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
terms of these zoning regulations as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of these zoning regulations shall be observed and substantial justice
done. The Board may require any appropriate conditions and stipulations as they
deem necessary to assure that the preceding requirements will be fully complied
with. Such conditions and stipulations attached to the approval shall be
complied with, and a violation of these conditions shall be considered the same
as any violation of the other provisions of this chapter.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirements, decision, or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
which is required to pass under this chapter or to affect any variation in this
chapter.
   4.   Appeal from Decision of Board. Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment under the
provisions of this chapter, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board,
or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition,
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board.
165.06   AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to time, be
amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed, provided that at least
seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published
in a paper of general circulation in the City. In no case shall the notice be
published more than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. Notwithstanding
Section 414.2 of the Code of Iowa, as a part of an ordinance changing land from
one zoning district to another zoning district or an ordinance approving a site
development plan, the Council may impose conditions on a property owner which
are in addition to existing regulations if the additional conditions have been
agreed to in writing by the property owner before the public hearing required
under this section or any adjournment of the hearing. The conditions must be
reasonable and imposed to satisfy public needs which are directly caused by the
requested change. In case, however, of a written protest against a change or
repeal which is filed with the Clerk and signed by the owners of 20 percent or
more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by
the owners of 20 percent or more of the property which is located within 200
feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal
is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the Council. The
protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the public hearing. Proposed
amendments not recommended by the Commission shall become effective only upon a
favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the Council. All zoning
amendment application forms shall be approved by resolution of the Council.
165.07   BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No new or remodeled building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no
change in the existing occupancy use of a building or a structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the Zoning Administrator has issued a building
certificate therefor as provided for in this chapter.
   1.   Certificate Issued. After final inspection, if it is found that the
building or structure complies with all the provisions of this code, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a building certificate which shall contain the
following:
      A.   The building permit number.
      B.   The address of the building.
      C.   The name and address of the owner.
      D.   A description of that portion of the building for which a
certificate is issued.
      E.   A statement that the described portion of the building complies with
the requirements of this code and the use to which the building complies with
the requirements of this code and the use to which the building or structure is
to be devoted complies with the use designation as provided for in these zoning
regulations.
      F.   The signature of the Zoning Administrator.
   2.   Temporary Certificate. A temporary building certificate may be issued
by the Zoning Administrator for the use of a portion or portions of a building
or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure.
   3.   Existing Occupancy. Buildings in existence at the time of the passage
of the ordinance codified in this chapter may have their existing use or
occupancy continued if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of the
passage of this ordinance codified in this chapter, provided such continued use
is not dangerous to life.
165.08   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person, whether acting directly or through employees or agents, that
violates, disobeys, omits or neglects provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to have committed a municipal infraction under
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances, and shall be subject to the provisions of
that chapter for any violation.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.09   APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The general provisions hereinafter set forth in these sections qualify or
supplement the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
165.10   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as herein otherwise provided, no building or premises shall hereafter
be used, and no building shall be extended, erected, converted, moved, rebuilt,
or altered, except in conformity with all the district regulations established
by this chapter for the district in which it is to be located and until a
building permit has been secured from the administrative officer as provided
herein. Building permits shall not be issued for construction of improvements
on premises which premises are not adjacent to a dedicated street or alley of
the City unless the application for such permit has been submitted to and
approved by the Board of Adjustment.
165.11   ANNEXATIONS.
   Any additions to the incorporated area of the City resulting from annexation
by the City or otherwise shall be automatically classified as in the
Agricultural District until otherwise classified by amendment; however, the
Council may, on its own volition or on petition by owners of property located
within the territory being annexed and after public notice and hearing as
provided by this chapter, designate a new classification for said territory.
165.12   STREET VACATIONS.
   Whenever any street, road, or other public way is vacated by official action
of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, road, or
public way shall be extended automatically to the center of such vacation, and
all area included in the vacation shall be subject to all the regulations of
the extended district.
165.13   MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.
   Any dwelling constructed, erected or located on any lot shall be at least 24
feet in width and length at the most narrow point, excepting mobile homes
located in approved mobile home parks. All dwellings shall be placed on
continuous foundations. These regulations shall not be construed to prohibit
the parking and use of one mobile home upon private property occupied or zoned
for residence purposes for a period of time not exceeding 72 hours when same is
used by the occupant of said property, relatives, or friends.
165.14   MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park within the City
unless the following regulations are complied with:
   1.   Each yard abutting on a perimeter public right-of-way shall be
considered a perimeter yard and shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth. All
other perimeter yards shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet. Yard requirements
may be increased where the Board of Adjustment deems necessary.
   2.   The Board of Adjustment may require that an area with a minimum of ten
(10) feet in width be reserved along the perimeter of the mobile home park and
may require the erection of a decorative fence or wall six (6) feet in height
within said area, to be constructed of a material which will provide a
significant visual and sound barrier and/or screen plantings to be provided and
maintained with a minimum height of eight (8) feet at maturity, or as otherwise
required by the Board of Adjustment. This area may be included as part of the
perimeter yard depth.
   3.   One permanent, low-illuminated identification sign may be permitted at
any entrance to a mobile home park. Such sign shall be of ornamental metal,
stone, masonry, wood, or other permanent material and shall indicate only the
name of the mobile home park. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in
surface area and shall meet all other requirements of sign regulations of the
City.
   4.   Parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for use of
park occupants and guests at the rate of at least two off-street car spaces for
each mobile home lot. Required car parking spaces shall be located so as to
provide convenient access to the mobile home but shall not exceed a distance of
100 feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve. All parking areas
shall be constructed with hard, smooth, dust-free surfacing.
   5.   Sufficient off-street parking and storage area may be provided to meet
anticipated requirements of park occupants for storing of boats, boat trailers,
travel trailers, pickups, coaches, truck tractors, trucks over three-quarter
(¾) ton pickup size, and similar items. Said area shall be in addition to
parking required elsewhere in this section and if designated areas for this use
are insufficient, said area shall be expanded. Parking and storage of vehicles
and items listed in this subsection shall not be permitted in other than
required parking areas.
   6.   Temporary mobile home storage may be permitted prior to permanent
placement on the mobile home stand; such temporary storage of a mobile home
shall not exceed 72 hours or, if this 72-hour limit is exceeded, the owner of
such stored mobile home shall notify the City.
165.15   BASEMENT OR CELLAR OCCUPATION.
   No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the
remainder of the building has been substantially completed.
165.16   ACCESSORY BUILDING IN REAR YARD.
   Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not occupy more than 35 percent of required rear yard and shall
not be nearer than six (6) feet to any side or rear lot line, except that when
a garage is entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located
closer than ten (10) feet to the alley line.
165.17   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction
of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building
shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic servants employed
entirely on the premises. The maximum square footage shall not exceed 1,008
square feet, and the maximum wall height shall not exceed 12 feet. The maximum
overall height shall be limited to one story and 18 feet.
165.18   UNOBSTRUCTED YARD REQUIRED.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any
structure, except for the projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and
ornamental features which are not to exceed 12 inches. No accessory building,
garage, or structure shall be placed in any required front yard area.
165.19   TWO-FAMILY OR MULTIPLE DWELLING CONSIDERED AS ONE BUILDING.
   For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or a
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
165.20   ONE MAIN BUILDING ON LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on
a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main
building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Where a lot or
tract is used for farming or for a commercial or industrial purpose, more than
one main building may be located upon the lot or tract but only when the
buildings conform to all open space requirements around the lot for the
district in which the lot or tract is located.
165.21   MORE THAN ONE MAIN BUILDING ON LOT.
   In the event that a lot is to be occupied by a group of two or more related
buildings to be used for the multiple dwelling, institutional, motel, or hotel
purposes, there may be more than one main building on the lot, provided,
however, that the open space between buildings that are parallel or within 45
degrees of being parallel shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet for one-
story buildings, 30 feet for two-story buildings, and 40 feet for three- or
four-story buildings.
165.22   DWELLINGS ABOVE COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES.
   No side yards are required where dwelling units are erected above commercial
and industrial structures.
165.23   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
   Where lots have double frontage on two non-intersecting streets, the
required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
165.24   SIDE YARD AND FRONT YARD ON CORNER LOT.
   The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be one-half
the required front yard on such street. However, if an adjacent lot fronts on
the same street, the entire required front yard must be provided. In any case,
the allowable building width shall not be reduced to less than 32 feet, and no
accessory building shall project beyond the required front yard on either
street.
165.25   SIDE YARD REDUCTION.
   Whenever a lot at the effective date of these zoning regulations has a width
of less than 60 feet, the side yards may be reduced to a width of less than ten
percent of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be less than five
(5) feet.
165.26   FRONT YARD ADJUSTMENT.
   Whenever 30 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street in any
block has been built up with buildings having a front yard, then the building
line of buildings to be erected shall not be less than that of the natural
building line of the block, as determined by existing buildings.
165.27   R-1 DISTRICT FENCE AND WALL HEIGHT.
   1.   Height Restrictions. In any R-1 District, fences and walls not
exceeding six (6) feet in height are permitted within the limits of side and
rear yards. A fence or wall not exceeding four (4) feet in height is permitted
within the limits of front yards. No portion of fences and walls exceeding four
feet in height is permitted within the limits of front yards. In the case of
retaining walls supporting embankments, the above requirements shall apply only
to that part of the wall above the ground surface of the retained embankment.
On any corner lot in any R-1 District, no fence, wall, or other structure shall
be erected to a height of more than three (3) feet above the elevation of the
established curb grade at the intersection of the streets on that part of any
yard which is bounded by the street lines of the intersecting streets and a
line connecting two points on the street lines 20 feet from their point in
intersection, and no planting of foliage which will obstruct the view of the
drivers of vehicles approaching the street intersection shall be placed or
maintained within such area.
   2.   Permit Required. Fencing permits are required for all fences, including
the “invisible type fence.” Perimeter fence means any fence constructed on the
property line or within two feet of and parallel to the property line. The cost
for the permit is $20.00.
   3.   Survey Pins. The property owner is required to locate the official
survey pins and expose same for view or have a lot survey made by a licensed
surveyor with corner pins located. However, the Zoning Administrator shall be
given the authority, after review of the fence permit application, not to
require the survey pins be exposed if it is clear that the proposed fence is
not on or near a property line, or if it is clear that the location of the
proposed fence is entirely on the property of the requesting party.
   4.   Finials or Posts. Fence height shall be in accordance with this
section; however, finials or posts shall be allowed to be up to 12 inches
higher than the fence height. The finished side of the fence shall be on the
neighbor’s side, with the posts on the inside of the fence. In the case of a
fence with centerline posts and both sides are finished, the provision that
posts are to be on the inside does not apply.
165.28   LOT TO PROVIDE OWN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   No yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a
yard or open space for a building on any other lot, and no yards or other open
space about an existing building or any building hereafter constructed for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building.
165.29   CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS.
   If actual construction has been started on any building at the time of the
passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nothing contained herein
shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
such building or part thereof.
165.30   BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which such building is located. If said building is to be located
in an area regulated by airport height zoning, any lower height requirement of
that airport zoning regulation shall prevail.
165.31   STRUCTURES CONSIDERED PART OF BUILDING.
   Any portion of a building which is covered by a roof and any structure
attached to the building shall be considered as part of the building for
purposes of determining yard and height requirements of this chapter.
165.32   LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY.
   The keeping or raising of poultry or livestock is prohibited except on
premises containing two acres or more. In addition, such poultry or livestock
must be contained at a distance of at least 250 feet from any residence now
existing or hereafter erected.
165.33   NONCONFORMING USES.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the
district in which such building is located. The lawful use of a building
existing at the time of the adoption of these zoning regulations may be
continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions hereof.
Such use may be extended throughout the building, provided no structural
alterations except those required by law or ordinance are made therein. If no
structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted
classification. If a nonconforming building is removed, the future use of such
premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. When a
nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use or to a more restricted
nonconforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restricted use. If, by amendment to this chapter, any property is hereafter
zoned to a more restrictive district by a change in district boundaries or the
regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive or of a
higher classification, the provisions of this chapter relating to the
nonconforming use of buildings or land existing at the time of the enactment of
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply to buildings or land
occupied or used at the time of the passage of such amendment. No nonconforming
building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public
enemy to the extent of more than 65 percent of its value shall be restored
until a permit is secured from the Board of Adjustment.
165.34   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   “Planned unit development” means an area of land to be developed as a single
entity for a number of dwelling units and uses ancillary thereto, the plan for
which may not conform to the lot size, bulk, or type of building, density, lot
coverage, required open space, or other requirements in any district
established by this chapter. Exceptions to provisions found in this chapter are
hereby made for planned unit developments. Planned unit development, for
purposes of this chapter, shall be considered a type of subdivision and will
require approval as delineated in the City’s subdivision regulations.
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
165.35   DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the locations of trades,
industries, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses; to
regulate and limit the height and use of buildings hereafter erected or
structurally altered; to regulate and limit the intensity of use and the lot
areas; and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open
spaces surrounding such buildings, the City is hereby divided into districts of
which there shall be six (6) in number, known as:
AG-1   Agricultural District
R-1   Residential District
C-1   General Business District
C-2   Highway Business District
I-1   Light Industry District
I-2   Heavy Industry District
165.36   MAP.
   The boundaries of these districts are established and designated upon the
map to be known as the Official Zoning Map of the City, which map, with all its
designations and information, is made a part of this chapter as if the same
were fully set forth herein. The Official Zoning Map is on file in the office
of the Clerk. 10
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: (See EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances
10 amending the zoning map.)
    
165.37   DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where there is uncertainty as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: The boundaries of the
various districts established by this chapter are street lines, alley lines,
property lines, lot boundary lines. Where the distance to any boundary line
from a street line, property line, or lot line is indicated by the Official
Zoning Map, such measurement shall control.
165.38   AG-1 – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The AG-1 Agricultural District is created to provide for those
lands within the corporate limits of Garner which are not planned for
development in the immediate future and which are primarily used for farming
purposes.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Farms, farm buildings other than those used for livestock, truck
gardens, orchards, and nurseries.
   3.   Conditional Uses. These uses are subject to conditional approval of the
Board of Adjustment.
      A.   Livestock raising facilities and the raising of livestock.
      B.   Extraction of minerals or raw material.
      C.   Transient enterprises, such as carnival and circus rides and shows.
      D.   Veterinary establishments.
      E.   Home occupations.
      F.   Single-family residences other than farm houses, which are a
principal permitted use.
      G.   Public and private recreational uses such as parks, trails, golf
courses, hunting and fishing areas, and wildlife preserves.
      H.   Cemeteries.
      I.   Railroads, streets and roads, bridges, power transmission lines, and
public utilities.
      J.   Ground mounted photovoltaic system or a roof mounted photovoltaic
system.
(Paragraph J – Ord. 461 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
   4.   Yard Requirements. No building shall be located closer than 60 feet
from the right-of-way of any public roadway.
165.39   R-1 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The R-1 Residential District is intended to provide for general
residential neighborhoods consisting primarily of single- or two-family
dwellings.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Single- or two-family dwellings and family homes as defined in
Section 165.02 of this chapter.
      B.   Public playgrounds and parks.
      C.   Accessory buildings.
      D.   Swimming pools when placed in a side or rear yard.
      E.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraph E – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
   3.   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to
approval of the Board of Adjustment.
      A.   Churches.
      B.   Public schools and private educational institutions having a
curriculum approved by the Iowa Department of Education or regulated by the
Department of Human Services.
      C.   Public garages.
      D.   Offices or studios of professional persons.
      E.   Ground mounted photovoltaic system limitations.
      F.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraph F – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
(Paragraphs E and F – Ord. 461 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
      G.   Nurseries and greenhouses.
      H.   Public libraries or public museums, clubs, lodges, or social or
community center buildings.
      I.   Funeral parlors and mortuaries.
      J.   Neighborhood grocery store.
      K.   Mobile home parks.
      L.   Multi-family dwellings.
      M.   Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes.
      N.   Home occupations.
      O.   Bed and breakfast homes.
      P.   Other uses such as above when there is clear evidence that such uses
would not seriously affect the value and character of the surrounding
development.
   4.   Minimum Lot Area.
      A.   Except as provided in paragraph B below, every dwelling hereafter
erected in the R-1 District shall have a lot area of not less than 6,000 square
feet for each single-family dwelling, 3,000 square feet per family for two-
family dwellings, and 2,000 square feet per family for multi-family dwellings.
      B.   Single-family dwellings may be erected on lots under 6,000 square
feet in size in the R-1 District, provided that the lot existed prior to June
14, 1983.
   5.   Yard Requirements. Except as may be otherwise provided, the yard
requirements for the R-1 District are as follows:
      A.   Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.
Whenever 30 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street in any
block has been built up with buildings having a front yard, then the building
line of buildings to be erected shall not be less than that of the natural
building line of the block, as determined by existing buildings.
      B.   Side Yard. There shall be a yard on each side of not less than six
(6) feet in width. The required minimum width of side yards for a church,
school, museum, hospital, or similar building shall be 50 percent more than the
formulation shown above.
      C.   Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet,
except in any block where there is an inner court not less than 65 feet square.
There shall be no rear yard required for any lot, the full width of which abuts
on such court. An accessory building may occupy not more than 35 percent of a
required rear yard area.
   6.   Height Regulations. Buildings and structures in the R-1 District shall
not exceed 35 feet in height.
   7.   Parking Requirements.
      A.   Each single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwelling shall
provide parking space on the lot occupied by the main building or garage space
in the main building or in an accessory building sufficient to accommodate two
motor cars for each family or dwelling unit.
      B.   Church, school and college auditoriums, theaters, general
auditoriums, stadiums, and other similar places of public assembly which are
erected on new sites shall provide one off-street parking space for every ten
(10) seats of the audience seating capacity provided in the main auditorium.
Said parking space shall be provided on the same lot as the place of public
assembly or on another lot within 500 feet of said place of public assembly.
      C.   Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, dispensaries, and welfare
institutions shall provide at least one off-street parking space for every 300
square feet of floor area in said buildings, such space to be located within
300 feet of the buildings.
      D.   Offices or studios of professional persons and funeral homes shall
provide one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor space in
the building devoted to the aforementioned uses.
   8.   Limitations. Any ground-mounted photovoltaic system shall occupy no
more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the rear yard in the R-1 Residential
District and will be less than 12 feet 1 inch high. There must be a dwelling on
the property before installation of the system. There will be no such
requirements in other districts.
(Subsection 8 – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
165.40   C-1 – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The C-1 General Business District is created for the purpose of
providing an orderly and planned development of business within the C-
1 District.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Retail business or service establishments such as the following:
         Antique shop
         Apparel shop
         Appliance store, sales and repair
         Automobile accessory store and auto sales including repair work
incidental to this use.
         Bakery whose products are sold only at retail
         Bank or savings and loan
         Barber shop
         Bed and breakfast homes
         Bicycle shop, sales and repair
         Bookstore
         Bus depot
         Business or professional offices
         Camera store, sales, supplies, and repair
         Candy shop for retail sales only
         Car wash
         Commercial parking lot
         Convenience stores
         Dairy store
         Dance studio
         Department store
         Drapery shop
         Drug store
         Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
         Flower shop
         Food stores and lockers
         Funeral parlors and mortuaries
         Furniture store
         Garden shop
         Gas stations and garages for general repair, but not including
wrecking or used parts yards
         Gift shop
         Greenhouse for retail sales
         Hardware store
         Hobby shop
         Hotel
         Interior decorating shop
         Jewelry store
         Key shop
         Landscape center
         Laundromat
         Loan office
         Lumber yard
         Monument sales yard
         Motel
         Music store
         Newspaper office
         Office supply store
         Paint store
         Pet shop
         Photographer studio
         Radio and television station and studios
         Recreation centers such as swimming pools, bowling alleys, billiard
parlors, and pool halls
         Restaurants including drive-in restaurants, taverns, bars, and night
clubs
         Sporting goods store
         Tailor shop
         Theatre
         Variety store
      B.   Accessory buildings.
      C.   Public parks and buildings.
      D.   Other uses similar to those listed which will not cause excessive
dust, noise, smoke, or odor and which will not be detrimental to the general
appearance and character of the general business district.
      E.   Any floor above the main ground level floor may be arranged and used
for dwelling purposes provided that two off-street parking spaces are provided
for each single-family dwelling unit and that a viable, authorized C-1 General
Business District use occurs on the main ground level floor.
   3.   Conditional Uses. The following and similar uses may be allowed in the
C-1 District, subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment.
      A.   Group homes.
      B.   Recreation vehicle parks, tourist courts, and cabins.
      C.   Mobile home parks.
      D.   Bed and breakfast inns.
      E.   A basement floor may be used for residential dwelling purposes
subject to the following conditions:
         (1)   A viable, authorized C-1 business occurs on the main ground
floor;
         (2)   The residence has a hard-wired smoke detector;
         (3)   Two methods of emergency egress from the residence exist;
         (4)   Any other conditions as may be set out by the Board of
Adjustment.
      F.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
      G.   Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraphs F and G – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
   4.   Height Regulations. Buildings and structures in the C-1 District shall
not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
   5.   Yard Regulations. There are no yard regulations in the C-1 District.
165.41   C-2 – HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The C-2 Highway Business District is created primarily to
provide for those types of businesses that are customarily located along major
thoroughfares of a city.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Gasoline filling stations and convenience stores.
      B.   Motels and hotels.
      C.   Automobile, truck, trailer, and garden and farm implement
establishments, including sales lots.
      D.   Retail stores or trade shops.
      E.   Funeral homes or mortuaries.
      F.   Offices and office buildings.
      G.   Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
      H.   Cocktail lounges, bowling alleys, dance halls, or skating rinks.
      I.   Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes.
      J.   Public garages and automobile repair shops, including body shops.
      K.   General service and repair establishments such as cleaning, laundry,
plumbing and heating, printing, and upholstering.
      L.   Accessory buildings.
      M.   Animal hospital, veterinary clinic, or kennel, provided all phases
of the business are conducted within a building where noises and odors are not
evident.
      N.   Bed and breakfast homes.
      O.   Bed and breakfast inns.
      P.   Any other commercial enterprises similar to the above listed uses
which will not produce significant amounts of dust, noise, smoke, odor, or
objectionable types or amounts of vehicular traffic.
      Q.   Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.
      R.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraphs Q and R – Ord. 477 –_Jan._26_Supp.)
   3.   Conditional Uses. The following and similar uses may be allowed in the
C-2 Highway Business District, subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment.
      A.   Churches, with one off-street parking space for every 10 seats of
audience seating capacity provided in the main auditorium. Said parking shall
be provided on the same lot as the church.
      B.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
      C.   Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraphs B and C – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
   4.   Yard Requirements. Except as may be otherwise provided, the yard
requirements in the C-2 District are as follows:
      A.   Front Yard. In the C-2 District on Highway 18, no building shall be
built closer than 60 feet from the right-of-way of said highway. If a C-
2 District adjoins a residence district within the same block, then that
residence district front yard requirements shall apply to that portion of the
C-2 District within that block. In the C-2 District, whenever 30 percent of the
frontage on one side of a street in any block has been built up with buildings,
then the setback line of buildings to be erected shall not be less than that of
the natural building line of the block as determined by existing buildings.
      B.   Side Yard. There are no side yard requirements within the C-
2 District except where a lot adjoins any residential district, in which case
the adjacent side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
      C.   Rear Yard. There are no rear yard requirements within the C-
2 District.
   5.   Height Regulations. Buildings and structures within the C-2 District
shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
   6.   Parking Regulations. The parking requirements for any buildings
hereafter erected shall be as follows:
      A.   Retail Store or Service Establishment. The minimum parking space
requirements for a retail store or service establishment shall be as follows:
one off-street parking space for every 400 square feet of building floor area.
      B.   Motels and Lodging Houses. Motels and lodging houses shall provide
at least one off-street parking space for each individual sleeping room or
living unit.
      C.   Offices and Funeral Homes. There shall be one off-street parking
space provided for every 300 square feet of floor space in the building devoted
to the aforementioned uses.
      D.   Restaurants, Cocktail Lounges, Night Clubs, Bowling Alleys, Dance
Halls, Skating Rinks or Similar Establishments. Such establishments shall
provide one off-street parking space for every 100 square feet of floor area
devoted to the aforementioned uses.
165.42   I-1 – LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The I-1 Light Industry District is created to provide for those
commercial and light manufacturing industries which do not qualify for location
in the business districts, but which are not heavy manufacturing industries.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Wholesale establishments.
      B.   Truck terminals.
      C.   Blacksmith and machine shops.
      D.   Sheet metal shops.
      E.   Storage and distribution warehouses.
      F.   Printing shops.
      G.   Builder’s or contractor’s plant or storage yard.
      H.   Building materials sales and storage and concrete mixing.
      I.   Lumber yards, including millworks.
      J.   Carpenter and cabinet shops.
      K.   Feed stores.
      L.   Bakery, wholesale.
      M.   Plumbing and heating shops.
      N.   Open yards for storage and sales.
      O.   Automobile repair garages, including body shops.
      P.   Raising of crops.
      Q.   Accessory buildings.
      R.   Any other light manufacturing or commercial enterprises similar to
the above listed uses which will not produce significant amounts of dust,
noise, smoke, odor, or objectionable types or amounts of vehicular traffic.
      S.   Bed and breakfast homes.
      T.   Bed and breakfast inns.
      U.   Ground.
      V.   Roof.
(Paragraphs U and V – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
   3.   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditional approval of the Board of Adjustment.
      A.   Mining and extraction of minerals and raw minerals.
      B.   Roof-mounted photovoltaic systems.
      C.   Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.
(Paragraphs B and C – Ord. 477 – Jan. 26 Supp.)
   4.   Yard Requirements. Except as may be otherwise provided, the yard
requirements for the I-1 District shall be as follows:
      A.   Front Yard. There is no front yard requirement in the I-1 District
unless the I-1 District adjoins a residential district within the same block,
in which case the residence district front yard requirement shall apply to that
portion of the I-1 District within that block.
      B.   Side Yard. There are no side yard requirements within the I-
1 District, except where a lot in the I-1 District adjoins any residential
district, in which case the adjacent side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10)
feet.
      C.   Rear Yard. There are no rear yard requirements in the I-1 District.
   5.   Height Regulations. The height of buildings and structures within the
I-1 District shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
   6.   Parking Requirements. The minimum parking space requirements for an
establishment in the I-1 District shall be one parking space for every two
employees on the maximum working shift, plus space to accommodate all trucks or
other vehicles used in connection therewith.
165.43   I-2 – HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT.
   1.   Intent. The I-2 Heavy Industry District is created to provide for those
heavy manufacturing industries which do not qualify for location in the I-
1 Light Industry District.
   2.   Principal Permitted Uses.
      A.   Food product manufacture, excluding fish and meats.
      B.   Concrete mixing, including concrete products manufacture.
      C.   Contractor’s equipment storage yard.
      D.   Laboratory, experimental or testing.
      E.   Sawmill, including the manufacture of wood products.
      F.   Manufacture and assembly from previously prepared materials such as
cloth, leather, plastics, metal, stone, or weed.
      G.   Raising of crops.
      H.   Any other heavy industrial use similar to the above uses which would
not create excessive amounts of dust, smoke, gas, noise, fumes, odor,
vibration, fire, or explosion.
   3.   Conditional Uses. The Board of Adjustment may approve as conditional
uses those industrial uses which may prove objectionable by reason of odor,
noise, smoke, or hazard such as the following:
      A.   Slaughter houses and stock yards.
      B.   Distillation of ethanol.
      C.   Acid or chemical manufacture or storage.
      D.   Cement, lime, gypsum, or similar material manufacture.
      E.   Explosive manufacture or storage.
      F.   Fertilizer manufacture or storage.
      G.   Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction.
      H.   Petroleum refining or storage.
      I.   Rubber goods, manufacture.
      J.   Salvage yard or junk yard, provided that the premises on which such
activity is conducted shall be wholly enclosed within a building, wall, or
fence not less than six (6) feet in height, completely obscuring the activity.
      K.   Mining and extraction of minerals and raw minerals.
      L.   Roof.
      M.   Ground.
(Paragraphs L and M – Ord.461 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
   4.   Yard Requirements. Except as may be otherwise provided, the yard
requirements for the I-2 District shall be as follows:
      A.   Front Yard. There is no front yard requirement in the I-2 District
unless the I-2 District adjoins a residential district within the same block,
in which case the residence district front yard requirement shall apply to that
portion of the I-2 District within that block.
      B.   Side Yard. There are no side yard requirements within the I-
2 District except where a lot in the I-2 District adjoins any residential
district, in which case the adjacent side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10)
feet.
      C.   Rear Yard. There are no rear yard requirements in the I-2 District.
   5.   Parking Requirements. The minimum parking space requirements for an
establishment in the I-2 District shall be one parking space for every two
employees on the maximum working shift, plus space to accommodate all trucks or
other vehicles used in connection therewith.
   6.   Height Regulations. The height of buildings and structures within the
I-2 District shall not exceed 45 feet in height.
165.44   TOWER/ANTENNA REGULATIONS.
   1.   Applicability. A tower structure shall be no closer to any public
right-of-way or other property line than the distance equivalent to the height
of the structure, including accessories or antenna mounted atop the structures.
Said distance shall be measured from the street right-of-way and from all
property lines of the proposed site to the center of the structure’s base. A
tower structure shall be located on a parcel not less than one acre in size. A
conditional use permit may be required from the Zoning Board of Adjustment with
approval of the Council, only after meeting the general site requirements as
herein established. All tower structures shall be protected from unauthorized
access by a security screen or fence not less than six (6) feet high and an
appropriate anti-climbing device.
   2.   Public Property. Antennas or towers located on public property owned or
controlled by the City shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a
conditional use permit under this section.
   3.   Amateur Radio, Private or Non-commercial Antennas. This section shall
not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is less than 45
feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio
station operator or is exclusively for receive-only antennas.
   4.   Pre-existing Towers and Antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a
permit has been properly issued prior to July 10, 2001, shall not be required
to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of the
FAA and FCC.
   Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this section as “pre-
existing towers” or “pre-existing antennas.”
   5.   Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures or
Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the decision makers that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant’s needs.
   6.   Zoning Districts Allowed. Towers and antennas as described in this
section shall be allowed to be constructed in the following zoning districts:
      A.   AG-1   Agricultural District
      B.   C-2   Highway Business District
      C.   I-1   Light Industry District
      D.   I-2   Heavy Industry District
   7.   Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations including but
not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control even though the
antenna tower may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that
are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
non-conforming use or structure.
   8.   Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any tower or antenna that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned
and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days or
receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. If
said antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the City may remove
such antenna or tower at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of
a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users
cease using the tower.
   9.   Lighting. Towers and antennas shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority, including the City. If
lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause
the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
   10.   State and Federal Requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or
exceed standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other agency of the
State or federal government having authority to set rules and regulations
pertaining to towers and/or antennas.
   11.   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, other than
safety or warning signs.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending Ordinance No. 301, the
Official Zoning Map adopted December 14, 1999, and have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NUMBER DATE ADOPTED
302              January 11, 2000
306              February 27, 2001
308              April 24, 2001
312              October 23, 2001
330              July 8, 2003
333              August 26, 2003
334              September 23, 2003
340              April 27, 2003
345              November 9, 2004
347              April 12, 2005
349              June 28, 2005
358              November 14, 2006
387              January 24, 2011
390              July 12, 2011
395              June 26, 2012
398              September 25, 2012/*
399              November 27, 2012
439              January 22, 2019
463              August 23, 2022
 
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
 
166.01 Definitions                   166.07 Review of Final Plats
166.02 Platting Required             166.08 Final Plat Requirements
166.03 General Requirements          166.09 Standards
166.04 General Procedures            166.10 Improvements
166.05 Review of Preliminary Plats   166.11 Plans, Profiles and Cross Sections
166.06 Preliminary Plat Requirements 166.12 Variances
 
166.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words are defined.
   1.   “Administrative subdivision” means the dividing of two platted lots
into two lots of like or similar size meeting the minimum lot size requirements
of
Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances, or the dividing of a platted lot into
two lots where each divided lot has a frontage of at least 60 feet and a
minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. The proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the City Administrator for his or her approval and waiver of
formal platting. Upon approval, the City Administrator shall furnish an
affidavit of approval to the property owner. If the City Administrator does not
approve the subdivision, it shall not preclude the owner from filing a full
subdivision plan under this chapter.
   2.   “Alley” means a public property dedicated to public use primarily for
vehicular access to a back side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   3.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land, or
the boundary of the subdivision.
   4.   “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered in the
State, designated as City Engineer by the Council.
   5.   “Comprehensive Plan” means the general plan for the development of the
community which may be titled master plan, comprehensive plan, or some other
title and which plan has been adopted by the governing body. Such
“comprehensive plan” shall include any part of such plan separately adopted and
any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
   6.   “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end connecting to another street
and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   7.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for another to
use a designated part of said owner’s property for a specified purpose.
   8.   “Flood hazard area” means any area subject to flooding by a one percent
(1%) probability flood, otherwise referred to as one hundred year flood, as
designated by the State Department of Natural Resources or the Federal
Insurance Administration.
   9.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent lands that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a one
hundred year flood without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation
more than one foot.
   10.   “Improvements” means changes to land necessary to prepare it for
building sites, including but not limited to grading, filling, street paving,
curb paving, sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways and other
public works and appurtenances.
   11.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel or tract
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or for building development.
   12.   “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
   13.   “Lot, double frontage” means any lot which is not a corner lot which
abuts two streets.
   14.   “Owner” means the legal entity holding title to the property being
subdivided or such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its
behalf.
   15.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the full cost of
the improvements which are required by this chapter, said cost being estimated
by the City Engineer, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally
sufficient to secure to the City that the said improvements will be constructed
in accordance with this chapter.
   16.   “Planning Commission” or “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City.
   17.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart an which the subdivider’s plan of
subdivision of land is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval
and intends to record in final form.
   18.   “Plats Officer” means the individual assigned the duty to administer
this chapter by the Council.
   19.   “Resubdivision” means any subdivision of land which has previously
been included in a recorded plat. In appropriate context, it may be a verb
referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
   20.   “Roadway width” or “surface width” means that portion of the street
available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from
back to back of curbs.
   21.   “Street” means the entire width between the property lines bounded
every way of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and others,
and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise
designated.
   22.   “Subdivider” means the owner of the property being subdivided or such
other person or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
   23.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into two or more parts for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development. The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange
of small parcels of land to or between owners of adjacent platted lots, where
such sale or exchange does not create any additional lots and where the land
sold or exchanged constitutes less than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the
enlarged lot after such transfer, is not considered a subdivision.
   24.   “Utilities” means a system for the distribution or collection of
water, gas, electricity, wastewater, and storm water.
166.02   PLATTING REQUIRED.
   Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall
hereafter subdivide or plat the same for the purpose of laying out an addition,
subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the City or,
pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, within two (2) miles from the
corporate limits shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form, and
containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots
therein contained or placing the plat on record.
166.03   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general requirements shall be complied with by all
subdividers:
   1.   Fees Established. The Council shall, from time to time, establish fees,
by resolution, for the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or
resubdivision shall be considered filed with the Clerk unless and until said
plat is accompanied by the fee, as established by resolution of the Council and
as required by this chapter.
   2.   Penalties. Any person who disposes of or offers for sale any lot or
lots within the area of jurisdiction of this chapter before the plat thereof
has been approved by the Council and recorded as required by law shall forfeit
and pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot or part of lot sold, disposed of,
or offered for sale. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the City’s
right to any other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this
chapter.
   3.   Building or Zoning Permit to be Denied. No building or zoning permit
shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel or tract where a
subdivision is required by this chapter unless and until a final plat of such
subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance with this chapter and
until the improvements required by this chapter have been accepted by the City.
166.04   GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   In order to secure the approval of any proposed subdivision, the subdivider
shall submit to the City plats and other information as required by this
chapter. The Commission and Council may waive the preliminary plat submittal
requirement and consider a final plat if the proposed subdivision does not
include any public improvements.
166.05   REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   1.   The Clerk, upon receipt of four (4) copies of the preliminary plat,
shall file one copy in the records of the City, shall retain one copy for
public inspection, and shall forward the remaining copies to the plats officer.
   2.   The plats officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City Engineer
and such other persons as necessary to review the plat and within two (2) weeks
shall submit the plat for consideration by the Commission.
   3.   The Commission shall examine the plat and the report of the City
Engineer and such other information as it deems necessary or desirable to
ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances of the City, to the
comprehensive plan, and other duly adopted plans of the City. The Commission
shall, within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the plat with the Clerk,
forward a report and recommendation regarding the plat to the Council. If such
recommendation is to disapprove or modify the plat, the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in writing in the report, and a copy of the report and
recommendation shall be provided to the applicant.
   4.   The Council shall examine the plat, the report of the City Engineer,
the report of the Commission, and such other information as it deems necessary
or desirable. Upon such examination, the Council shall ascertain whether the
plat conforms to the ordinances and standards of the City, conforms to the
comprehensive plan and other duly adopted plans of the City, and will be
conducive to the orderly growth and development of the City in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. Following such examination, the Council
may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the plat. If the
decision of the Council is to disapprove the plat or to approve the plat
subject to conditions, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing in
the official records of the Council, and such decisions shall be provided to
the applicant. Action on the preliminary plat by the Council shall be taken
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plat with the Clerk, unless such
time period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and the City.
   5.   The approval of a preliminary plat by the Council shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of such approval, after which such approval
shall be void. The subdivider shall take no action requiring the precedent
approval of a preliminary plat except upon application for and approval of an
extension of such period of validity by the Council.
   6.   The approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization by
the Council for the installation of improvements as required by this chapter
and as shown on the preliminary plat, provided no such improvement shall be
constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles, cross sections
and specifications for the construction of such improvement have been submitted
to and approved in writing by the City Engineer.
   7.   Before the Council will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances
or other City requirements and the agreements between the subdivider and the
City.
   8.   In lieu of the requirements that improvements be completed prior to the
approval of a final plat, the subdivider may post a performance bond with the
City guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed within a
period of two years from the date of approval of such final plat, unless
extended by Council approval, but such approval of the plat shall not
constitute final acceptance of any improvements to be constructed. Improvements
will be accepted only after their construction has been completed.
166.06   PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of at
least one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or less and shall be plainly
marked “Preliminary Plat” and shall show:
   1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
   2.   The name and address of the owner.
   3.   The name, address and profession of the person preparing the plat.
   4.   The date, scale and north point.
   5.   The legal description of the area being platted.
   6.   The boundary line (accurate in scale), the dimensions and location of
the property to be platted and the location of the plat in relation to section
lines.
   7.   The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements,
utilities and other existing features affecting the plat.
   8.   The layout, numbers and dimensions of proposed lots and blocks.
   9.   The layout of all existing and proposed utility and other easements.
   10.   The location, width and dimensions of all streets, alleys and grounds
proposed to be dedicated for public use.
   11.   Proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
   12.   Restrictions proposed, if any, to be included in the owner’s
dedication of the plat.
   13.   Written statement of the appropriate officials of the availability of
gas and electricity to the proposed subdivision.
   14.   Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider
proposes to provide and install all required improvements required by this
chapter.
166.07   REVIEW OF FINAL PLATS.
   1.   The Clerk, upon receipt of six (6) copies of the final plat, shall file
one copy in the records of the City, shall retain one copy for public
inspection, and shall forward the remaining copies to the plats officer.
   2.   The plats officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City Engineer
and such other persons as necessary to review the plat and shall schedule the
plat for review by the Council.
   3.   The plats officer and the City Engineer shall examine the plat as to
its compliance with the ordinances and standards of the City and its
conformance with the preliminary plat and shall set forth their findings in
writing. A copy of the findings shall be provided to the subdivider.
   4.   If the plat is found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat
as approved, the final plat shall be forwarded to the Council for review. If
the plat is found not to conform to the preliminary plat, it shall be referred
to the Commission for review, prior to review by the Council. The Commission
shall then review the plat and shall forward a written recommendation thereon
to the Council within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the plat with the
Clerk. If the recommendation is to disapprove the plat or to require
modification of the plat, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing,
and a copy of the recommendation shall be provided to the subdivider.
   5.   Upon receipt of the plat and written reports thereon, the Council shall
review the plat and attachments thereto. If the plat is found to conform to the
ordinances and standards of the City and the comprehensive plan and other duly
adopted plans, all as of the date of approval of the preliminary plat, and is
found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat, the Council shall
approve the plat and shall cause its approval to be entered on the plat as
required by law.
   6.   Action on the final plat by the Council shall be taken within sixty
(60) days of the date of filing of the plat with the Clerk, unless such time
period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and the City. If the
action is to disapprove the plat, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in
the official records of the Council, and such decisions shall be provided to
the subdivider.
166.08   FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider shall, within one year from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, unless such time period has been extended, prepare and file
with the Clerk four (4) copies of the final plat and required attachments, as
set forth in this chapter. Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision as
set forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the Council until and
unless a preliminary plat for the area included in the proposed final plat has
been approved and has not expired and become void as set forth above. The final
plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') or
less. Sheet size shall be no greater than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches
(18" x 24") or smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8½" x
11") and shall be of a size acceptable to the County Auditor. If more than one
sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly show the number of the sheet, the total
number of sheets included in the plat, and match lines indicating where other
sheets adjoin. The final plat shall be clearly marked “Final Plat” and shall
show the following:
   1.   The name of the subdivision.
   2.   Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
   3.   Scale and a graphic bar scale, north arrow, and date on each sheet.
   4.   All monuments to be of record, as required by Chapter 354, Code of
Iowa.
   5.   Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every lot,
block, street, easement, or other area shown on the plat, as well as the outer
boundaries of the subdivided lands.
   6.   All distance, bearing, curve and other survey data, as required by
Chapter 354, Code of Iowa.
   7.   All adjoining properties shall be identified, and where such adjoining
properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that subdivision
shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a resubdivision of a part or the
whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall be shown to
controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be
made. Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle following the name
of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat.
   8.   Street names and clear designation of public alleys.
   9.   Block and lot numbers.
   10.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for
public use and the purpose for which such property is dedicated or reserved for
public use.
   11.   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be confined to
only those easements pertaining to public utilities including gas, power,
telephone, cable television, water, sewer, easements for ingress and egress,
and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary for the orderly development
of the land encompassed within the plat.
   12.   All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled “not a
part of this plat.”
   13.   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the
land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service as
determined by the Council.
   14.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision
boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any individual lot.
   15.   A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was prepared
by the surveyor or under the surveyor’s direct personal supervision, signed and
dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor’s Iowa registration number of
seal; and a sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the registered
land surveyor who drew the plat.
   16.   The following shall be attached to and accompany any final plat:
      A.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the
plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire,
signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a
dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for
streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if
the dedication is approved by the Council;
      B.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the
mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
      C.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of
title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the
proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land
being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing
the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances
for the purpose of this section.
      D.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
      F.   Specifications and engineering construction drawings including
profiles, cross-sections and details of all public improvements. Elevations
shall be referred to mean sea level as exhibited in standard U.S. Geological
Survey Maps. Specifications and references shall meet those required by the
City’s construction and specification standards, including a site grading plan
for the entire subdivision.
      G.   A certificate by the City Engineer that all required improvements
and installations have been completed according to the construction plans
submitted to the City prior to construction or with the final plat if not
constructed, or that a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been
approved by the City Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or that the Council has
agreed that the City will provide the necessary improvements and installations
and assess the costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the
subdivision.
      H.   The encumbrance bond, if any.
      I.   If private streets or other private improvements have been approved,
an agreement in the form of a covenant running with the land in a form approved
by the City Attorney providing for the construction or reconstruction of any
improvements to meet City standards and the assessment of all costs of the
property owners in the event of annexation and dedication and acceptance shall
be required.
166.09   STANDARDS.
   1.   Acreage Subdivisions. Where the parcel of land is subdivided into
larger tracts than ordinarily used for building lots, such parcel shall be
divided so as to allow for the opening of streets and the ultimate extension of
adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of
such streets may, at the discretion of the Council, be made a requirement of
the plat.
   2.   Relation to Existing Streets. New subdivisions shall make provisions
for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining areas (or
their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar
they may be necessary for the public requirements.
   3.   Streets. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the
most favorable development of the entire neighboring area, and proposed streets
shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and
street of reasonable gradient. If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plan
should be laid out such that the distance between any street and the railroad
will provide lots of sufficient depth to allow for a buffer strip between the
residence and the railroad unless it is a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
between the railroad right-of-way line and the street right-of-way line.
   4.   Minimum Street and Alley Widths. The minimum width of a street shall be
66 feet and the minimum alley width shall be 20 feet. When a street is
considered by the Council to be a major traffic carrier, the minimum street
width may be required to be up to twice the required roadway width, as
determined by the Council. Cul-de-sac streets shall be permitted where
topographical or geographical features preclude continuation of streets.
Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, a turnaround having a street property line
diameter of at least 100 feet and the minimum paved turnaround shall be 80
feet. The property line at the intersection of the turnaround and the leading
portion of the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 50 feet. A
turnaround diameter greater than 100 feet may be required by the Council in the
case of commercial or industrial subdivision.
   5.   Minimum Roadway Width. The minimum roadway width shall be 28 feet and
the minimum roadway width for alleys shall be 18 feet.
   6.   Street Grades. Street grades shall be so arranged that grades shall not
exceed ten percent. Gutter grades shall not be less than 0.4 percent. All
changes in street grades shall be connected by a vertical curve of reasonable
length to assure adequate visibility. However, on streets which have minimum
grade, no vertical curve shall be used. In approaching intersections, there
shall be suitable leveling of the street at a grade generally not to exceed one
percent and for a distance of generally not less than 50 feet from the nearest
line of the intersecting street. The grade within the intersection should be as
level as possible permitting drainage. The Council may permit variance from
these grades where it deems modification advisable to adjust to topographic
situations.
   7.   Intersections. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a radii of
at least 20 feet. Streets should be laid out to intersect at right angles, and
may be curved approaching the intersection in order to bring this about; no
street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
   8.   Street Names. Streets that are obviously in alignment with others
already existing and named shall bear the name of the existing streets. The
proposed names of new streets shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats
and such names shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names.
The Clerk shall determine street names and house numbers.
   9.   Blocks. No block shall be longer than 900 feet between streets, except
where the topography or platted area requires blocks of greater length. In
blocks greater than 300 feet in length between street lines, the Council may
require a right-of-way of not less than ten feet in width to be dedicated for
crosswalks if it is considered essential for the welfare of the community.
   10.   Lots. Residential lots shall be a minimum of 60 feet in width, except
on cul-de-sacs. On cul-de-sacs the minimum lot width shall be 60 feet wide at
the building setback line and 45 feet at the property line. The residential lot
area shall not be less than 6,000 square feet and shall have a minimum depth of
80 feet. Corner lots for residential use shall be a minimum of 70 feet in
width.
   11.   Easements for Public Utilities. Where alleys are not provided in the
plat, easements of not less than five (5) feet in width shall be granted to the
City by the owner on each side of all rear and side lot lines where necessary
for the extensions of main sewers or other utilities. The subdivider shall
install electrical and telephone wiring systems consisting of the necessary
wiring, fixtures and equipment which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
Telephone lines shall be installed underground according to local utility
specifications.
   12.   Monuments. Permanent monuments meeting the requirements of Chapter 355
of the Code of Iowa shall be placed at block corners, points of curves, change
in direction along lot lines and at each lot corner.
166.10   IMPROVEMENTS.
   The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by this
chapter. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with the specifications provided by the subdivider and prepared by a
Registered Engineer. All improvements shall be constructed under the
supervision of the City Engineer.
   1.   Streets and Alleys. All streets and alleys within the platted area
which are dedicated for public use shall be designed for six-inch Portland
cement concrete with integral curb. The subdivider is obligated for the cost of
grading, compaction and minimum of four (4) inches of crushed stone. All grades
shall be approved by the Council after receiving the report and recommendations
of the City Engineer. If the subdivider elects not to construct six-inch
Portland cement concrete streets with integral curb he shall construct a street
to meet the requirements as follows: The roadway width shall be 28 feet and to
the grade of the finished concrete street; the roadway shall also have a four-
foot-wide shoulder on each side and shall receive four inches of crushed stone
on a compacted subgrade; the subgrade shall be four inches below the finished
grade and shall be compacted to 95% standard proctor density; the property line
shall be brought to a grade above the proposed top of curb and a ditch cut
between the property line and the shoulder of the roadway.
   2.   Sidewalks. Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required by the
Council if they are considered necessary for the general welfare and safety of
the community. The sidewalks shall be constructed to the grade approved by the
Council after receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer.
   3.   Water Lines. Where a usable and acceptable public water main as
determined by the City Engineer is within 600 feet of the area to be
subdivided, the subdivider shall connect with such water main and provide a
water connection for each lot and stubbed to the property line in accordance
with the Water Department Standards, procedure and supervision. Where the water
main is not within the 600 feet as defined above, the subdivider and the
Council shall negotiate the cost for extending the water line to within 600
feet of the subdivision, if the Council wishes to make such extension. The
subdivider is obligated for the cost of a 6-inch diameter water main, valves,
fittings, fire hydrants, and appurtenances. If a water main greater than six
inches in diameter is required by the City, the additional cost shall be paid
for by the City. The subdivider may, at his or her own expense and with the
permission of the Council, construct water mains of greater diameter than that
which is required by the City.
   4.   Sewers. Where a usable and acceptable public sanitary sewer, as
determined by the City Engineer, is within 600 feet of the area to be
subdivided, the subdivider shall connect to such sanitary sewer and provide a
sanitary sewer service for each lot and stubbed to the property line. The sewer
system shall be constructed subject to the supervision of the City Engineer.
Where the public sanitary sewer is not within 600 feet of the area to be
subdivided, the subdivider and the Council shall negotiate the cost for
providing sanitary sewer to within 600 feet of the subdivision, if the Council
wishes to make such extension. The subdivider is obligated for the cost of all
sewers up to eight inches in diameter including all appurtenances. If a sewer
main greater than eight inches in diameter is required by the City, the
additional cost shall be paid for by the City. The subdivider may, at his or
her own expense and with the permission of the Council, construct sanitary
sewers of greater diameter than that required by the City.
   5.   Storm Sewers. Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of
storm water; however, the Council reserves the right to waive a part or all of
these storm sewer requirements. If storm sewers are required, in part or in
whole, they shall be subject to the approval of the Council and the supervision
of the City Engineer:
      A.   A design frequency of five (5) years shall be used in the design of
all laterals and a ten-year frequency in the design of all trunk lines.
      B.   The minimum pipe diameter shall be 12 inches.
      C.   Provisions shall be made for disposing of storm water for design
frequencies greater than five years on an emergency basis.
      D.   Storm water inlets shall be in accordance with the City’s standard
details.
      E.   The subdivider is obligated for the cost of all storm sewers
required by this chapter, except in the case of a trunk line extension, in
which case the subdivider shall pay a proportional share of the overall cost of
the trunk. The proportional share shall be the ratio of the total trunk line
capacity to capacity required for only the subdivision. All of the foregoing
improvements shall be completed and constructed before the Council approves the
final plat. However, this requirement may be waived if the subdivider will post
a performance bond with the Council guaranteeing that said improvements will be
constructed within a period of two years from final acceptance of the plat. If
utilities, sanitary sewer, water main or storm sewer outlets are not available
or accessible, the subdivider may be required to post a performance bond
guaranteeing that the improvements will be constructed within a five-year
period providing the utility service becomes available (within 600 feet of the
subdivision).
166.11   PLANS, PROFILES AND CROSS SECTIONS.
   The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer the following: plans and
profiles drawn to a minimum horizontal scale of one inch to twenty feet (1" =
20') and a minimum vertical scale of one inch to five feet (1" = 5') and
specifications for the construction of the improvements for the subdivision as
required in Section 166.10 of this chapter. All elevations shall be referred to
the City datum and taken from bench marks as defined by the City Engineer:
   1.   The plan and profile of each street with tentative grades and street
intersection elevations. All grades shown shall be top of curb grades.
   2.   The plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers with grades and pipe
sizes indicated, and a plan of the proposed water distribution system showing
pipe sizes and locations of valves and fire hydrants.
   3.   The cross sections of proposed streets showing the width of roadways,
present and proposed grade lines, and location and size of utility mains. The
cross sections shall be taken and plotted at intervals of not more than 50 feet
along the centerline and shall extend out to the sides to that point where the
proposed grade intersects the existing grade. In no case shall these cross
sections be extended less than the full width of the right-of-way.
   4.   Standard specifications approved by the City Engineer may be used.
   5.   Provide an overall drainage plan which shall show the drainage area of
each inlet of the subdivision.
   6.   The grading plan shall be sufficiently complete and of such accuracy
that it can be used for final lot grading.
166.12   VARIANCES.
   Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirement of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual topography or
other conditions, the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Provided,
however, such variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. In no case shall any
variance or modification be more than a minimum easing of the requirements and
in no instance shall it be in conflict with any zoning ordinance and such
variances and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of three
fourths (3/4) of the members of the Council.
 
