CITY CODE
of
IOWA CITY, IOWA
2006
Code current through:
Ord. 25-4966, passed September 2, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This City Code of the City of Iowa City, as supplemented, contains
ordinances and resolutions up to and including Ordinance 25-4966, passed
September 2, 2025, and Resolution 16-258, passed August 29, 2016. Ordinances
and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in
conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to
ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
Ordinance No. 25-4965
Ordinance amending Title 14, Zoning Code and Title 15, Land Subdivision, to
update the Neighborhood Open Space Requirements (REZ25-0012)
Whereas, neighborhood open space is considered a vital part of Iowa City’s
community and often serves as a focal point of neighborhood activity; and
Whereas, attractive open space enhances and serves the immediate and future
needs of area residents in the same way as other capital improvements such as
streets, water mains, and sanitary and storm sewers serve residents of a
neighborhood; and
Whereas, it is the intent of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, to ensure that
adequate usable neighborhood open space, parks and recreation facilities are
provided in a manner consistent with the Parks Master Plan adopted on September
19, 2017 (Resolution No. 17-309), and that the method of assuring such open
space is calculated in a predictable and reasonable way as development occurs
in the City; and
Whereas, the City of Iowa City, Iowa has determined that new subdivisions
impact existing neighborhood open space, as well as a need for additional
neighborhood open space; and
Whereas, the provision of neighborhood open space through dedication and/or the
payment of fees to be used for land acquisition in lieu of dedication is a
reasonable and objective method for addressing and alleviating such impact, and
also promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of Iowa City; and
Whereas, the current neighborhood open space requirements, adopted in 1994
(Ordinance No. 94-3648), are based on maximum residential density, and
significant zoning code updates since that time have rendered this formula
unworkable in some cases; and
Whereas, the adoption of the Form-Based Code and Standards allows a wide range
of housing types, resulting in theoretical maximum densities that do not
reflect likely development patterns, and thereby distort the open space
calculation; and
Whereas, some zoning districts, such as those in the Riverfront Crossings
District and the Central Business District, do not have maximum density
standards, making the existing open space formula infeasible to implement; and
Whereas, the City seeks to adopt a new open space formula that is predictable
and functional across all zoning districts, regardless of density assumptions;
and
Whereas, the inclusion of a 10% cap on the neighborhood open space requirement
ensures that the amount of land or fee in-lieu contribution remains
proportional to the scale of the development, preventing disproportionately
high burdens on projects with smaller sites or higher densities; and
   Whereas, the Planning and Zoning Commission reviewed the zoning code
amendments set forth below at the July 16, 2025 meeting and recommended
approval.
   Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
   Section I. Amendments. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa City, Iowa
is hereby amended as follows:
A.   Amend 14-5K-1, Purpose, by deleting the strikethrough text and adding the
underlined text:
The neighborhood open space requirements ensure that adequate usable
neighborhood open space, parks and recreation facilities are provided in a
manner that is consistent with the neighborhood open space   parks master plan,
as amended, by using a calculable method to equitably apportion the costs of
acquiring and developing land for those purposes. The provisions of this
article require development, which creates increased needs for neighborhood
open space ("open space impact"), to pay a proportionate share of the city's
capital improvements to fulfill said open space impact. Usable neighborhood
open space includes pedestrian/bicycle trails, preferably located within
natural greenway systems, private open space that is publicly accessible,  and
neighborhood parks that serve nearby residents. Portions of larger community
parks may be adapted for neighborhood use, but this article is not intended to
fund the acquisition of community parks or large playing fields for organized
sports.  This article is also intended to encourage, wherever reasonably
feasible, the dedication of sensitive areas in conjunction with usable open
space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
B.   Amend 14-5K-2, Applicability, by deleting the strikethrough text and
adding the underlined text:
As a condition of approval for preliminary plats containing residential uses  
residential subdivisions, and commercial subdivisions containing residential
uses, and planned developments , the applicant shall dedicate land, pay a fee
in lieu of land, or a combination thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and
open space purposes, as determined by the city and in accordance with the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
C.   Amend 14-5K-3, Dedication of Land, by deleting the strikethrough text and
adding the underlined text:
A.   Amount Of Land To Be Dedicated: The amount of land dedication shall be
determined by the following formula. This formula is deemed a reasonable
calculation of the additional need for neighborhood open space created by the
subject subdivision or planned development. 
A x 0.65DU x PDU x 3/1000, where
A = Acres of undeveloped property;
DU = Maximum dwelling units per undeveloped acre (43,560 divided by the minimum
lot area requirement for the highest density residential use allowed in the
subject base zone);
0.65 = This percentage figure reflects the average development density
occurring in Iowa City;
# of units x PDU x 3/1000, where
# of units = Number of new units is determined as noted in the Table 5K-1;
PDU = Persons per dwelling unit based on the most recent census; and
3/1,000 = The community standard of a Acres for of active neighborhood open
space required per 1,000 persons, as determined by the formulas set out in the
neighborhood open space plan, as amended.
Table 5K-1: Determining Unit Number
 
Zone                                    Unit Number Determined by
                                        Allowable units based on the following
Single-Family Residential               dimensional requirements: Lot size, Lot
                                        frontage, and Lot width
                                        For every platted lot: Maximum dwelling
                                        units per undeveloped acre (43,560
Multi-Family Residential and Commercial divided by the minimum lot area
Zones (with residential uses)           requirement for the highest density
                                        residential use allowed in the subject
                                        base zone) x 0.65
River Front Crossings and Eastside      Unit number to be provided by developer
Mixed Use Districts                     at submittal of preliminary plat
                                        application
Form-Based                              Total unit number on Neighborhood Plan
Planned Development Overlays (OPDs)     Total unit number on Preliminary OPD
                                        Plan
B. Dedication Cap: The maximum land dedication requirement is 10% of the total
acres of land being developed.
B. C. Nature Of Land To Be Dedicated: Except as otherwise required by the city,
all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria:
1.   Usability: At least ninety percent (90%) of the land required to be
dedicated shall be located outside of floodways, lakes or other water bodies,
areas with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), wetlands subject to
federal or state regulatory jurisdiction and other areas the city reasonably
deems unsuitable for neighborhood open space due to topography, flooding or
other appropriate considerations. Dry bottom storm water detention facilities
and dry creek areas may be credited toward reaching a portion of the required
land dedication when the city determines that such areas are suitable for use
as neighborhood open space. Pedestrian/bicycle trails and private open space
that is publicly accessible may be credited toward reaching the required land
dedication when the city determines that such areas are suitable for use as
neighborhood open space.  The city encourages the dedication of lakes, ponds,
creeks, other water bodies, wetlands falling under the jurisdiction of state or
federal agencies and other sensitive areas including woodland areas, both as
ten percent (10%) of and in addition to the dedicated land required by this
article, if sufficient abutting land is dedicated as a usable, public
recreation area or park.
2.   Unity: The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land, except where
the city determines that two (2) or more parcels or greenways/trails would best
serve the public interest, given the type and distribution of neighborhood open
space needed to adequately serve the proposed development. If the city
determines that two (2) or more parcels would best serve the public interest,
the city may require that such parcels be connected by a dedicated strip of
land at least twenty feet (20') wide in order to provide access and continuity
between said parcels.
3.   Location: The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably serve
the recreation and open space needs of the residents of the subdivision or
planned development.
4.   Shape: If a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate
recreational facilities and activities, such as fields, courts or playground
equipment, the shape of the dedicated land shall be suitable for such
facilities and activities. Linear open space should be of sufficient width to
accommodate trails and adjacent greenways.
5.   Access:
a.   Greenways/Trails: Public access to greenways/trails shall be provided by a
public access easement at least twenty feet (20') in width. In addition,
greenways/trails shall be connected to existing or proposed greenways/trails on
adjacent property.
b.   Parks: Public access to the dedicated land to be used for parks shall be
provided either by adjoining public street frontage or by a dedicated public
access easement at least fifty feet (50') in width, which connects the
dedicated land to a public street or right of way. The grades adjacent to
existing and proposed streets shall permit reasonable access to the dedicated
land. The parcel shall be safely accessible to pedestrian traffic.
6.   Responsibility For Site Preparation:
a.   The city may require the subdivider or developer to grade and seed those
portions of the dedicated land to be improved prior to dedication of the
property and prior to the city's acceptance of the dedication.
b.   Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a street, the subdivider
or developer shall remain responsible for the installation of utilities,
sidewalks and other improvements required along that street segment.
c.   Prior to dedication, the subdivider or developer shall be responsible for
restoring satisfactory ground cover and controlling erosion on land to be
dedicated that has been disrupted as a result of development activities by the
subdivider or developer.
D. C. Procedure For Dedication Of Land:
1.   The dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the preliminary
subdivision plat or preliminary planned development plan, whichever is
applicable. The subdivider or developer shall designate the area or areas of
land to be dedicated pursuant to this article on the preliminary subdivision
plat or planned development plan. Where wetlands have been delineated on the
property, the preliminary subdivision plat or planned development plan shall
also identify the boundaries of such wetlands.
2.   Upon receipt of the preliminary subdivision plat, the director of planning
and community development (PCD) director of neighborhood & development services
(NDS) shall submit a copy to the director of parks and recreation director of
the department of parks and recreation for review by the parks and recreation
commission. The parks and recreation commission shall submit recommendations
concerning the land to be dedicated to the planning and zoning commission
within twenty-one (21) business days of the receipt of a complete application
for preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary planned development.
3.   Once the final subdivision plat or final planned development is approved,
and any public improvements required to be installed by the subdivider or
developer within the land to be dedicated have been installed, approved, and
accepted by the city, and the subdivider or developer has completed site
preparation pursuant to subsection B6 of this section, the subdivider or
developer shall provide a properly executed warranty deed conveying the
dedicated land to the city within two (2) years of final plat approval (or
final planned development approval) or by the time the city issues fifty
percent (50%) of the certificates of occupancy for the subdivision, at the
discretion of the city, or as otherwise specified in the subdivider's or
developer agreement.
4.   The city shall formally accept the dedication of land for open space,
parkland or greenways/trails by resolution. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
D.   Amend 14-5K-4, Payment of Fees in Lieu, by deleting the strikethrough text
and adding the underlined text:
A.   General: The payment of fees in lieu of dedication of land may occur at
the request of the subdivider or developer with approval by the city, or may be
required by the city. The payment of fees in lieu of land dedication shall be
reviewed and approved as part of the preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary planned development.
B.   Request By Subdivider Or Developer:
1.   If a payment in lieu of open space is requested, the subdivider or
developer must include such request in a letter submitted with the application
for a preliminary subdivision or preliminary planned development , whichever is
applicable.
2.   The PCD director director of neighborhood & development services (NDS)
will forward a copy of the preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary planned
development, along with a copy of the letter requesting payment of fees in lieu
of land dedication to the director of the department of parks and recreation
for review by the parks and recreation commission. The commission shall submit
any and all recommendations concerning the payment of fees in lieu of
dedication to the planning and zoning commission within twenty one (21)
business days of the date a complete application for preliminary subdivision
plat or planned development is submitted.
3.   The planning and zoning commission will consider the request for payment
of fees in lieu of land dedication during the subdivision or planned
development review process and forward its recommendations to the city council.
C.   Determination Of Fees In Lieu Of Dedication Criteria: The city may, at its
discretion, require the payment of fees in lieu of the subdivider dedicating
land, if the city finds that all or part of the land required for dedication is
not suitable for public recreation and open space purposes, or upon a finding
that the recreational needs of the proposed subdivision can be met by other
park, greenway, or recreational facilities planned or constructed by the city
within reasonable proximity to the subdivision. The city shall consider the
following factors in making its determination:
1.   Recreational and open space elements of the city comprehensive plan, as
amended, and the relation of the subdivision to the proposed open space and
recreational areas;
2.   Topographic and geologic conditions of the land available for dedication;
3.   Size, shape, location of and access to the land available for dedication;
4.   The character and recreational needs of the neighborhood where the
subdivision is located;
5.   The costs of developing open space and recreational areas in the
subdivision;
6.   The actual or potential development of open space and recreational areas
on land adjacent to the subdivision which will serve the needs of the
subdivision;
7.   Recommendations of staff, the parks and recreation commission and the
planning and zoning commission; and
8.   Any other relevant information.
D.   Time Of Payment: Fees in lieu of dedication must be paid in full by the
subdivider/developer prior to the issuance of the first building permit for a
lot in the subdivision  or planned development .
E.   Amount Of Payment: The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the
land that otherwise would have been required for dedication. The fair market
value of the undeveloped land shall be determined by a qualified real estate
appraiser  or by other means who is  acceptable to both the city and the
subdivider or developer. The city and subdivider/developer will equally share
the appraisal costs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
E.   Amend 14-5K-5, Requiring Both Dedication of Land and Payment of Fee, by
deleting the strikethrough text and adding the underlined text:
The city may, at its discretion, require a subdivider or a developer of a
planned development to dedicate a portion of the land required under the
formula set forth in this article, and also to pay a fee in lieu of dedication
for the remaining portion of the land by said formula. The fee for the
remaining portion shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser or
by other means who is  acceptable to both the city and subdivider or developer.
The city and subdivider/developer will equally share the appraisal costs. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
F.   Amend 14-5K-6, Use of Funds, by deleting the strikethrough text and adding
the underlined text:
A.   The neighborhood open space district boundary map (see figure 5K-1 of this
section) , divides the city into neighborhood open space districts. All
payments in lieu of dedication shall be deposited in a special neighborhood
open space account designated by the name of the contributing development. All
payments will be used to acquire or develop open spaces, parks, recreation
facilities and greenways/trails that are located within the neighborhood open
space district containing the subject subdivision or planned development and
will benefit the residents of the subdivision or planned development for which
payment has been made.
FIGURE 5K-1
Neighborhood Open Space District Boundary Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5529_8561x6617.jpg]
B.   The city must use the payment in lieu of dedication within five (5) years
from the date received. This period will be automatically extended an
additional five (5) years if the subdivider/developer has not constructed at
least fifty percent (50%) of the units within the subdivision or planned
development for which payment in lieu of dedication has been made.
C.   If the city has not spent the funds by the last day of the five (5) year
period or, if extended, by the last day of an additional five (5) years, the
city shall, within ninety (90) days thereafter, mail to the property owner, at
the address on file with the Johnson County treasurer's office, a proportional
refund based on the percentage of the platted lots they own of the total
platted lots in the subdivision  or planned development . The subdivider's
agreement/development agreement for each subdivision /planned development for
which the subdivider/developer has made payments in lieu of dedication shall
inform all property owners and successors in interest to properties in the
subdivision /planned development of the right to a refund as provided for
herein. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
G.   Amend 15-3-5, Neighborhood Open Space Requirements, by deleting the
strikethrough text and adding the underlined text:
A.   Intent And Purpose: The neighborhood open space requirements are intended
to ensure provision of adequate usable neighborhood open space, parks and
recreation facilities in a manner that is consistent with the neighborhood open
space parks master plan , as amended, by using a fair and reasonably calculable
method to equitably apportion the costs of acquiring and/or developing land for
those purposes. Active, usable neighborhood open space includes pedestrian/
bicycle trails preferably located within natural greenway systems , private
open space that is publicly accessible,  and also includes neighborhood parks
that serve nearby residents. Portions of community parks may be adapted for
neighborhood use, but this chapter is not intended to fund the acquisition of
community parks or large playing fields for organized sports.
B.   Dedication Of Land Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Of Land Required: The
dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the preliminary subdivision
plat. As a condition of approval for  preliminary plats containing residential
uses   residential subdivisions and commercial subdivisions containing
residential uses , the applicant shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu of
land, or a combination thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and open space
purposes, as determined by the city and in accordance with the provisions of
title 14, chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this
code. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
 
   Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict
with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
   Section III. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the
Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
   Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its
final passage, approval and publication in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter
380.
 
Passed and approved this 2nd day of September 2025.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 09/11/2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordinance No. 25-4970
 
Ordinance amending Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 5,
entitled “Parking Meter Zones and Parking Lots,” Section 6, entitled
“Penalties; Parking Tickets,” to provide for an updated and streamlined process
to appeal parking tickets and Chapter 9, entitled “Towing and Impoundment
Procedures,” Section 4, entitled “Impoundment for Accumulated Parking
Violations,” to increase the amount of accumulated parking fines that result in
adding a vehicle to the impound list from $50.00 to $150.00.
 
Whereas, the Iowa City Code section 9-5-6 provides the process for a driver or
owner of a vehicle to appeal a parking violation; and
 
Whereas, the current Iowa City Code section 9-5-6 outlines a process that is
unsustainable and said provision should be amended to update and streamline the
process to allow for a more efficient, staff and customer friendly process for
administrative review of parking tickets; and
 
Whereas, Iowa City Code section 9-9-4 provides that a vehicle may be impounded
for accumulated parking violations of $50.00 or more; and
 
Whereas, it is appropriate to increase the threshold for the impoundment of a
vehicle for unpaid parking tickets from $50.00 to $150.00 or more; and
 
Whereas, it is in the best interest of the City to adopt this ordinance.
 
   Now, therefore, be it resolved by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
 
   Section I. Amendment.
 
1.   Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 5, entitled
“Parking Meter Zones and Parking Lots,” Section 6, entitled “Penalties; Parking
Tickets,” Subsection A., entitled “Parking Violations” is amended by deleting
the strike-through text as follows:
   
The penalties for violations of parking regulations shall be as provided in the
schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Parking violations may be
charged on a notice of fine (ticket), and if the driver or owner charged admits
the violation, payment of the scheduled penalty shall be paid to the department
of finance. If the driver or owner charged desires to contest the violation,
the violation may be appealed to the parking violation review panel as provided
in subsection B of this section or may be charged and filed with the district
court on a standard traffic citation pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended,
as provided in subsection C of this section.
 
2. Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 5, entitled “Parking
Meter Zones and Parking Lots,” Section 6, entitled “Penalties; Parking
Tickets,” Subsection B., entitled “Administrative Review” is amended by adding
the underlined text and deleting the strike-through text as follows:
 
A driver or owner charged with a parking violation may request an
administrative review within seven (7) twenty (20) calendar days of the date
the parking ticket was issued. The request shall be made through the online
portal accessed through the City’s website or on the form provided by the City,
which can be downloaded from the City’s website or picked up at the Parking
Office city and shall be reviewed by a three (3) member panel made up of the
parking superintendent, a member of the police department and one other city
staff member. Requests submitted with an explanation listed on the City’s
website shall be reviewed by Transportation Services staff. All other reviews
shall be conducted by the City Manager or City Manager’s designee. The review
panel shall consider the defenses or mitigating circumstances set forth on the
review request form and shall base its findings and determination thereon. The
panel may dismiss Any any notice of fine (ticket) may be dismissed for good
cause, and upon dismissal, the City city shall refund the fine money paid by
the appealing party, less any unpaid parking fines then owing by the driver or
owner charged.
 
3. Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 5, entitled “Parking
Meter Zones and Parking Lots,” Section 6, entitled “Penalties; Parking
Tickets,” Subsection C., entitled “Violation Not Dismissed by Administrative
Review” is amended by adding the underlined text and deleting the strike-
through text as follows:
 
A driver or owner charged with a parking violation on a notice of fine (ticket)
whose violation was reviewed but not dismissed by the administrative review
panel may request that the violation be charged on a standard traffic citation
and tried in magistrate court as a simple misdemeanor. This request must be
made within ten (10) calendar days of the date the administrative review
decision was issued. If the driver or owner is found not guilty or the charge
is dismissed by the magistrate, the City city shall refund any fine money paid
for the violation. If found guilty, the driver or owner shall be credited with
all fine money previously paid for the violation.
 
4. Title 9, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” Chapter 9, entitled “Towing
and Impoundment Procedures,” Section 4, entitled “Impoundment for Accumulated
Parking Violations,” Subsection A., entitled “Determination of Towing and
Impoundment” is amended by adding the underlined text and deleting the strike-
through text as follows:
 
If any vehicle has accumulated a combination of parking violations, and/or ramp
charges, and/or vehicle unlock fees, totaling one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) ($50.00) or more, such vehicle may be towed and impounded or may be
impounded by use of a "Denver boot" or similar device, as hereafter provided. 
 
   Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict
with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
   Section III. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the
Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
 
   Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its
final passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
 
 
Passed and approved this 18th day of November 2025.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 11/26/2025
 
 
 
Ordinance No. 25-4971
Ordinance amending Titles 15, 16, and 18 of the City Code to adopt and
incorporate the SUDAS Design Manual and Specifications, General Supplemental
Design Standards and Specifications, and City of Iowa City Design Supplement
and Specifications
Whereas, the City currently uses the Iowa City Interim Municipal Design
Standards for the design of public improvements, adopted in March 1996; and
Whereas, the City currently uses the Statewide Urban Design and Specifications
(SUDAS) Standard Specifications, General Supplemental Specifications, and the
City of Iowa City Supplemental Specifications as specifications for all public
improvement projects, adopted by resolution on May 15, 2018; and
Whereas, the City now desires to align its design standards with the
specifications and currently accepted practices in the engineering industry
across the state by adopting the SUDAS Design Manual (2024 Edition), General
Supplemental Design Standards, and City of Iowa City Design Supplement as the
City’s new design standards for use in all public improvement projects and
construction within the right-of-way, as well as any extraterritorial areas
required to be built to City standards pursuant to any fringe area agreement;
and
Whereas, the City also desires to amend Title 16 to codify the specifications;
and
Whereas, these new design standards and specifications necessitate amendments
to other provisions of the Code of Ordinances to incorporate necessary cross
references and eliminate conflicting provisions, as well as eliminate
duplicative definitions; and
Whereas, Staff has reviewed the SUDAS Design Manual and prepared the City of
Iowa City Design Supplement; and
Whereas, the SUDAS Board of Directors periodically approves general
supplemental design standards and specifications in response to innovations and
changes in construction technologies, methods, and materials, which are then
annually incorporated into its Design Manual and Specifications; and
Whereas, Staff recommends amendments to Title 15 “Land Subdivisions”, Title 16
“Public Works”, and Title 18 “Site Plan Review” of the City Code to adopt,
incorporate and align the code with these design standards and specifications.
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa that the Iowa City Code of Ordinances shall be amended as follows:
Section 1. Delete Table 15-1 Standards for Street Rights-of-Way.
Section 2. Delete Section 15-3-12 Specifications; Section 16-1A-4 Prohibited
Surface Materials in Certain Areas; Section 16-3G-7 Dry and Wet Bottom Storm
Water Management Facilities, and indicate such sections are reserved.
Section 3. Amend Sections 16-1G-3; 16-2A-4; 16-2A-5; 16-3C-2; 16-3C-10; 16-3E-
6; and 16-3G-9 by replacing “director of public works, or designee,” “director
or designee,” “director of public works,” and “public works director” with
“Director.”
Section 4. Amend the following sections of Title 15 “Land Subdivisions” by
inserting the underlined words and deleting those stricken through, renumbering
remaining provisions as necessary:
a. 15-1-8(A) Modifications of Requirements, paragraph (1):
Upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or on its own motion,
the City Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of chapter 3,
"Subdivision Design Standards Provisions and Required Public Improvements", of
this title, provided one of the following qualifying circumstances are met:
b. 15-2-2 Preliminary Plat, B.  Plat Specifications and Accompanying
Information:
e. Contours at five two foot (25 ') intervals or less.
c. 15-2-3 Final Plat, A. Submission Required, paragraph 2:   
d. Construction plans according to the Design Standards set forth in Title 16,
Chapter 4. specifications of the city engineer.
d. 15-2-3 Final Plat, C. Accompanying Documents:
6. Construction Plans: A complete set of construction plans for all public
improvements, meeting Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4city
specifications, must be submitted to the city engineer's office.
e. 15-3: Subdivision Design Standards Provisions and Required Public
Improvements, Section 1: General Requirements:
A. Design of the subdivision shall comply with the standards of this chapter,
provide for the orderly growth and development of the city, demonstrate
consistency with the Iowa City comprehensive plan and any specific adopted
district plans, and take into consideration the natural features of the site
and patterns of adjacent development.
C. "Public improvements", as defined in this title, shall be constructed and
installed according to the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in
Title 16, Chapter 4. established by the city. Copies of said standards are on
file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008) If the
infrastructure and/or grading cannot be designed to comply with these
standards, a new preliminary plat may be required at the discretion of the
city.
D. Construction plans and specifications, including plans for subdivision
erosion control measures, shall be submitted to and approved by the city
engineer for approval prior to construction.
E. Prior to acceptance of public improvements, record of construction drawings
must be submitted to the city engineer in hard copy and digital form.
f. 15-3-2: Streets and Circulation:
A. Connectivity of Streets, Sidewalks, And Trails: Subdivisions shall provide
for continuation and extension of arterial, collector and local streets,
sidewalks and trails in accordance with the following standards:
C. Street Types:
1.    Table 15-1, "Standards For Street Rights Of Way", of this section
provides a summary of various street types. The information in this table is
intended to provide guidance for the design of the street network within a
subdivision, Public street rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16,
Chapter 4, except for those subdivisions regulated by Article 14-2H (Form-
Based Zones And Standards). When designing a subdivision, street types should
be chosen based on the intended function of the street and anticipated level of
traffic. The city will review the proposed streets and determine the
appropriate street type based on the factors set forth in this section.
E.   Measurements and Construction Standards:
1. All right of way improvements must be designed and constructed according
with the design and construction standards established by the city. Said
standards are on file in the office of the city engineer. Specifications and
Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4.
2. All street widths shall be measured back of curb to back of curb.
23.   The minimum outside radius of the pavement of cul-de-sac bulbs and loop
streets is thirty nine feet (39'). A center median is required at the center of
the cul-de-sac bulb with a minimum radius of eleven feet (11'). For loop
streets a median is also required with a minimum width of thirty feet (30'). In
residential areas, center medians for cul-de-sacs and loop streets are required
to be landscaped to at least the S1 standard as described in title 14, chapter
5, article F, "Screening and Buffering Standards", of this code. The
subdivider's agreement shall designate and set forth procedures for property
owners or a homeowners' association to maintain the landscaped area within the
center median of loop streets and cul-de-sacs. Said instrument shall provide
that if said services are not provided as required therein, the city shall have
the right to perform said services, and the cost thereof shall be a lien and
charge against all of the subject lots.
F.   Street Intersections:
       1.   A maximum of four (4) legs are allowed at any one intersection.
       2.   The distance between street intersections must be at least one
hundred twenty five feet (125') centerline to centerline.
       3.   Intersections of street centerlines shall be between eighty degrees
(80°) and one hundred degrees (100°).
       4.   Corner lots abutting on an arterial or collector street shall have
a minimum radius of fifteen feet (15') at the intersection.
       5.   Dead end streets and alleys are not permitted except at subdivision
boundaries abutting undeveloped areas. In such cases a temporary fire apparatus
accommodating turnaround may be required and, if required, must be constructed
to city specifications.
K.   Cost Sharing For Street Upgrades:
       1.   At the discretion of the City, subdivisions may be approved that
access existing public streets that do not meet the city
standards Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4
(“city standards”), provided the subdivider contributes toward the future
reconstruction cost of bringing the segment of the subject street that abuts
the subject property to City standards. When determining whether such an
approval will be granted, the City will evaluate the street based on factors
such as roadway surface, sight distance, anticipated traffic levels, and
pedestrian/bicycle facilities. If the City permits a development to access a
street that does not meet City standards, the subdivider shall contribute to
the cost as follows:
g. 15-3-3 Sidewalks, Trails and Pedestrian Connections:
Public sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed in
the public right of way according to the following standards :
A.   Sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed
according to city standards. Said standards are on file in the office of the
city engineer.  to the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title
16, Chapter 4.
B.   Five foot (5') wide concrete sidewalks must be constructed along both
sides of all local and collector streets, except for connections to existing
sidewalks as provided in subsection D of this section. For low volume and loop
streets, as described in table 15-1 of section 15-3-2 of this chapter, the
required sidewalk width may be reduced to four feet (4').
C.   Along arterial streets, a five foot (5') sidewalk is required on one side
of the street and an eight foot (8') sidewalk on the other side, except as
allowed in subsection D of this section. The city will determine on which side
of the street the eight foot (8') sidewalk will be placed. When an eight ten
foot (108') sidewalk is required, the city, at its discretion, will either pay
for the excess pavement required for the developer to install an eight ten foot
(108') sidewalk rather than a five foot (5') sidewalk, or collect the estimated
cost of the five foot (5') sidewalk from the developer and apply said cost to
construction of an eight ten foot (108') sidewalk by the city. Any payment of
excess pavement costs by the city shall be pursuant to state law.
D.   In cases where the proposed sidewalk provides a connection between
existing sidewalks that are less than the required width, the proposed sidewalk
may be constructed to match the width of the adjacent sidewalks. However, this
modification is not allowed in cases where one end of the proposed sidewalk
will provide a connection to future sidewalks for new development. In such a
case, the sidewalk should be tapered to provide a transition between differing
sidewalk widths. The city will determine where along the street the transition
should occur.
E.   All sidewalks and trails must connect to other sidewalks and trails within
the development and to the property line to provide for their extension to
adjacent properties.
G.   In residential subdivisions, blocks longer than six hundred feet (600')
must have midblock pedestrian connections between adjacent streets, unless said
connection is deemed to be unnecessary and is waived by the city. At the time
of subdivision, these connections must be platted as minimum fifteen foot (15')
wide easements; if the connecting sidewalk is greater than five feet (5') in
width, the easement must be at least twenty feet (20') wide. Within this
easement a sidewalk must be constructed to city standards that is equal in
width to the sidewalks to which it provides a connection. If the midblock
sidewalk connects to sidewalks of two (2) different widths, the midblock
sidewalk must be equal in width to the wider sidewalk. The area and sidewalk
within the pedestrian easement must be maintained by adjacent property owners
according to the subdivider's easement agreement in a manner similar to
maintenance requirements for public sidewalks.
h. 15-3-14 Off-site Costs for Public Improvements:
B.   Off-site public improvements shall be designed and constructed according
to the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4.
plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and shall be of
sufficient size and capacity to serve the full area capable of being served by
the type of improvement so that the City will not be required to construct
parallel or duplicate facilities. If said infrastructure is greater in size
than that needed to service the subdivision itself, the City, at its
discretion, may share in the expense thereof. When sSuch cost sharing shall be
according to the procedure set forth by the city manager is required, the City,
at its discretion, will either pay for the excess costs required for the
developer to install the larger infrastructure or collect the estimated cost
from the developer and apply said cost to construction of the larger
infrastructure by the City. Any payment of excess costs by the City shall be
pursuant to state law.
Section 5. Amend the following sections of Title 16 “Public Works” by inserting
the underlined words and deleting those stricken through, renumbering remaining
provisions as necessary:
a. 16-1A-1 Definitions
DIRECTOR: Director of Public Works, or designee, department of public works.
b. 16-1A-2: Protection of Public Right-of-Way Generally:
The Ddirector of public works shall be responsible for construction, management
and maintenance of public right of way.
   c. 16-1A-5: Debris on Public Right-of-Way:
C.   Summary Removal By City: In addition to the provisions of this section,
whenever, in the judgment of the Director of public works or the police chief,
an emergency exists creating a health or safety hazard which requires immediate
removal of debris from the public right of way, the City may remove the debris
and assess the removal cost against the property from which the debris was
removed, for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by
state law.
d. 16-1C-3: Construction and Repair:
A.   Sidewalks must be constructed, reconstructed and repaired in accordance
with the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter
4.Iowa City municipal design standards, as amended.
e. 16-1D-1: Definitions:
CITY: The city of Iowa City.
DIRECTOR: The city manager of the city or designee.
SPECIFICATIONS:The latest editions of "Standard Specifications For Highway And
Bridge Construction", as amended, Iowa department of transportation, Ames,
Iowa.
UTILITY: Any public utility regulated by the Iowa Utilities Board commerce
commission or its successor and/or persons holding a franchise or other
agreement with the city or other entities.
f. 16-1D-7: Backfilling:
A.   Backfilling Under oOr Near Within Two Feet Of Paved Surfaces:
The Ttrenches for all substructures under or near paved surfaces and traveled
ways or within two feet (2') of paved surfaces shall be backfilled as required
by the Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4.design standards
established by the city, as approved by resolution of the city council.
B.   Backfilling Of Unpaved Areas And Parkways: Excavated soil from unpaved and
untraveled ways shall be carefully deposited and satisfactorily tamped in
uniform layers to minimize settlement placed in accordance with the
Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. 
g. 16-1D-8: Repairs of Surfaces:
The type of resurfacing required for any excavation shall be in accordance with
the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. The
_Public Works Director may specify the type of resurfacing required for any
excavation. (1978 Code §31-30; amd. 1994 Code)
h. 16-3A-2: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
SOLID WASTE: Includes unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid or
semisolid state, including, but not limited to, garbage, ashes, refuse, sludge,
yard waste, appliances, construction wastes, residential, commercial and
industrial wastes and waste being recycled. garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other
similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to
such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and
domestic activities, as further defined in Iowa Code Section 455B.301 and Title
567 Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 100.
i. 16-3A-3: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
  A.   Connections:
1.   Before the permanent improvements of any street, highway, avenue, alley,
public ground or place whereon city utilities are located, provision for
utility connection therefrom to the curb lines of adjacent property shall be
made according to the Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. of the
city engineer, including inspections. All buildings and properties used for, or
intended to be used for, human occupancy and/or employment are required, at
their expense, to install suitable connections with city utilities. Each
separate building shall be provided with a separate connection to the city
utility, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
3.   Construction materials for city utility connections shall be as set forth
in the Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. in the design
standards established by the city engineer, as approved by resolution of the
city council.
j.  16-3C-3: CONNECTION TO DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN:
B.   Service Lines:
2.   New Lines: The size of all new service lines shall be as set forth in the
Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. standards
on file in the department of public works.
3.   Separate Connections: There shall be separate service lines from the
distribution water main to each building service. Such service lines shall be
installed according to the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in
Title 16, Chapter 4.standards established by the city engineer.
k. 16-3C-4: WATER METERS:
A.   Metered Water Required:
1.   Requirements For Installation Of Water Meters:
          a.   All water furnished by the city shall be metered unless
otherwise provided in this article. The owner shall provide a suitable location
and plumbing system for the water meter. The owner shall be responsible for
obtaining the meter from the city and also for the installation of each meter.
On new construction, the water meter(s) shall be installed prior to or
coincident with installation of plumbing fixtures. The water meter(s) shall be
installed in accordance with the Specifications and Design Standards set forth
in Title 16, Chapter 4.standards established by the city engineer.
2.   Requirements For Single Purpose Water Meters:
          b.   A single purpose water meter shall be installed according to
the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter
4. standards.
l. 16-3C-6: FIRE PROTECTION:
A.   All fire hydrants external to a building shall be installed and maintained
according to Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter
4.standards established by the city engineer and shall be maintained by the
city according to standards established by the director.
m. 16-3D-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interests.
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
n. 16-3D-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
D.   Design, Construction, Operation And Maintenance Of System: Design,
construction, operation and maintenance of private sanitary sewer disposal
systems shall comply with all requirements of the city, this Article,
the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4, the
county board of health and the Iowa administrative code environmental
protection division 567, chapter 69, as amended.
o. 16-3D-5: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
B.   A nonresidential development consisting of one or more buildings on one or
more lots may, at the discretion of the Ddirector, be served by a private
sanitary sewer collection system, provided:
2.   The private sewer collection system is constructed in accordance with
Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4. Iowa City
design standards for public improvements on file in the office of the
department of public works; and
p. 16-3D-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
C.   Specifications:
1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes Specifications and Design Standards set forth in
Title 16, Chapter 4. or other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
q. 16-3E-2: DEFINITIONS.
Definitions set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to this article. In
addition, Aas used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent representative or
fiduciary thereof.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
r. 16-3F-2: DEFINITIONS:
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
s. 16-3G-2: DEFINITIONS:
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of the department of public works or
designee.
DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that is designed to be
normally dry and which accumulates excess storm water only during periods when
the restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water
inflow rate.
LOW FLOW: The carrying capacity of storm sewers and/or natural drainageways.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY: Water which flows by gravity over a route formed on the
earth's surface prior to development.
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interests.
PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area in a
manner that will ensure complete removal of all surface water by means of
natural gravity.
SAFE STORM WATER DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The rate of storm water runoff that can be
transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct or combination
thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise
sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to cause
damage to structures or facilities located thereon.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation not absorbed by soil
or plant material.
STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: An area designated to temporarily accumulate excess
storm water.
WATERSHED: The entire catchment area that contributes storm water runoff to a
given point.
WET BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that contains a body of
water and which accumulates excess storm water during periods when the
restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water inflow
rate. (1978 Code §33-50.1; amd. 1994 Code)
t. 16-3G-3: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
Excluding the central business district and the area designated as the new
south side neighborhood, this article shall apply to development which results
in an aggregate gross area of three (3) acres or more of drainage from or to a
single drainage area.This article shall apply to the requirements in the
Specifications and Design Standards set forth in Title 16, Chapter 4, excluding
areas deemed appropriate for exemption by the Public Works Director. The gross
aggregate drainage area shall include streets and other dedicated lands.
u. 16-3G-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY:
A.   Immediately after approval of aWith the preliminary plat, preliminary OPDH
plan, site review plan or building permit, whichever comes first, and in all
cases before site work begins, the owner shall submit the following documents
to the Director of public works for approval:
1.   Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil erosion
for the entire development (Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan) prepared in
accordance with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit No. 2 in effect at the time
of development.
2.   Plans, specifications and all calculations for the control of storm water
runoff as required by this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by
the director the Project Drainage Report set forth in the SUDAS Design Manual.
v. 16-3G-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN CONSTRUCTION:
A. All storm water management facilities shall be designed, constructed and
maintained, according to the Specifications and Design Standards set forth in
Title 16, Chapter 4. Storm Water Release Rate: The controlled release rate of
storm water runoff shall not exceed the existing safe storm water drainage
capacity of the downstream system and shall be as established in the design
standards approved by resolution of the city council. Where a proposed
development contains only a portion of a watershed, the storage requirements
shall be based upon the proportion of the watershed being developed.
B.   Excess Storm Water Passage:
       1.   An excess storm water passage shall be provided for all storm water
management facilities through the proposed facility and also through the
proposed development from the upland watershed as established in the design
standards approved by resolution of the city council.
        2.  No buildings or structures shall be constructed within such excess
storm water passage; however, streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas,
pedestrian walkways, utility easements and other open space uses shall be
considered compatible uses. In the event such excess storm water passage is
reshaped or its capacity to transport excess storm water otherwise restricted,
the Ddirector shall notify the agency or person causing such restriction to
remove the same and set a reasonable time for its removal. If such person
refuses or is unable to comply with such order, the Ddirector shall cause such
restrictions to be removed at the expense of such person.
       3.   Where a proposed development contains existing natural
drainageways, appropriate land planning shall be undertaken to preserve such
natural drainageways as part of the excess storm water passage.
    C.   Determination Of Storage Capacity: The volume of required storm water
storage shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year flood
event. Such calculation shall be made in accordance with methods approved by
the director.
CD.   Compensating Storage: In the event compensating storage is available,
said storage may be provided at an alternative location as approved by the
Ddirector.
w. 16-3G-10: STORM WATER UTILITY:
B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
CITY: City of Iowa City.
DIRECTOR: The public works director or designee.
x. 16-3G-11: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION:
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following shall mean:
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
y. 16-3H-2: DEFINITIONS: As used in this article, the following definitions
shall apply:
DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
OWNER: Any person with a legal or an equitable ownership interest in real or
personal property.
PERSON: Includes an individual, entity, business, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, venture or any combination thereof or any agent,
representative or fiduciary thereof.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid
state, including, but not limited to, food waste, ashes, refuse, sludge, yard
waste, appliances, special waste, building demolition materials generated by
residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial activities.
z. 16-3H-7: STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE, D. Downtown Solid Waste Container:
3.   Administrative Rules: The Director City Manager or designee is authorized
to establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry
out the provisions of this subsection. A copy of said rules shall be on file
with the City Clerk and available on the City's website.
aa. CHAPTER 4: STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS PROJECTS
16-4-1: DESIGN STANDARDS STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR IOWA CITY:
The most recent published edition of the Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards
“Design Manual”, the general supplemental design standards adopted by the Iowa
Statewide Urban Design and Specifications (SUDAS) Board of Directors, and the
Iowa City “Design Supplement,” adopted by resolution, collectively comprise the
“Design Standards for Public Improvements” in Iowa City" is hereby adopted by
reference, as the standard for all designing and planning and construction of
any and all public improvements in the City and any extraterritorial areas
required to be constructed to City standards pursuant to any fringe area
agreement.
16-4-2: STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL AREAS:
An addition to "Design Standards for Public Works Improvements", "Section XI -
Design Standards for New Developments Located Outside The City Limits Of Iowa
City, But Within The Two Mile Extraterritorial Limit" is hereby adopted, by
reference.  SPECIFICATIONS: The most recent published edition of the Iowa
Statewide Urban Design Standards “Standard Specifications”, the general
supplemental specifications adopted by the Iowa Statewide Urban Design and
Specifications (SUDAS) Board of Directors, and the Iowa City “Supplemental
Specifications,” adopted by resolution, collectively comprise the
“Specifications for Public Improvements in Iowa City” for construction of any
and all public improvements in the City and any extraterritorial areas required
to be constructed to City standards pursuant to any fringe area agreement.
16-4-3: COPIES ON FILE:
Copies of the Design Standards and Specifications, additions and revisions
thereto, as adopted in this chapter, are on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
Section 6. Amend the following sections of Title 18 “Site Plan Review” by
inserting the underlined words and deleting those stricken through, renumbering
remaining provisions as necessary:
a. 18-3-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
D.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control: The design of the proposed development
shall comply with the standards for erosion and sedimentation control required
by  Title 16, Chapter 4 and Title 17, Chapter 8-established in the city design
standards in order to protect adjoining or surrounding property. The
development plan shall consider the topography and soils of the site to achieve
the lowest potential for erosion. 
Section 7. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 8. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision
or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 9. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
 
Passed and approved this 18th day of November 2025.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 11/26/2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordinance No. 25-4969
 
Ordinance amending Title 14, Zoning, related to the City’s Floodplain
Management Standards to ensure the community’s continued participation and
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) (REZ25-0013).
Whereas, the City has been a participating member in the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) since 1977; and
 
Whereas, the City’s continued participation in the NFIP allows flood insurance
eligibility for community members and continued Community Rating System (CRS)
program participation; and
 
Whereas, the City is ranked at Class 6 in the CRS program and has achieved this
class by implementing flood damage reduction, flood warning and response, flood
mapping and regulation, and public information activities that exceed NFIP's
minimum standards resulting in a 20% discount for community members on
federally backed flood insurance; and
 
Whereas, the City received a formal notice from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) on June 26, 2025 that Iowa City is required, as a
condition of continued eligibility in the NFIP, to adopt or show evidence of
adoption of the floodplain management regulations that meet the standards of 44
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 60.3 (d) of the NFIP by the effective
date of the Flood Insurance Rates Maps (FIRM); and
 
Whereas, the proposed amendments adopt the FIRM and the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) submitted to the City by FEMA on June 26, 2025, ensure the City’s
continued participation in the NFIP, and support sound floodplain management
practices across the community; and
 
Whereas, the Iowa City Comprehensive Plan includes a land use goal that
encourages compact, efficient development through a City strategy that guides
development away from sensitive environmental areas, such as floodplains and
flood hazard areas; and
 
Whereas, the Iowa City Comprehensive Plan includes an environmental goal that
works to protect and enhance our watersheds, floodplains, wetlands, and
greenways; and
 
Whereas, the Planning and Zoning Commission reviewed the zoning code amendments
set forth below at the September 3, 2025 meeting and recommended approval by a
vote of 4-0 (Miller, Elliott, Beining absent).
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
 
Section I. Amendments. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa City, Iowa is
hereby amended as follows:
 
A.   Amend 14-5J-1: Purpose, by adding the following underlined text and
deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
The purpose of this aA rticle is to protect and preserve the rights and
privileges and property of Iowa City and its residents and to protect, preserve
and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing flood losses. The provisions of this aA rticle are
designed to:
    A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
    B.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
    C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage.
    D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners to purchase
flood insurance through the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 10-4414,
11-16-2010)
B.   Amend 14-5J-2: Applicability And Interpretation, by adding the following
underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
       A.   Application Of Provisions: The regulations within this article
apply to all lands identified in the "Johnson County, Iowa, and incorporated
areas flood insurance rate map", dated February 16, 2007. The "Johnson County,
Iowa and incorporated areas flood insurance study", as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference and is made a part of this article for the purpose of
administering floodplain management regulations. The provisions of this
Ordinance shall apply to all lands and development which have significant flood
hazards. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Johnson County and
Incorporated Areas, City of Iowa City, Panels 19103C0185F, 19103C0187F,
19103C0189F, 19103C0190F, 19103C0191F, 19103C0192F, 19103C0193F, 19103C0194F,
19103C0205F, 19103C0211F, 19103C0213F, 19103C0215F, 19103C0310F, and
19103C0330F, dated December 26, 2025, which were prepared as part of the
Johnson County Flood Insurance Study, shall be used to identify such flood
hazard areas and all areas shown thereon to be within the boundaries of the
base flood shall be considered as having significant flood hazards. The Flood
Insurance Study for Johnson County is hereby adopted by reference and is made a
part of this Ordinance for the purpose of administering floodplain management
regulations.  
       B.   Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries: The boundaries
of the flood hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
precise location of the base flood elevation at the particular site in question
and when an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary,
the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of
Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building
official in the enforcement or administration of this Article.
    BC.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this aArticle are considered
minimum requirements and will be liberally construed in favor of the governing
body City of Iowa City and will not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the sState statutes.
    CD.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this
aArticle to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this aArticle imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this aArticle shall prevail. Where more specific provisions
herein conflict with other provisions of this title, this aArticle shall
prevail. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
      E. Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
C.   Amend 14-5J-3: Legal Authority And Findings Of Fact, by adding the
following underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
    A.   Legal Authority: Chapters 455B and 414, cCode of Iowa, as amended,
gives cities authority to adopt regulations governing development and
redevelopment within flood hazard areas, including designation of flood hazard
maps.
    B.   Legislative Findings:
       1.   The flood hazard areas of Iowa City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of its residents.
       2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages.
Such uses create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
       3.   This aArticle relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing
flood hazards, which is consistent with the standards established by the Iowa
dDepartment of nNatural rResources or its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
D.   Amend 14-5J-4: Compliance with Provisions; Nonconforming Situations, by
adding the following underlined text and deleting the following text with a
strikethrough:
    A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no structure or
land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this aArticle.
    B.   If a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this
aArticle lawfully existed prior to May 2, 1977, and has existed continuously
without abandonment since that time, then improvements may be made to the
structure, notwithstanding the provisions of this aArticle, provided such
improvements do not constitute a substantial improvement as defined in cChapter
9, aArticle F, "Floodplain Management Definitions", of this title. However,
structures, uses, or development that are nonconforming with regard to other
provisions of this title must comply with the applicable regulations contained
in cChapter 4, aArticle E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 10-
4414, 11-16-2010)
E.   Amend 14-5J-5: Enforcement, by adding the following underlined text and
deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
    A.   Enforcement Official Designated: The building official shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this aArticle.
    B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
building official include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
       1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this Article will be satisfied.
2.   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from federal, state and local government agencies
including approval when required from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
for floodplain construction.
       13 .   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum North American Vertical Datum 1988 ) of the
lowest floor , including basement, of all new or substantially improved
buildings   structures or the elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      24.   Notify adjacent communities or counties and the Iowa dDepartment of
nNatural rResources, or its assignee, prior to any proposed alteration or
relocation of a watercourse. and submit evidence of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
       35.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and other such
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
aArticle. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
       6.   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning Iowa City’s participation in the National Flood Insurance Program,
utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
       7.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of any annexations or
modifications to Iowa City’s boundaries.
      8.   Maintain the accuracy of Iowa City’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps when:
          a.   Development placed within the floodway results in any of the
following:
(1) An increase in the base flood elevations, or
(2) Alteration to the floodway boundary.
          b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
          c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
          d.   Within 6 months of the completion of the development, the
applicant shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for
a Letter of Map Revision.
       9.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of
this Article.
      10.   Forward all requests for variances and appeals to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration. Ensure all requests include the information
ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information
deemed necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
F.   Amend 14-5J-6: Floodplain Development Permit, by adding the following
underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
    A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit, issued by the
building official, must be obtained prior to initiation of any development on a
parcel of land within a flood hazard area according to the applicable review
and approval procedures contained in cChapter 8, aArticle B, "Administrative
Approval Procedures", of this title. Issuance of a floodplain development
permit does not relieve the property owner from complying with federal, state,
or other agency regulations, including approval when required from the Iowa
dDepartment of nNatural rResources.
    B.   Compliance: Floodplain development permits based on approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications. Prior to use or occupancy of any
structure, the applicant will be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, registered in the state, that the
finished fill, building structure floor elevations, floodproofing or other
flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions
of this aArticle. Any use, arrangement or construction not in compliance with
the uses authorized will be deemed a violation of this aArticle. (Ord. 10-4414,
11-16-2010)
    C.   Action on Permit Application: The building official shall, within a
reasonable period of time, make a determination as to whether the proposed
floodplain development meets the applicable standards of this Article and shall
approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be
informed, in writing, of the specific reasons, therefore. The building official
shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of
Adjustment.
    D.   Penalties for Violation: Violation of any provision of this Chapter
will be enforced as a municipal infraction pursuant to 1-4-2.
G.   Amend 14-5J-7: General Floodplain Management Standards, by adding the
following underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
All properties subject to the regulations of this article must comply with the
following applicable performance standards: All development must be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable
performance standards and where the base flood elevations have not been
provided in the flood insurance study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
shall be contacted to determine:
       A.   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
       B.   The base flood elevation. Until a regulatory floodway is
designated, no development may increase the base flood elevation more than one
(1’) foot. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such
determination.
       AC.   General Construction Requirements: All structures development
shall be:
       1.   Adequately Designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure; and
       2.   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage; and
       3.   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
    BD.   Class 1 Critical Facilities:
       1.   Class 1 critical facilities may not be located within a flood
hazard area.
       2.   Class 1 critical facilities must be located with a means of
vehicular access that will remain passable during occurrence of the 0.2% flood
event.
    CE.   Residential Buildings:
       1.   All new or substantially improved residential structures must have
the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition, including
basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no
lower than one foot (1’) above the flood hazard elevation and extend at such
elevation at least eighteen feet (18’) beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon.
       2.   Where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude
elevating by fill, alternate methods of elevating, such as piers, may be
allowed, subject to approval by the building official. In such a case, a
licensed professional shall certify that the methods used will be adequate to
support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding.
       3.   All new residential structures located in areas that would become
isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with means of
access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood.
However, this criterion shall not apply where the building official determines
there is sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life and property.
When estimating flood warning time, consideration shall be given to the
criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
    DF.   Nonresidential and Mixed Use Buildings:
1.   All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings   structures
must have the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition,
including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level.
       2.   All new and substantially improved mixed-use structures must be
designed with all residential uses, including dwelling units, located a minimum
of one foot (1’) above the flood hazard elevation. Commercial use areas must
meet the requirements for non-residential structures in paragraph 14-5J-7D-1.
Lobbies that provide access to both residential and commercial portions may be
floodproofed in accordance with paragraph 14-5J-7D-3, provided that there is at
least one separate access to residential areas of the structure. When separate
access to residential areas is located less than one foot (1’) above the flood
hazard elevation and is enclosed by walls, the walls must comply with the
requiremnts for openings in 14-5J-7E-1.
       23.   When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered
in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the flood hazard, and that the structure below
the flood hazard elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water. Such certification must also indicate the specific
elevation, in relation to national geodetic vertical datum, to which any
structures are floodproofed. A record of this certification will be retained in
the office of the building official. must submit a Non-Residential
Floodproofing Certificate, a Flood Emergency Operation Plan, and an Inspection
and Maintenance Plan to be retained in the office of the building official.
          a.   The Non-Residential Floodproofing Certificate shall certify that
the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the flood hazard, and that the structure below the flood hazard elevation
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
Such certification must also indicate the specific elevation, in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988, to which any structures are floodproofed.
          b.   Components of the Flood Emergency Operating Plan (FEOP) will
include procedural details when the floodproofing requires human intervention
such as the installation of flood gates or flood shields. The FEOP will ensure
that the floodproofing components will operate properly under all conditions,
including power failures.
          c.   The Inspection and Maintenance Plan will ensure that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions by describing
inspection and maintenance activities, including inspection intervals and
repair requirements.
    EG.   All New And Substantially Improved Structures:
       1.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer to meet or exceed the following minimum approval
criteria:
          a.   There must be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. The openings shall not be located on the same wall.
          b.   The openings shall be located on exterior walls such that the 1%
flood elevation, or shallow flood elevation, is above the bottom of the
opening, and in all cases the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above grade.
          c.   Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
       2.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
       3.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities elevated or floodproofed to one foot (1') above the
flood hazard elevation. shall be constructed with electric meter, electrical
service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air conditioning, ventilation
equipment (including ductwork), and other similar machinery and equipment
elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed) to a minimum of one foot (1’) above the flood hazard elevation.
    FH.   Manufactured Housing: Manufactured All new and substantially improved
manufactured housing, including those placed in existing manufactured housing
parks, planned developments, or subdivisions, must be:
       1.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors as required by the City Building Code.
       2.   Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
    GI.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
       1.   All new or replacement on site water supply or sewage waste
disposal systems must be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system
or contamination from the system during flooding.
       2.   New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems
must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system. Water supply facilities and sanitary sewage systems (other than onsite
systems) must be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than
one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
       3.   Utilities, such as gas or electrical systems, must be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damage or impaired systems.
      4. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding. 
    HJ.   Storage Of Flammable, Explosive Or Injurious Materials: Storage of
materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1')
above the flood hazard elevation. Other material and equipment must either be
similarly elevated or:
       1.   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to floodwaters; or
       2.   Be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
    IK.   Flood Control Structural Works: Flood control structural works,
including, but not limited to, levees and flood walls, must provide, at a
minimum, protection from a 0.2% flood event with a minimum of three feet (3')
of design freeboard and must provide for adequate interior drainage. In
addition, flood control structural works must be approved by the Iowa
dDepartment of nNatural rResources or its assignee.
    JL.   Inhibiting Floodways And Drainage Facilities: No use shall affect the
capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main
stream, drainage ditch or other drainage facility or system. Watercourse
Alterations Or Relocations: Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
    KM.   Subdivisions:
       1.   Subdivisions and planned developments, including manufactured
housing parks and subdivisions, must be designed to minimize flood damage and
must have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage, and
must meet the applicable performance standards established by the cCity
eEngineer. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the
installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance
standards of this aArticle. Any subdivision, planned development, or
manufactured housing park intended for residential development must provide all
lots with a means of vehicular access that will remain passable during
occurrence of the 10.2% annual chance flood event.
       2.   Proposals for subdivisions shall include the flood hazard elevation
data for those areas located within flood hazard areas.
    LN.   Residential Accessory Structures: The exemption of detached garages,
sheds and similar structures from the general floodplain management for
residential buildings may result in increased premium rates for insurance
coverage of the structure and contents; however, said detached garages, sheds
and similar accessory type structures are exempt from the general floodplain
management for residential buildings when all of the following conditions
exist:
       1.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
It shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size. Those portions of the structure
located less than one foot (1’) above the flood hazard elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
       12.   The structure is not used for human habitation.
       23.   The structure is designed so as to have low flood damage
potential. The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purpose such as vehicle parking and limited storage.
       34.   The structure is constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
       45.   The structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, which may
result in damage to other structures. resist floatation, collapse and lateral
movement.
       56.   The service facilities for the structure, such as electrical and
heating equipment, are elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above
the flood hazard elevation.
       87.   Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
The structure’s walls include openings that satisfy the provisions of 14-5J-7E-
1.
    MO.   Recreational Vehicles:
       1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
subsection F of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of manufactured
homes when the following criteria are satisfied:
          a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
          b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
       2.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection F of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of manufactured homes. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
    P.   Pipeline River And Stream Crossings: Pipeline river and stream
crossings must be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently
protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
H.   Amend 14-5J-8: Special Floodway Provisions, by adding the following
underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
In addition to the general floodplain standards listed above, uses  
development  within the floodway must meet the following applicable standards:
    A.   No use development is permitted in the floodway that would increase
the 1% flood hazard elevation, unless approved by the Iowa department of
natural resources or its assignee. base flood elevation. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit the applicant /agent must obtain a conditional
LOMR from FEMA.
    B.   All uses development within the floodway must:
       1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and
       2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
       3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
    C.   No use development is permitted that would affect the capacity or
conveyance of the channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream,
drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
    D.   Structures, buildings, recreational vehicles and sanitary and utility
systems, if permitted, must meet the applicable general floodplain management
standards and must be constructed and aligned to present the minimum possible
resistance to flood flows.
    E.   Buildings Structures, if permitted, must have low flood damage
potential and must not be used for human habitation.
    F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the
time available after flood warning.
    G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations, including channel changes and
modifications, must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Iowa dDepartment of nNatural rResources or its
assignee.
    H.   Any fill or stream bank erosion control projects allowed in the
floodway must have some beneficial purpose and will be limited to the minimum
amount necessary.
    I.   Pipelines that cross rivers or streams must be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to action of flood flows. Where floodway data
has been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to
define the floodway limits.
    J.   Where no floodway data has been provided, the Iowa department of
natural resources or its assignee shall be contacted to provide a floodway
delineation. Where floodway data is not available, it shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to produce engineered data delineating the
floodway. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010) Where no floodway data has been provided,
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to provide a
floodway delineation. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make
such determination.
I.   Amend 14-5J-9: Variances, by adding the following underlined text and
deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
The bB oard of aA djustment may authorize, upon request, in specific cases,
such variances from the terms of this aA rticle that will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this aA rticle will result in unnecessary and undue
hardship. To ensure that the spirit of this title is observed and substantial
justice done, no variance to the strict application of any provision of this aA
rticle shall be granted by the board unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following approval criteria are met. In addition, the applicant must
meet all the provisions and general approval criteria for variances as stated
in cC hapter 4, aA rticle B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title, except subsection 14-4B-2A4
of this title. See Section 14-8C for the procedure to apply for a variance and
Section 14-4B-2 for the standards to obtain a variance.
    A.   Approval Criteria:
       1.   No variance shall be granted for any development within the
floodway that would result in any increase in flood elevation unless approved
by the Iowa dDepartment of nNatural rResources or its assignee.
       2.   Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, and a determination that the granting of the variance will
not result in increased flood elevation, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances or cause fraud on or
victimization of the public.
       3.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
       4.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this aArticle, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, over the signature of the building
official, that the issuance of a variance will likely result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
       5.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Iowa dDepartment of nNatural rResources or its assignee.
    B.   Factors For Consideration: When considering applications for
variances, the bBoard of aAdjustment will consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this aArticle in addition to the following
factors:
       1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood elevation or
velocities caused by encroachments.
       2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
       3.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community, and the risk of losing said services during a flood event.
       4.   The risk assumed by emergency personnel if it is necessary to
evacuate the use/structure during a flood event.
       5.   After consultation with the historic preservation commission, a
determination of whether compliance with the floodplain regulations would
result in a substantial alteration or destruction of defining architectural
characteristics of landmark properties and properties located within historic
or conservation districts.
       6.   Such other factors that are relevant to the purposes of this
aArticle.
    C.   Conditions Of Approval: Upon consideration of the factors and approval
criteria listed in this section, the bBoard of aAdjustment may attach such
conditions and safeguards to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary
to fulfill the purposes and intent of the provisions of this aArticle. (Ord.
10-4414, 11-16-2010)
J.   Amend 14-5J-10: Amendments, by adding the following underlined text and
deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
The regulations and standards set forth in this aA rticle may, from time to
time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Iowa
dD epartment of nN atural rR esources or  its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-
2010)
K.   Amend 14-5J-11: Warning and Disclaimer of Liability, by adding the
following underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
The degree of flood protection required by this aA rticle is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by humanmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This aA rticle does not imply that areas outside
the regulated areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This aA rticle
does not imply that uses permitted within the regulated areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This aA rticle shall not create liability on the
part of Iowa City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this aA rticle or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
L.   Amend 14-8B-5: Floodplain Development Permit, by adding the following
underlined text and deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
    A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the
building official shall be secured prior to initiation of any development on a
tract of land within a flood hazard area.
    B.   Submittal Requirements: The building official may require the
following information:
       1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit.
       2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
       3.   Location and dimensions of all structures.
       34.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
       45.   Elevation of the flood hazard event base flood and 0.2% annual
chance flood event. Where flood elevation data is not provided in the flood
insurance study, the applicant shall contact the Iowa dDepartment of nNatural
rResources to obtain such data.
       56.   Elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum North
American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor, including basement, of
buildings structures or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
       67.   For buildings structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated
cost of improvements and market value of the building structure prior to the
improvements.
       78.   Such other information as the administrator building official
deems reasonably necessary for the purpose of determining compliance with the
requirements of cChapter 5, aArticle J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of
this title.
    C.   Approval Procedure: The building official shall, within a reasonable
time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development
meets the applicable standards of cChapter 5, aArticle J, "Floodplain
Management Standards", of this title, and shall approve or disapprove, in
writing, the application. For disapprovals, the applicant will be informed, in
writing, of the specific reasons why the application was disapproved. The
building official shall not issue permits for variances, except as approved by
the bBoard of aAdjustment according to the approval criteria for such variances
set forth in cChapter 5, aArticle J of this title. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
M.   Amend 14-9F-1: Definitions, by adding the following underlined text and
deleting the following text with a strikethrough:
As used in cC hapter 5, aA rticle J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this
title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained
in aA rticle A of this cC hapter shall apply to all terms used in cC hapter 5,
aA rticle J of this title that are not defined in this section.
    APPURTENANT STRUCUTRE: A structure which is on the same parcel of the
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
    BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building that has its floor or lowest
level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides (see definition of Lowest
Floor).
    BASE FLOOD: The following having one (1) percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in a given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-year flood”).
    BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
    CLASS 1 CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that must remain accessible during
the 0.2% flood event because they are the base of operations for emergency
responders, are particularly difficult to evacuate during a flood event, or
facilities that provide services essential to the life, health, and safety of
the community. Class 1 critical facilities include police and fire stations,
emergency medical centers, communication centers, hospitals, jails, nursing
homes, and other residential uses for persons with limited mobility and/or
dependency upon life sustaining medical equipment.
    CRITICAL FACILITIES: Structures that store public records; museums and
libraries; schools; and other buildings that store rare and/or valuable items
and information that sustain the history and public records of a community.
These structures are not expected to remain accessible or functioning during a
flood event, though in many instances their functions must resume as soon as
possible after a flood event. Critical facilities also include public
infrastructure such as water distribution and wastewater treatment facilities,
which are expected to remain functioning during a flood event although they may
be temporarily inaccessible or accessible only by watercraft during a flood
event.
    DEVELOPMENT: Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the placement of manufactured housing, buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, streambank erosion control measures,
storage of equipment or materials, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations. Development is considered to commence with either the
first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
factory built home on a foundation. Development does not include “minor
projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” as
defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and
similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
    ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in
a structure when all the following criteria are met:
    A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of 14-5J-7E-1.
    B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.), and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
    C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1’) above the base flood elevation.
    D.   The enclosed area is not a basement.
    EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before May 2, 1977.
    EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before May 2, 1977.
    EXPANSION OF EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
    FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
    FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURAL WORKS: Barriers or storage areas constructed to
control floodwater, modify or redirect a channel.
    FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation which floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a specific frequency flood. For
instance, the 1% flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters with a one
percent (1%) likelihood of occurring in any given year. The 0.2% flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters with a two-tenths percent (0.2%)
likelihood of occurring in any given year. In areas of shallow flooding, there
is a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an elevation
specified on the flood insurance rate map.
    FLOOD EVENT:
    A.   500-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths
percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred
(500) years.
    B.   100-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100)
years.
    C.   1% Annual Chance Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a
one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(formerly known as the 100-year flood event).
    D.   0.2% Annual Chance Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a
two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(formerly known as the 500-year flood event).
    FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Land that is shaded and areas that are subject to
flooding that are identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as “A”, "AE", "X"
or,. on the flood insurance rate map., and “X-shaded”.
    FLOOD HAZARD ELEVATION: In AE zones, the elevation of the 0.2% flood as
profiled in the flood insurance study for Johnson County, Iowa. In areas of
shallow flooding, the elevation of the flood as illustrated on the flood
insurance rate map.
    A.   In zones labeled “AE” and “X-shaded”, the elevation of the 0.2% annual
chance flood event as provided by the Flood Insurance Study for Johnson County,
Iowa.
    B.   In zones labeled “A”, the elevation of the 0.2% annual chance flood
event as determined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
    FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
    FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A study initiated, funded and published by the
federal insurance administration for the purpose of evaluating, in detail, the
existence and severity of flood hazards, providing the city with the necessary
information for adopting a floodplain management program and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates. A report published by FEMA for a community
issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) that performs an
examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards. The FIS report
contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water surface
elevations that were used to prepare the accompanying FIRM.
    FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a
result of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 1% floodplain is the
area of land that, in any given year, has a one percent (1%) likelihood of
flooding. The 0.2% floodplain is the area of land that, in any given year, has
a two-tenths percent (0.2%) likelihood of flooding. In areas of shallow
flooding, there is a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to a
specified elevation, but a clearly defined channel does not exist, and the path
of flooding is unpredictable.
    FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damages and for promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
    FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
    FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of floodwaters to the
floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood elevation.
cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood (1% annual
chance) by more than one foot (1’).
    FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway,
which can be filled, leveed or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood elevations. Special Flood Hazard Area that are
located outside the floodway.
    HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Combustible materials, and flammable liquids, and
chemicals—whether stored aboveground or underground. These include but are not
limited to cryogenic fuels, class I and class II liquids, liquified petroleum
gas, and other substances regulated by the international fire code, as amended.
    HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
    HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
    A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register;
    B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
    C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or,
    D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs (note Iowa City has such a
program) that have been certified by either i) an approved state program as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior (note State of Iowa has an approved
program) or ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
    LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building structure, including a basement, except when all the following
criteria are met: the criteria listed in the definition of Enclosed Area Below
Lowest Floor are met.
    A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
subsection 14-5J-7E of this title; and
    B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses, such as building access, parking or
storage; and
    C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation; and
    D.   The floor is not below grade on all sides.
    MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Any structure designed for residential use which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a
building site. For the purposes of cChapter 5, aArticle J, "Floodplain
Management Standards", of this title, manufactured housing includes factory
built homes, mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. and not fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
    MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured housing lots for rent or sale.
    MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading
and excavating) valued at less than $500.
    MIXED-USE STRUCTURE: A structure with areas designed for both residential
and commercial uses, in which the floor area dedicated to commercial uses is
25% or more of the total floor area (or common areas that support residents or
residential uses that are not considered commercial uses).
    NEW CONSTRUCTION OF NEW BUILDINGS, MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS: Those
structures or development that began for which start of construction began on
or after May 2, 1977.
    NEW MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured housing park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed, (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 2,
1977.
    NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A structure that has a commercial or non-
residential (non-habitational) use, including but not limited to: businesses,
houses of worship, schools, garages, poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational
buildings, mercantile buildings, agricultural buildings (including grain bins
and silos), industrial buildings, and warehouses.
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
    A.   Built on a single chassis;
    B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
    C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
    D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
    SHALLOW FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Areas of special flood hazards having shallow
water depths and/or unpredictable flow paths between one foot (1’) and three
feet (3'), and with water surface elevations determined.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the “base
flood”. This land is identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map as
Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
    START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as pouring a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the structure, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
    STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or installed on the ground or attached to
the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
manufactured housing, grain storage facilities, storage tanks and similar.
    SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as established by an
appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is greater. of the
structure before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials
shall be included in the estimated cost of repair.
    SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure that satisfies
either of the following criteria:
    A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as
established by an appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is
greater, of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started
or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The
term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure provided the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic
structure” and provided a Variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
    B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after May 2, 1977,
shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%). (Ord.
10-4414, 11-16-2010)
    VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations. See Section 14-8C for the procedure to apply for a
variance and Section 14-4B-2 for the standards to obtain a variance.
    VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the City’s floodplain management ordinance.
 
Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
Section III. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision
or part thereof no adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
 
Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective December 26,
2025.
 
 
Passed and approved this 21st day of October 2025.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 12/26/2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordinance no. 26-4973
 
Ordinance amending Title 16, entitled Public Works, Chapter 3, City Utilities,
Article C, Potable Water Use and Service.
 
    Whereas, the water source for the City of Iowa City drinking water is
primarily the Iowa River; and
 
   Whereas, the Iowa River is a surface water source with flows impacted by
weather conditions and subject to the control of the Federal Army Corps of
Engineers at the Coralville Dam; and
 
   Whereas, the State of Iowa experienced a 204-week drought between June 2020
and May 2024; and
 
   Whereas, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources inspection of the water
system in January 2022 and December 2024 has recommended the development of an
emergency conservation policy per Iowa Administrative Code 567-52.9(3)(c); and
 
   Whereas, emergency water conservation is needed when the demand on the
public drinking water system is greater than the available water for
production; and
 
   Whereas, water conservation may be achieved through voluntary curtailment of
use or enforced with water use restrictions; and
 
   Whereas, to better prepare the City of Iowa City for an emergency water
conservation event it is necessary to adopt an ordinance establishing water use
restrictions; and
 
   Whereas, it is additionally in the public interest and for the protection of
public health, safety, and welfare to prevent the depressurization of the water
supply and the reduction of available firefighting water; and
 
   Whereas, the City desires to amend the Potable Water Use and Service article
to enable action in the event of an emergency water conservation scenario.
 
   Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
 
Section I. Amendment.
 
Title 16, Chapter 3, Article C, is amended by adding Section 11 entitled
“Emergency Water Conservation” with the text as follows:
 
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish and set forth plans and
procedures to be followed during an emergency water conservation event. Without
such provisions, water may not be sufficiently conserved for essential uses,
such as the preservation of public drinking water and firefighting systems.
 
B. Emergency Water Conservation Event: The City Manager or designee shall
declare a water conservation emergency when the City Manager or designee finds
that there is a need to reduce water use, based on available Iowa City drinking
water production, the need to reduce water use other than that which is
necessary for the preservation of human life and for fire protection. The
following stages of water use regulations may be selectively enacted during a
water conservation event.
 
 
 
1.   Stage 1: Warning
 
After a warning has been declared, the following activities may be prohibited:
a.   Outdoor watering and irrigation, except in the case of an approved
application submitted to the Iowa City Water Division for the watering of
vegetation planted or sod laid during the current growing season, not to exceed
1-inch of water use per week, with approved watering activities occurring
between 8PM and 8AM.
b.   The use of water to wash cars, trucks, boats, and other motor vehicles,
except at commercial establishments with water reuse. Use of wash bays or
services without water reuse are prohibited.
c.   Filling private outdoor swimming pools, children’s wading pools,
reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
d.   Outdoor pressure washing activities.
e.   Fire hydrant flushing activities by the Iowa City Water Division, except
as necessary to maintain water age and disinfectant residual.
f.   Bulk water sales at bulk fill stations.
g.   Sewer line jetting activities, except as necessary to prevent sewer line
blockages.
h.   Use of contractor fire hydrant water meters.
i.   Any additional measures not listed that are deemed necessary by the City
Manager to maintain the integrity of the public drinking water system.
 
2.   Stage 2: Emergency
 
At the emergency stage, the following activities may be prohibited:
 
a.   All restrictions listed in Stage 1.
b.   All outdoor water and irrigation, without exceptions.
c.   All use of water to wash cars, trucks, boats, and other motor vehicles,
without exceptions.
d.   Filling of swimming pools, including public pools and splash pads.
e.   Water use through a single purpose or irrigation meter.
f.   Additional water use restrictions shall be provided to residential,
commercial, and industrial customers on a case-by-case basis.
 
3.   Stage 3: Prolonged Emergency
 
At the prolonged emergency stage, the following restrictions may occur:
 
a.   All restrictions listed in Stages 1 and 2.
b.   Strategic shutdown of water service to areas of the City in order to
minimize the loss of system integrity.
 
C. Declaration and Notice:
 
1.   The City Manager or designee shall declare an Emergency Water Conservation
Event by written, signed notice, filed with the City Clerk, stating the
beginning time of the emergency water conservation declaration and the
restrictions imposed on water use.
2.   The City Manager or designee may cancel or enhance such declaration at any
time based on water supply availability.
3.   The City Manager or designee shall issue a press release and other
communication efforts deemed necessary at the time of the initial declaration
and for any changes to the declaration.
4.   The City Manager or designee shall assign staff to perform enforcement
actions related to the declaration.
 
D. Violations:
 
1.   All violations of the declared restrictions imposed by the Emergency Water
Conservation Event shall be a municipal infraction subject to the penalties
provided within this code and water shutoff as needed to prevent further water
waste.
 
Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
Section III. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision,
or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
 
Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
 
 
Passed and approved this 6th day of January 2026.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 01/15/2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordinance No. 26-4974
 
Ordinance amending Title 16, entitled “Public Works,” Chapter 3, entitled “City
Utilities,” Article H, entitled “Solid Waste,” Section 7, entitled “Storage of
Solid Waste,” to require property and business owners within the downtown area
subject to the solid waste container permit system to contract with a
commercial waste hauler.
 
Whereas, the City adopted a solid waste permit system codified at Section 16-
3H-7 of the Iowa City Code to limit the number of solid waste haulers allowed
to place their solid waste containers (aka, dumpsters) in the public alleys in
central Iowa City defined as the “downtown” in Resolution No. 17-29, which is
the area bordered by Gilbert Street to the east, Iowa Avenue to the north,
Clinton Street to the west, and Burlington Street to the south and the area
bordered by Gilbert Street to the east, Bloomington Street to the north,
Dubuque Street to the west, and Jefferson Street to the south; and
Whereas, the current permittee is Republic Services of Iowa; and
Whereas, not every owner or business in the “downtown” has contracted with
Republic Services of Iowa for solid waste removal services, and the City and
the Downtown District have received complaints that solid waste is being
deposited in containers paid for by other owners and businesses; and
Whereas, in order to address this issue, the City in 2023 amended the Sidewalk
Café Policy adopted by Council resolution to require all sidewalk café
businesses to contract with a waste hauler; and
Whereas, the problem of depositing solid waste in containers paid for by others
has continued; and
Whereas, it is in the City’s interest to adopt an ordinance requiring all
property owners and businesses in the “downtown” to contract with a waste
hauler unless the Public Works Director upon good cause grants an exception.
 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
   
   Section I. Amendments.
1.   Title 16, entitled "Public Works," Chapter 3, entitled "City Utilities,”
Article H, entitled “Solid Waste,” Section 7, entitled "Storage of Solid
Waste," is amended by adding the following underscore text as new Subsection
D4:
 
D. 4. Every owner or operator of property in the “downtown” must contract with
a commercial waste hauler for the collection of its refuse, recycling
materials, and if used in its operation grease/cooking oil.  The owner or
operator must provide a copy of the contract to the City within three (3)
calendar days upon request. The Director upon good cause shown may approve an
exception to this requirement. Any violation of this subsection is a municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty provided in Subsection 1-4-2D of this
Code.
 
   Section II. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict
with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
   Section III. Severability. If any section, provision or part of the
Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
   Section IV. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its
final passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
 
Passed and approved this 6th day of January 2026.
 
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 01/15/2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordinance No. 26-4975
 
Ordinance amending Title 3, "Finance, Taxation and Fees" of the City Code, to
re-establish the Iowa City Downtown Self-Supported Municipal Improvement
District (SSMID) pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 386, Code of Iowa; and
providing for the establishment of an operation fund and the levy of an annual
tax in connection therewith.
 
Whereas, the City of Iowa City is authorized by Chapter 386, Code of Iowa (the
"Act") to create a self-supported municipal improvement district in the City,
to provide for the existence and operation of such district, to provide for the
maintenance of improvements or self-liquidating improvements for such district,
and to levy taxes with respect to such district, all as more specifically
defined in the Act; and,
 
Whereas, Ordinance No. 11-4460 adopted on December 6, 2011 established the Iowa
City Downtown Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District (SSMID) for a
period of four (4) years; and,
 
Whereas, Ordinance No. 15-4649 adopted on December 15, 2015 re-established the
Iowa City Downtown SSMID for an additional ten (10) years and expanded
boundaries that will expire on June 30, 2026; and
 
Whereas, on September 12, 2025, a Petition was filed to again re-establish the
SSMID for a period of ten (10) years with expanded boundaries as described
therein (“Proposed District”); and,
 
Whereas, the Petition is in compliance with the provisions of the Act; and,
 
Whereas, on October 7, 2025, the City Council received the Petition and
referred it to the City's Planning and Zoning Commission for review in
accordance with the Act; and,
 
Whereas, on October 15, 2025, the City's Planning and Zoning Commission
reviewed the Petition on the merit and feasibility of the Proposed District and
forwarded an Evaluative Report to the City Council; and,
 
Whereas, on October 21, 2025, the City Council scheduled a public hearing for
November 18, 2025, at 6:00 P.M., at which it proposed to take action for the
establishment of the Proposed District, and did direct that notice of such
hearing be given in accordance with the Act; and,
 
Whereas, notice of the hearing was published in the Iowa City Press Citizen on
October 30, 2025, and a copy of such notice was mailed by certified mail on
November 3, 2025, to the affected owners of record of real property located
within the Proposed District as shown by the records of the Johnson County
Auditor, in satisfaction of the notice requirements of the Act; and,
 
Whereas, at the Public Hearing, the City Council did meet and hear all owners
of property in the Proposed District and residents of the City desiring to
express their views with respect to the establishment of the Proposed District;
and,
 
Whereas, on November 18, 2025, the City Council closed the public hearing on
the creation of the Proposed District and found that the Petition and the
Proposed District satisfied the applicable requirements imposed by the Act;
and,
 
Whereas, more than thirty days have now passed since the public hearing on the
creation of the Proposed District was closed, and a petition containing the
requisite number of signatures that would require the matter to be withdrawn
from Council consideration has not been filed with the City Clerk opposing the
creation of the Proposed District.
 
Now Therefore, Be It Ordained, by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa,
 
Section I. Chapter 7, entitled "Iowa City Downtown Self-Supported Municipal
Improvement District," Title 3, entitled "Finances, Taxation and Fees," of the
City Code, is hereby repealed and the following is inserted in lieu thereof:
 
1.   In accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 386 there is hereby established and
created in the City of Iowa City, a self-supported municipal improvement
district as defined in the Act, the name of which shall be the "Iowa City
Downtown Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District" (herein the
"District").
 
2.   The District shall include all property within the following described
boundaries:
 
   BEGINNING AT THE WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF GILBERT STREET WHERE IT INTERSECTS THE SOUTH LINE OF THE PLATTED
EAST-WEST ALLEY IN BLOCK 57, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY, IOWA;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID PLATTED ALLEY AND ITS WESTERLY EXTENSION TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH
THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF LINN STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF SAID LINN STREET AND ITS SOUTHERLY EXTENSION TO A POINT ON THE
SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BLOOMINGTON STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BLOOMINGTON STREET TO THE
NORTHWEST CORNER OF AUDITOR’S PARCEL 2012099 AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 57 AT PAGE 120 IN THE RECORDS OF THE JOHNSON COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE;
 
THENCE SOUTHERLY, ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF SAID AUDITOR’S PARCEL 2012099, TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF SAID
AUDITOR’S PARCEL 2012099, AND A POINT ON THE NORTH LINE OF THE PLATTED EAST-
WEST ALLEY IN BLOCK 68, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE OF THE PLATTED EAST-
WEST ALLEY IN BLOCK 68, TO A POINT ON THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF DUBUQUE
STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF DUBUQUE STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF MARKET STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF MARKET STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF CLINTON STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF CLINTON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF WASHINGTON STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF WASHINGTON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION
OF THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITOL STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID NORTHERLY EXTENSION, AND SAID EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF CAPITOL STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF BURLINGTON STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF BURLINGTON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE OF MADISON STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF MADISON STREET TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT
6, OF BLOCK 93, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT 6, BLOCK 93, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST
LINE OF THE PLATTED NORTH-SOUTH ALLEY IN BLOCK 93, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID WEST LINE OF THE PLATTED NORTH-
SOUTH ALLEY IN BLOCK 93, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF COURT STREET;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF COURT STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF
THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CAPITOL STREET;
 
THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID NORTHERLY EXTENSION AND THE EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF CAPITOL STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF THE IOWA INTERSTATE RAILROAD;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF THE IOWA INTERSTATE RAILROAD TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF GILBERT STREET;
 
THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF GILBERT STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WESTERLY EXTENSION OF
THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BOWERY STREET;
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID WESTERLY EXTENSION AND SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BOWERY
STREET TO
ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE EAST LINE OF THE PLATTED NORTH SOUTH ALLEY IN BLOCK 1 OF
LYON’S 1ST ADDITION;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID SOUTHERLY PROJECTION, EAST LINE OF SAID PLATTED NORTH
SOUTH ALLEY AND THE EAST LINE OF THE NORTH SOUTH PLATTED ALLEY IN BLOCK 1 OF
BERRYHILL & PIERCE ADDITION TO ITS
INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH LINE OF THE PARCEL OF LAND, AS DESCRIBED IN BOOK 4771 AT PAGES 112-
116 OF THE RECORDS OF THE JOHNSON COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE;
 
THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE OF SAID DESCRIBED PARCEL;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE OF SAID DESCRIBED PARCEL TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST RIGHT-
OF- WAY LINE OF VAN BUREN STREET;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF VAN BUREN STREET, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WESTERLY EXTENSION
OF THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF COLLEGE STREET.
 
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID WESTERLY EXTENSION AND THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF COLLEGE STREET TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE EAST 2.42 FEET OF THE SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT 7, OF BLOCK 41, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA
CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID EAST 2.42 FEET OF THE SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT 7, OF BLOCK 41, TO THE NORTHWEST
CORNER OF SAID EAST 2.42 FEET OF THE SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT 7, OF BLOCK 41;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID EAST 2.42 FEET OF THE SOUTH 75 FEET OF LOT 7, OF BLOCK 41, TO THE SOUTHWEST
CORNER OF THE NORTH 75 FEET OF LOT 8, BLOCK 41, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID NORTH 75 FEET OF LOT 8, BLOCK 41, AND NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF SAID
WEST LINE, TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 1 OF SAID BLOCK 41, ORIGINAL TOWN OF
IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID LOT 1, BLOCK 41, AND THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF SAID WEST LINE, TO
THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 8, OF BLOCK 40, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID LOT 8, BLOCK 40, AND THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF SAID WEST LINE, TO
ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTH LINE OF THE PLATTED EAST-WEST ALLEY IN SAID
BLOCK 40;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE OF THE PLATTED EAST-
WEST ALLEY, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTHERLY LINE OF THE FORMER CHICAGO,
ROCK ISLAND, & PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY RIGHT-OF-WAY;
 
THENCE NORTHEASTERLY ALONG SAID NORTHERLY LINE OF THE FORMER CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND, & PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY
RIGHT-OF-WAY, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST LINE OF LOT 1, BLOCK 40,
ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID WEST LINE OF LOT 1, BLOCK 40, AND THE NORTHERLY EXTENSION OF SAID WEST LINE, TO THE
SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 8, BLOCK 39, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID LOT 8, BLOCK 39, TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 8, BLOCK
39;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID LOT 8, BLOCK 39, AND ITS EASTERLY EXTENSION, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH
THE EAST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF JOHNSON STREET;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID EAST RIGHT-OF-
WAY OF JOHNSON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH RIGHT- OF-WAY LINE OF
MARKET STREET;
 
THENCE EAST ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF MARKET STREET, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF DODGE STREET;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF DODGE STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF BLOOMINGTON STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF BLOOMINGTON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE OF JOHNSON STREET;
THENCE NORTH ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF JOHNSON STREET TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
OF BLOOMINGTON STREET;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID NORTH RIGHT-OF-
WAY LINE OF BLOOMINGTON STREET, TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THE WEST HALF OF LOT
6, BLOCK 37, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY;
 
THENCE NORTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID WEST HALF OF LOT 6, BLOCK 37, TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTH LINE
OF THE PLATTED EAST-WEST ALLEY, IN SAID BLOCK 37;
 
THENCE WEST ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE OF THE PLATED EAST WEST ALLEY OF SAID BLOCK
37, THE
WESTERLY PROJECTION THEREOF, THE SOUTH LINE OF THE PLATTED EAST WEST ALLEY IN BLOCK 48, ORIGINAL TOWN OF IOWA CITY, AND
THE WESTERLY PROJECTION THEREOF TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
 
   
3.    It is hereby found and determined that all of the property within the
District is similarly related so that the present and potential use or
enjoyment of the property is benefited by the condition, performance of
administration, redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance of the District
and the owners of property in the District have a present and potential benefit
from the condition, performance of administration, redevelopment,
revitalization and maintenance of the District.
 
4.    Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, there is hereby established and
created a self-supported municipal improvement district operation fund with
respect to the District to be known as the "Iowa City Downtown Self-Supported
Municipal Improvement District Operation Fund" (herein the "Operation Fund"),
for which the City may certify taxes (the "Operation Tax") against the
property, as defined in the Act (excluding property assessed as residential
property for property tax purposes), within the District (the "Property") each
year, in addition to all other taxes, commencing with the levy of taxes for
collection in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2026 for the purposes of paying
the administrative and operational expenses of the District, as defined and
authorized in the Act or paying part or all of the maintenance expenses of
"improvements" or "self-liquidating improvements", as defined in the Act, for a
period of ten (10) years.
 
5.    The City may disburse the amounts collected in the Operation Fund, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Iowa City Downtown District Board of
Directors as described in paragraph 5 of the Petition, for one or more of the
following purposes:
 
a)   Develop and manage activities in support of marketing, business retention
and attraction, including but not limited to:
(1)   Development and management of business retention and attraction
activities
(2)   Marketing and advertising
(3)   Business support services
(4)   Establishment and promotion of special events, festivals, and activities
(5)   Contingency reserve fund for extraordinary expenses
 
b)   Physical or other improvements designed to enhance the image and
appearance of the District, including but not limited to:
(1)   Enhanced cleaning
(2)   Lighting improvements
(3)   Seasonal and decorative enhancements
(4)   Signage and banners
(5)   Landscaping
(6)   Public or private art
 
c)   To hire an Executive Director and, if needed, other support staff who will
work for the Board of Directors and to fulfill the intent of this Petition and
Ordinance establishing the SSMID.
 
6.    The rate of the Operation Tax to be levied annually, in addition to all
other taxes, as aforesaid, shall not exceed: 1) For the period of July 1, 2026
through June 30, 2033, a rate of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per one
thousand dollars ($1,000) of taxable value, commencing with the levy of taxes
for collection in the seven fiscal years beginning July 1, 2026; and, 2) For
the period July 1, 2033 through June 30, 2036, a rate of two dollars and
seventy-five cents ($2.75) per one thousand dollars ($1,000) of taxable value
for collection in the three fiscal years beginning July 1, 2033.
 
SECTION II. REPEALER. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION Ill. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision
or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
 
SECTION IV. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be effective July 1, 2026.
 
Passed and approved this 6th day of January 2026.
s/Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest:s/ Kellie Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 01/15/2026
 
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 18-4762
Ordinance to Adopt the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, 2018,
AKA "City Code."
Whereas, Section 380.8 of the Code of Iowa, 2018, requires that at least once
every five years a city shall adopt a code of ordinances; and,
Whereas, on February 21st, 2012 the City Council adopted the City Code of Iowa
City, Iowa; and,
Whereas, the City of Iowa City adds new ordinances and amendments upon passage
by supplementation to the City Code itself; and,
Whereas, if a proposed code of ordinances contains only existing ordinances
which have been edited and compiled without substantive changes, the council
may adopt such code without notice of public hearing; and,
Whereas, it is now appropriate to adopt a code of compiled and existing
ordinances under the statute, without any substantive changes proposed.
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
Section I. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code
of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the
changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and Law of the City as enacted by the City Council, and shall hereafter be
referred to as "The City Code".
Section II. It is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, a copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section III. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the City Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the
City Code in any manner to cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
Section IV. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section V. A code of ordinances, containing only the current and existing
ordinances edited and compiled without change in substance, shall be and hereby
is adopted as the City Code, 2018.
Passed and approved this 17th day of July, 2018.
s/James A. Throgmorton, Mayor
Attest: s/Julie Voparil, Deputy City Clerk
Ordinance No. 23-4906
Ordinance to Adopt the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, 2023,
AKA "The City Code."
Whereas, Section 380.8 of the Code of Iowa, 2023, requires that at least once
every five years a city shall adopt a code of ordinances; and,
Whereas, on July 17th, 2018, the City Council adopted the City Code of Iowa
City, Iowa; and
Whereas, the City of Iowa City adds new ordinances and amendments upon passage
by supplementation to the City Code itself; and
Whereas, if a proposed code of ordinances contains only existing ordinances
which have been edited and compiled without substantive changes, the council
may adopt such code by ordinance without the necessity of a public hearing; and
Whereas, it is now appropriate to adopt a code of compiled and existing
ordinances under the statute, without any substantive changes proposed.
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Iowa City,
Iowa:
Section I. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code
of the City of Iowa City, Iowa, prepared by American Legal Publishing,
containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the
changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and Law of the City as enacted by the City Council, and shall hereafter be
referred to as ''The City Code."
Section II. It is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by American Legal Publishing, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of
a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and
is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, a copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
Section Ill. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the City Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the
City Code in any manner to cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
Section IV. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section V. A code of ordinances, containing only the current and existing
ordinances edited and compiled without change in substance, shall be and hereby
is adopted as the City Code, 2023.
Passed and approved this 1st day of August, 2023.
s\Bruce Teague, Mayor
Attest: s\ Kellie K. Grace, City Clerk
*Submitted to publish on 8/10/2023
IOWA CITY CHARTER 1
Preamble
Definitions
Article I. Powers of the City
§
1.01. Powers of the City.
§
1.02. Construction.
§
1.03. Savings Clause.
Article II. City Council
§
2.01. Composition.
§
2.02. Division into Council Districts.
§
2.03. Eligibility.
§
2.04. Terms.
§
2.05. Compensation.
§
2.06. Mayor.
§
2.07. General Powers and Duties.
§
2.08. Appointments.
§
2.09. Rules; Records.
§
2.10. Vacancies.
§
2.11. Council Action.
§
2.12. Prohibitions.
Article III. Nomination, Primary Election and Regular Election
§
3.01. Nomination.
§
3.02. Primary Election.
§
3.03. Regular City Election.
Article IV. City Manager
§
4.01. Appointment; Qualifications.
§
4.02. Accountability; Removal.
§
4.03. Absence; Disability of City Manager.
§
4.04. Duties of City Manager.
§
4.05. Ineligibility; Prohibited Acts.
Article V. Boards, Commissions and Committees
§
5.01. Establishment.
§
5.02. Appointment; Removal.
§
5.03. Rules.
Article VI. Campaign Contributions and Expenditures
§
6.01. Limitations on the Amount of Campaign Contributions.
§
6.02. Disclosure of Contributions and Expenditures.
§
6.03. Definition.
§
6.04. Violations.
Article VII. Initiative and Referendum
§
7.01. General Provisions.
§
7.02. Commencement of Proceedings, Affidavit.
§
7.03. Petitions; Revocation of Signatures.
§
7.04. Procedure after Filing.
§
7.05. Action on Petitions.
§
7.06. Results of Election.
§
7.07. Prohibition on Establishment of Stricter Conditions or Requirements.
Article VIII. Charter Amendments and Review
§
8.01. Charter Amendments.
§
8.02. Charter Review Commission.
 
Notes
  1. The home rule Charter of the City, adopted by the voters of the City on
1 November 15, 1973, and by ordinance 76-2792 on January 2, 1976, pursuant to
  I.C.A. section 372.9, is set out herein as adopted and amended.
PREAMBLE
We, the people of Iowa City, Iowa, pursuant to the constitution and statutes of
the State of Iowa and the principle of self-determination, proclaim that the
government of Iowa City belongs to all its residents and all share the
responsibility for it. We hereby adopt this Charter and confer upon it the full
home rule powers of a charter city in order to provide for an honest and
accountable council-manager government. By this action, we secure the benefits
of home rule and affirm the values of representative democracy, professional
management, strong leadership, public engagement, diversity and inclusiveness,
regional cooperation, and stewardship of our unique environment. Furthermore,
adoption of this Charter recognizes the following principles:
   1.   Resident participation on an equitable and inclusive basis as part of
the process of democratic self-government.
      a.   Each individual shall have an opportunity to participate in the life
of the City, including economic, cultural and intellectual.
      b.   Discrimination prohibited by Title 2 of the City Code shall not be
tolerated.
   2.   The provision of service relating to the health, safety, and welfare of
its residents in a fair, equitable and efficient manner.
   3.   The conduct of City business in conformity with the principles and
practices of due process, equal protection under the laws, and protection of
individual liberties granted by the Constitution of the United States, by the
State of Iowa, and by local ordinances.
   4.   Civility and responsiveness by City employees in their interactions
with the public. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
DEFINITIONS
As used in this Charter:
1.   "City" means the City of Iowa City, Iowa.
2.   "City Council" or "Council" means the governing body of the City.
3.   "Council member" means a member of the Council, including the Mayor.
4.   "Shall" imposes a duty.
5.   "Must" states a requirement.
6.   "May" confers a power.
7.   "Eligible elector" means a person eligible to register to vote in Iowa
City.
8.   "Qualified elector" means a resident of Iowa City who is registered to
vote in Iowa City.
9.   "Board" includes a board, commission, committee or other similar entity
however designated.
10.   "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, political party, committee or any other legal entity.
11.   "Ordinance" means a city law of a general and permanent nature.
12.   "Measure", except as provided in Article VII, means an ordinance,
amendment, resolution or motion. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 85-3227, 3-
12-1985; Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE I. POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 1.01. Powers of the City.
The City shall have all powers possible under the constitution and laws of this
state. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 1.02. Construction.
The grant of power to the City under this Charter is intended to be broad; the
mention of a specific power in this Charter is not intended to be a limitation
on the general powers conferred in this article. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd.
Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 1.03. Savings Clause.
If any provision of this Charter, or the application of this Charter to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this Charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord.
25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
Section 2.01. Composition.
The City Council consists of seven members. As provided in Article III, four,
to be known as Council members at-large, are to be nominated by eligible
electors of the City at-large, and three, to be known as district Council
members, are to be nominated by eligible electors of their respective
districts. The purpose of district divisions is to ensure City-wide geographic
representation on the Council. All Council members shall be elected by the
qualified electors of the City at-large. (Ord. 85-3273, 12-17-1985; amd. Ord.
25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.02. Division into Council Districts.
The Council, by ordinance, shall divide the City into three Council districts
of substantially equal population. These districts are to be designated as
Council District A, Council District B, and Council District C. (Ord. 76-2792,
1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.03. Eligibility.
To be eligible to be elected to and to retain a Council position, a person must
be an eligible elector of Iowa City, and if seeking or elected to represent a
Council district, must be an eligible elector of that Council district. (Ord.
05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.04. Terms.
At the first election under this Charter, all seven Council members are to be
elected; the Council member from Council District A, Council District C, and
the two Council members at-large who receive the greatest number of votes cast
for Council member at-large are to serve for terms of four years, and other
Council members are to serve for terms of two years. Commencing at the next
regular City election, and at all subsequent regular City elections, all
Council members elected to fill the positions of those whose terms expire shall
be elected for terms of four years. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947,
2-18-2025)
Section 2.05. Compensation.
The Council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor and
the other Council members. The Council shall not adopt such an ordinance during
the months of November and December immediately following a regular City
election. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.06. Mayor.
   A.   Immediately following the beginning of the terms of Council members
elected at the regular City election, the Council shall meet and elect from
among its members the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem for a term of two years. (Ord.
85-3227, 3-12-1985)
   B.   The Mayor is a voting member of the Council, the official
representative of the City, presiding officer of the Council and its policy
spokesperson. The Mayor may add items to the City Council agenda. The Mayor
shall present to the City no later than February 28 an annual State of the City
message. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015)
   C.   The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor during the absence of the Mayor.
(Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.07. General Powers and Duties.
All powers of the City are vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided
by state law or this Charter. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-
18-2025)
Section 2.08. Appointments.
   A.   The Council shall appoint the City Manager.
   B.   The Council shall appoint the City Clerk. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
   C.   The Council shall appoint the City Attorney. (Ord. 95-3671, 3-28-1995)
   D.   The City Manager shall appoint the Chief of the Police Department and
the Chief of the Fire Department, subject to approval of the Council.
   E.   The Council shall appoint all members of the City's boards, except as
otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985)
   F.   The Council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, of persons it
appoints and shall provide for the method of compensation of other City
employees. All appointments and promotions of City employees must be made
according to job-related criteria and be consistent with nondiscriminatory and
equal employment opportunity standards established pursuant to law. (Ord. 95-
3671, 3-28-1995; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.09. Rules; Records.
The Council may determine its own rules and shall maintain records of its
proceedings consistent with state law. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-
4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.10. Vacancies.
The Council shall fill a vacancy occurring in an elective City office as
provided by state law. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.11. Council Action.
Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a majority vote of
all the members of the Council except as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord.
05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 2.12. Prohibitions.
   A.   A Council member may not hold any other City office or be a City
employee or elected county official while serving on the Council nor hold any
remunerated City office or employment for at least one year after leaving the
Council. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976)
   B.   With the exception of powers provided in
Section 2.08, a Council member may not dictate, in any manner, the appointment
or removal of any City employee. However, the Council may express its views
pertaining to the appointment or removal of such employee to the Council
appointee under whom the employee works (City Manager, City Attorney, City
Clerk).
   C.   A Council member may not interfere with the supervision or direction of
any City employee other than the City Manager, City Attorney, or City Clerk.
(Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE III. NOMINATION, PRIMARY ELECTION AND REGULAR ELECTION
Section 3.01. Nomination.
   A.   An eligible elector of a Council district may become a candidate for a
Council district seat by filing with the Johnson County Commissioner of
Elections a valid petition requesting that their name be placed on the ballot
for that office. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the petition must be
filed not more than eighty-five (85) days nor fewer than sixty-eight (68) days
before the date of the election. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the
petition must be signed by eligible electors from the candidate's district
equal in number to at least two (2) percent of those who voted to fill the same
office at the last regular City election, but not fewer than ten (10) persons.
   B.   An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for an at-large
Council seat by filing with the Johnson County Commissioner of Elections a
petition requesting that the candidate's name be placed on the ballot for that
office. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the petition must be filed not
more than eighty-five (85) days nor fewer than sixty-eight (68) days before the
date of the election. Unless otherwise provided by state law, the petition must
be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two (2) percent of
those who voted to fill the same office at the last regular City election, but
not fewer than ten (10) persons. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947,
2-18-2025)
Section 3.02. Primary Election.
   A.   If there are more than two candidates for a Council district seat, a
primary election must be held for that seat with only the qualified electors of
that Council district eligible to vote. The names of the two candidates who
receive the highest number of votes in the primary election are to be placed on
the ballot for the regular City election as candidates for that Council seat.
(Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
   B.   If there are more than twice as many candidates as there are at large
positions to be filled, there shall be a primary election held unless the
Council, by ordinance, chooses to have a run-off election. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-
1985; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 3.03. Regular City Election.
   A.   In the regular City election, each Council district seat up for
election shall be listed separately on the ballot and only the names of
candidates nominated from that Council district shall be listed on the ballot
as candidates for that seat. However, all qualified electors of the City shall
be entitled to vote for each candidate. The three Council district seats shall
be designated on the ballot as Council District A, Council District B and
Council District C and each shall be elected at-large.
   B.   The at-large Council seats shall be designated on the ballot as such.
(Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE IV. CITY MANAGER
Section 4.01. Appointment; Qualifications.
In appointing a City Manager, the Council shall consider only the
qualifications and fitness of the person without regard to political or other
affiliation. During their tenure the City Manager shall reside within the City.
(Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 4.02. Accountability; Removal.
   A.   The City Manager is under the direction and supervision of the Council
and holds office at its pleasure. A City Manager removed by the Council is
entitled to receive termination pay as provided by contract. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-
19-2015)
   B.   Upon the resignation or removal of the City Manager, the Council shall
appoint an individual qualified to perform the duties of City Manager to serve
at the pleasure of Council or until a City Manager is appointed. (Ord. 76-2792,
1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 4.03. Absence; Disability of City Manager.
The City Manager may designate a qualified City employee as acting City Manager
to perform their duties during a temporary absence or disability. If the City
Manager does not make such a designation, the Council shall appoint a qualified
City employee to perform the duties of the City Manager until they return.
(Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 4.04. Duties of City Manager.
   A.   The City Manager shall be chief administrative officer of the City and
shall:
      1.   Ensure that the laws of the City are executed and enforced.
      2.   Supervise and direct the administration of City government and the
official conduct of employees of the City appointed by the City Manager
including their employment, training, reclassification, suspension, or
discharge as the occasion requires, subject to state law.
      3.   Appoint the Chief of the Police Department and the Chief of the Fire
Department with the approval of the City Council.
      4.   Supervise the Chief of the Police Department and Chief of the Fire
Department, including their suspension or discharge as the occasion requires.
Such supervision shall not be subject to approval of the City Council.
      5.   Appoint or employ persons to occupy positions for which no other
method of appointment is provided by state law or this Charter.
      6.   Supervise the administration of the City personnel system, including
the determination of the compensation of all City employees appointed by the
City Manager subject to this Code or this Charter.
      7.   Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for
the City, supervise all purchases of materials and supplies, and assure that
such materials and supplies are received and are of specified quality and
character.
      8.   Supervise and manage all public improvements, works and undertakings
of the City, and all City-owned property including buildings, plants, systems,
and enterprises, and have charge of their construction, improvement, repair,
and maintenance except where otherwise provided by state law.
      9.   Supervise the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications and estimates for the City.
      10.   Provide for the issuance and revocation of licenses and permits
authorized by state law or City ordinance and cause a record thereof to be
maintained.
      11.   Prepare and submit to the Council the annual budgets in the form
prescribed by state law.
      12.   Provide the Council an itemized written monthly financial report.
      13.   Attend Council meetings and keep the Council fully advised of the
financial and other conditions of the City and its needs.
      14.   See that the business affairs of the City are transacted in an
efficient manner and that accurate records of all City business are maintained
and made available to the public, except as otherwise provided by state law.
      15.   Provide necessary and reasonable clerical, research, and
professional assistance to boards within limitations of the budget.
      16.   Perform such other and further duties as the Council may direct.
(Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
   B.   The City Manager, in performing the foregoing duties, may:
      1.   Present recommendations and programs to the Council and participate
in any discussion by the Council of any matters pertaining to the duties of the
City Manager.
      2.   Cause the examination and investigation of the affairs of any
department or the conduct of any employee under supervision of the City
Manager.
      3.   Execute contracts on behalf of the City when authorized by the
Council. (Ord. 85-3227, 3-12-1985; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 4.05. Ineligibility; Prohibited Acts.
Except for the exercise of the right to vote, the City Manager shall not take
part in any election of Council members. This prohibition shall in no way limit
the City Manager's duty to make available public records as provided by state
law or this Charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE V. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Section 5.01. Establishment.
   A.   With the exception of the Community Police Review Board, the Council
may establish boards in addition to those required by state law and shall
specify the title, duties, length of term, qualifications of members and other
appropriate matters. The Council shall consider the available demographics of
board and commission members and applicants in making appointments in an effort
to make appointments reflective of the community. The Council may reduce or
increase a board's duties, transfer duties from one board to another or
dissolve any board, except as otherwise provided by state law or this Charter.
(Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025; Ord. 25-4966, 9-2-2025)
Section 5.02. Appointment; Removal.
The Council shall, subject to the requirements of state law, seek to provide
broad representation on all boards. The Council shall establish procedures to
give at least thirty days' notice of vacancies before they are filled and shall
encourage applications by residents. Council procedures for the removal of
members shall be consistent with state law. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord.
15-4621, 5-19-2015; Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 5.03. Rules.
   A.   The Council shall establish rules and procedures for the operation of
all boards, which must include but are not limited to, the adoption of by-laws
and rules pertaining to open meetings and open records. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-
2005)
   B.   The Council shall specify, for each board, methods for informal and
formal communication with Council, time schedules for the completion of reports
requested by Council and such rules as it deems appropriate.
   C.   A board may establish additional rules and procedures that are
consistent with state law, Council rules, and this Charter. (Ord. 76-2792, 1-2-
1976; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE VI. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES
Section 6.01. Limitations on the Amount of Campaign Contributions.
The Council, by ordinance, shall prescribe limitations on the amount of
campaign contributions made to a candidate for election to Council by a person
as defined in this Charter. (Ord. 95-3671, 3-28-1995; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-
2025)
Section 6.02. Disclosure of Contributions and Expenditures.
The Council, by ordinance, may prescribe procedures requiring the disclosure of
the amount, source and kind of contributions received and expenditures made by
(1) each candidate for election to Council and (2) any and all other persons,
for the purpose of aiding or securing the candidate's nomination or election.
(Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 6.03. Definition.
Within this article "contribution" shall be defined as that term is defined in
chapter 68A ("campaign finance") of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005;
amd. Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 6.04. Violations.
The Council, by ordinance, shall prescribe: (1) penalties for the violation of
the contribution limitations and disclosure requirements it establishes
pursuant to this Section; and (2) when appropriate, conditions for the
revocation of a candidate's right to serve on Council if elected, consistent
with state law. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE VII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 7.01. General Provisions.
   A.   Authority.
      1.   Initiative. The eligible electors have the right to propose measures
to the Council and, if the Council fails to adopt a measure so proposed without
any change in substance, to have the measure submitted to the voters at an
election.
      2.   Referendum. The eligible electors have the right to require
reconsideration by the Council of an existing measure and, if the Council fails
to repeal such measure, to have it submitted to the voters at an election.
      3.   Definition. Within this article, "measure" means all ordinances,
amendments, resolutions or motions of a legislative nature, however designated,
which (a) are of a permanent rather than temporary character and (b) include a
proposition enacting, amending or repealing a new or existing law, policy or
plan, as opposed to one providing for the execution or administration of a law,
policy or plan already enacted by Council.
   B.   Limitations.
      1.   Subject Matter. The right of initiative and referendum shall not
extend to any of the following:
         a.   Any measure of an executive or administrative nature, including,
but not limited to, personnel decisions.
         b.   The City budget.
         c.   The appropriation of money.
         d.   The levy of taxes or special assessments.
         e.   The issuance of general obligation and revenue bonds.
         f.   The letting of contracts.
         g.   Salaries of City employees.
         h.   Any measure required to be enacted by state or federal law.
         i.   Amendments to this Charter.
         j.   Amendments affecting the City zoning ordinance or the land use
maps of the comprehensive plan, including the district plan maps.
         k.   Public improvements subsequent to City Council action to
authorize acquisition of property for that public improvement, or notice to
bidders for that public improvement, whichever occurs earlier. "Public
improvement" shall mean any building or construction work.
      2.   Resubmission. No initiative or referendum petition shall be filed
within two years after the same measure or a measure substantially the same has
been submitted to the voters at an election.
      3.   Council Repeal, Amendment and Reenactment. No measure proposed by
initiative petition and adopted by the vote of the Council without submission
to the voters, or adopted by the voters pursuant to this article, may for two
years thereafter be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people, unless
provision is otherwise made in the original initiative measure. No measure
referred by referendum petition and repealed by the vote of the Council without
submission to the voters, or repealed by the voters pursuant to this article,
may be reenacted for two years thereafter except by vote of the people, unless
provision is otherwise made in the original referendum petition.
   C.   Construction.
      1.   Scope of Power. It is intended that this article confer broad
initiative and referendum powers upon the eligible electors of the City.
      2.   Initiative. It is intended that (a) no initiative petition will be
invalid because it repeals an existing measure in whole or in part by virtue of
proposing a new measure and (b) an initiative petition may amend an existing
measure.
      3.   Referendum. It is intended that a referendum petition may repeal a
measure in whole or in part.
   D.   Effect of Filing Petition. The filing of an initiative or referendum
petition does not suspend or invalidate any measure under consideration. Such
measure shall remain in full force and effect until its amendment or repeal by
Council pursuant to Section 7.05A or until a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a measure vote to repeal or amend the measure and the vote is
certified.
   E.   City Obligations. An initiative or referendum vote which repeals an
existing measure in whole or in part does not affect any obligations entered
into by the City, its agencies or any person in reliance on the measure during
the time it was in effect. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-
2025)
Section 7.02. Commencement of Proceedings; Affidavit.
   A.   Commencement. One or more qualified electors, hereinafter referred to
as the "petitioners," may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by
filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will supervise the
circulation of the petition and will be responsible for filing it in proper
form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all
relevant notices are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed
initiative measure or citing the measure sought to be reconsidered.
   B.   Affidavit. The City Clerk shall accept the affidavit for filing if on
its face it appears to have signatures of one or more qualified electors. The
City Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition forms to the petitioners the
same day the affidavit is accepted for filing. The City Clerk shall cause to be
prepared and have available to the public, forms and affidavits suitable for
the commencement of proceedings and the preparation of initiative and
referendum petitions. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 7.03. Petitions; Revocation of Signatures.
   A.   Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of
the number of persons who voted in the last regular City election, but such
signatures of eligible electors shall be no fewer than ten. (Res. 16-258, 8-29-
2016) [November 2016 Special Election]
   B.   Form and Content. All papers of a petition prepared for filing must be
substantially uniform in size and style and must be assembled as one
instrument. Each person signing shall provide, and the petition form shall
provide space for, the signature, printed name, address of the person signing
and the date the signature is executed. Petitions prepared for circulation must
contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of
the measure proposed or sought to be reconsidered. The petition filed with the
City Clerk need have attached to it only one copy of the measure being proposed
or referred.
   C.   Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition containing signatures
must have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by an eligible
elector certifying: the number of signatures on the paper, that the elector
personally circulated it, that all signatures were affixed in the elector's
presence, that the elector believes them to be genuine signatures of the
persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity
before signing to read the full text of the measure proposed or sought to be
reconsidered. Any person filing a false affidavit will be liable to criminal
penalties as provided by state law.
   D.   Time for Filing Initiative Petitions. Signatures on an initiative
petition must be secured and the petition filed within six months after the
date the affidavit required under Section
7.02A was filed.
   E.   Time for Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions may be filed
within sixty days after final adoption by the Council of the measure sought to
be reconsidered, or subsequently at any time more than two years after such
final adoption. The signatures on a referendum petition must be secured during
the sixty days after such final adoption; however, if the petition is filed
more than two years after final adoption, the signatures must be secured within
six months after the date the affidavit required under Section
7.02A was filed.
   F.   Revocation of Signature. Prior to the time a petition is filed with the
City Clerk, a signatory may revoke their signature for any reason by filing
with the City Clerk a statement of their intent to revoke their signature.
After a petition is filed a signatory may not revoke their signature. The City
Clerk shall cause to be prepared and have available to the public, forms
suitable for the revocation of petition signatures. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015;
amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 7.04. Procedure after Filing.
   A.   Validity of a Petition. A petition is valid if it contains the minimum
required signatures by eligible electors in the required form and with the
required content and accompanied by the affidavit of circulator as set forth in
Section
7.03. The petition shall be examined by the City Clerk before it is accepted
for filing. If the petition appears valid on its face it shall be accepted for
filing. If it lacks the required number of signatures it shall be considered
invalid and returned to the petitioners. Petitions which have been accepted for
filing are valid unless written objections are filed with the City Clerk within
five working days after the petition is received.
   B.   Hearing on Objections; Objections Committee. Written objections timely
filed with the City Clerk shall be considered by an objections committee made
up of the Mayor and City Clerk and one member of the Council chosen by the
Council by ballot, and a majority decision shall be final. The hearing on the
objections shall be held within ten days of receipt of the objections.
   C.   Court Review. To the extent allowed by law, court review of the
Objections Committee's actions shall be by writ of certiorari. (Ord. 15-4621,
5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 7.05. Action on Petitions.
   A.   Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
determined valid, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative
measure or reconsider the referred measure. If the Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative measure and fails to adopt a measure which is similar in
substance within sixty days, or if the Council fails to repeal the referred
measure within thirty days after the date the petition was finally determined
valid, it shall submit the proposed or referred measure to the qualified
electors of the City as hereinafter prescribed. If at any time more than thirty
days before a scheduled initiative or referendum election the Council adopts
the proposed initiative measure or adopts a measure which is similar in
substance or if the Council repeals a referred measure, the initiative or
referendum proceedings shall terminate and the proposed or referred measure
shall not be submitted to the voters.
   B.   Submission to Voters.
      1.   Initiative. If required by this section, the vote of the City on a
proposed measure shall be held at the first legally permissible election date
more than forty days after the expiration of the sixty day period provided for
consideration in Section
7.05A, provided that the initiative petition was filed no fewer than 80 days
prior to the deadline imposed by state law for the submission of ballot
questions to the Commissioner of Elections.
      2.   Referendum. If required by this section, the vote of the City on a
referred measure shall be held at the first legally permissible election date
more than forty days after the expiration of the thirty day period provided for
reconsideration in Section
7.05A, provided that the referendum petition was filed no fewer than 50 days
prior to the deadline imposed by state law for the submission of ballot
questions to the Commissioner of Elections. The Council may provide for a
special referendum election on a referred measure any time more than 120 days
after the filing of the referendum petition with the City Clerk.
   C.   Ballot. Copies of the proposed or referred measure shall be made
available to the qualified electors at the polls and shall be advertised at the
City's expense in the manner required for "questions" in section 376.5 of the
Iowa Code. The subject matter and purpose of the referred or proposed measure
shall be indicated on the ballot. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 25-4947,
2-18-2025)
Section 7.06. Results of Election.
   A.   Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
proposed initiative measure vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted
upon certification of the election results. The adopted measure shall be
treated in all respects in the same manner as measures of the same kind adopted
by the Council, except as provided in Section
7.01B(3). If conflicting measures are approved by majority vote at the same
election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall
prevail to the extent of such conflict.
   B.   Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
referred measure vote in favor of repealing the measure, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015;
amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 7.07. Prohibition on Establishment of Stricter Conditions or
Requirements.
The Council shall not set, except by Charter amendment, conditions or
requirements affecting initiative and referendum. (Ord. 15-4621, 5-19-2015;
amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
 ARTICLE VIII. CHARTER AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW
Section 8.01. Charter Amendments.
This Charter may be amended only by one of the following methods:
   A.   The Council, by resolution, may submit a proposed amendment to the
voters at the first legally permissible election date consistent with Section
7.05(B) of this Charter, and the proposed amendment becomes effective when
approved by a majority of those voting.
   B.   The Council, by ordinance, may amend the Charter. However, within
thirty (30) days of publication of the ordinance, if a petition valid under the
provisions of section 362.4 of the Code of Iowa is filed with the Council, the
Council must submit the amending ordinance to the voters at the first legally
permissible election date consistent with Section
7.05(B) of this Charter, and the amendment does not become effective until
approved by a majority of those voting.
   C.   Petitions.
      1.   Action by Council. If a petition valid under the provisions of
section 362.4 of the Code of Iowa is filed with the Council proposing an
amendment to the Charter, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed
amendment. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed amendment which is similar
in substance within sixty days, it shall submit the proposed amendment to the
qualified electors of the City as hereinafter prescribed. If at any time more
than thirty days before the scheduled election the Council adopts a proposed
amendment which is similar in substance, the amendment proceedings shall
terminate and the proposed amendment shall not be submitted to the voters.
      2.   Amendment. If required by this section, the vote of the City on the
proposed amendment shall be held at the first legally permissible election date
consistent with Section
8.01(C)(1) of this Charter, and the amendment becomes effective if approved by
a majority of those voting. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005)
      3.   Ballot. Copies of the proposed amendment shall be made available to
the qualified electors at the polls and shall be advertised at the City's
expense in the manner required for "questions" in section 376.5 of the Iowa
Code. The subject matter and purpose of the proposed amendment shall be
indicated on the ballot. (Ord. 05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
Section 8.02. Charter Review Commission.
The Council, using the procedures prescribed in Article V, shall establish a
Charter Review Commission at least once every ten years following the effective
date of this Charter. The Commission, consisting of at least nine members,
shall review the existing Charter and may, within twelve months recommend any
Charter amendments that it deems fit to the Council. The Council shall either
exercise its power of amendment pursuant to Section
8.01B of the Charter on a matter recommended by the Commission or submit such
amendments to the voters in the form prescribed by the Commission, and an
amendment becomes effective when approved by a majority of those voting. (Ord.
05-4152, 3-1-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4947, 2-18-2025)
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
The home rule charter is set out in this volume as adopted by the voters on
November 15, 1973, and by ordinance 76-2792, on January 2, 1976. The following
table shows the disposition of amendments to the charter:
Ordinance     DDisposition
Number
Ordinance       DatDisposition
Number
77-2826     3-15-1977  6.01
77-2858     9-6-1977   7.05B
77-2864     9-6-1977   3.01
                       Definitions 7,8,
                       2.01,
                       2.03,
                       2.05 -
                       2.08,
                       3.01 -
85-3227     3-12-1985  3.03,
                       4.04,
                       5.02,
                       6.04,
                       7.01 -
                       7.05,
                       8.01,
                       8.02
85-3228     3-12-1985  6.02
85-3273     12-17-1985 2.01
90-3462     6-26-1990  7.03A,
                       7.04A
                       2.06B,
                       2.08C,E,
95-3671     3-28-1995  3.01A,
                       6.01,
                       7.04D
                       Definitions 11,12,
                       2.03,
                       2.05,
                       2.11,
                       2.12B,
                       3.01A,
                       3.02A,
                       4.04A,
                       5.02,
                       5.03A,
05-4152     3-1-2005   6.02,
                       6.03,
                       6.04,
                       7.01,
                       7.02,
                       7.03B,C,E,
                       7.04A,B,C,
                       7.05,
                       7.06,
                       8.01,
                       8.02
Res. 07-262 8-31-2007  5.01
                       Preamble,
                       2.06B,
                       3.01,
                       4.02A,
                       5.01,
                       5.02,
15-4621     5-19-2015  6.03,
                       7.01,
                       7.03,
                       7.04,
                       7.05,
                       7.06,
                       7.07
Petition    11-2016    7.03A
                       Preamble,
                       1.01,
                       2.01,
                       2.08D,F,
                       2.12B,C,
                       3.01,
                       4.01,
25-4947     02-18-2025 4.03,
                       4.04A,
                       5.01A,
                       7.01B,
                       7.03C,F,
                       7.05B,
                       8.01A,B,C. In addition, the capitalization of several
                       words and titles was amended throughout the Charter.
25-4966     9-2-2025   5.01
                      
 
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Official City Code
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: OFFICIAL CITY CODE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Iowa City. This city
code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CITY CODE or CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (1994 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
 1-2-1 of this title. (1994 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (1994 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any
person having a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain said
code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. The person receiving
replacement pages shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered or made available through the office of the city
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations and not requiring the vote
of the people; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of
a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, except as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1994 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance, after it becomes effective, does not revive
an ordinance previously repealed, and no new ordinance shall be construed or
held to repeal a former ordinance unless expressly so stated. However, any
offense committed against or under any such former ordinance shall not be
affected, and any conviction, penalty, abatement, punishment, judgment, decree
or other court order shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically so ordered by a court of law or equity.
   B.   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code. (1978 Code §1-5; amd. 1994 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Conflicting Provisions
1-3-4: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this city code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included, provided
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this city
code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. (1994 Code)
   B.   Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the
approved usage of the language; technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed
according to such meaning. (1978 Code §1-2)
   C.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter", "article",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
As used in this code, the following definitions shall apply:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   ATTEST: To affirm to be true or genuine; to certify.
   CALENDAR YEAR: January 1 through December 31.
   CITY: The city of Iowa City, county of Johnson, state of Iowa and shall
extend to its several officers, agents and employees.
   CITY CODE: The city code of the city of Iowa City.
   COMPUTING TIME; HOLIDAYS: In computing time, the first day shall be excluded
and the last included unless the last falls on Sunday or a holiday, in which
case, the time prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the
following Monday or first working day.
   COUNTY: The county of Johnson in the state of Iowa.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer
of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed
to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize other agents or
employees to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless
the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Iowa City".
   LAND, REAL ESTATE, REAL PROPERTY: Includes land, buildings, structures,
tenements, hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein,
equitable as well as legal.
   MONTH, YEAR, DAY: The word "month" means a calendar month, the word "year"
means a twelve (12) month period, and the word "day" means a calendar day
unless specified otherwise.
   OATH, AFFIRMATION: The word "oath" includes affirmations in all cases where
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases, the word
"swear" includes "affirm".
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICIALS, OFFICERS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS: Whenever reference is made to
officials, officers, boards and commissions by title only, i.e., "council",
"clerk", "the mayor", such terms shall be deemed to refer to the officials,
officers, boards and commissions of the city of Iowa City.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, joint venture, firm, partnership,
association, organization, responsible party, government or any other group or
entity acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case the person is unable to write, by proper
mark. Due to a physical handicap, if a person is unable to make a written
signature or mark, that person may substitute the following in lieu of a
signature required by law:
   A.   The person's name written by another upon the request and in the
presence of the person with a disability; or
   B.   A rubber stamp reproduction of the name of the person with a disability
or facsimile of the actual signature when adopted by the person with a
disability for all purposes requiring a signature and then only when affixed by
that person or another upon request and in the presence of the person with a
disability. (1978 Code §2-1; amd. 1994 Code)
1-3-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of this title is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or section of this code, the provision which
establishes the more specific and/or the higher standards for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. Nothing in
this title shall be construed to repeal additional remedies or rights of action
arising from a violation of any ordinance or code section. (1978 Code §1-2;
amd. 1994 Code)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, including when such catchlines are amended, unless
expressly so provided. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Violations; Criminal Penalty
1-4-2: Civil Penalties For Municipal Infractions
1-4-3: Election Of Remedies
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PENALTY:
   A.   State Law Violations Declared Simple Misdemeanor: Any act or failure to
act defined and made a simple misdemeanor under the code of Iowa, as amended,
or as may hereafter be so defined by a statute of the state is hereby declared
to be a simple misdemeanor under the ordinances and this code, provided the
regulation or prohibition of such acts or failures to act is now within or
shall hereafter come within the scope of the powers granted expressly or by
implication to the city as a municipal corporation. (1978 Code §1-8; amd. 1994
Code)
   B.   Criminal Penalty: The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, an offense or a simple misdemeanor by this code or any ordinance or
code herein adopted by reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act
or duty required by this code or any ordinance or code herein adopted by
reference, is a simple misdemeanor and is, unless another penalty is specified,
or the violation is scheduled under state law, punishable by a penalty with a
fine prescribed in Section 903.1(1)(a) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-4350, 6-30-
2009; amd. Ord. 15-4620, 5-19-2015; Ord. 20-4827, 7-21-2020)
1-4-2: CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   ENVIRONMENTAL INFRACTION: A municipal infraction that is a violation of this
code or standards established by the city in consultation with the state
department of natural resources or its successor.
   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION: A violation of this code punishable by civil penalty
and such alternative relief sought by the city and as provided by state law.
(1978 Code §1-20; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Violations, Penalties And Alternative Relief:
      1.   Any violation of this code, with the exception of any violation
which is a felony, aggravated misdemeanor or serious misdemeanor under state
law or if the violation is a simple misdemeanor under the code of Iowa, as
amended, is a municipal infraction.
      2.   Unless another civil penalty is provided elsewhere in this code for
a specific violation, a municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable as
provided in the following schedule of civil penalties for each day a violation
exists or continues: (1978 Code §1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
 
First offense                         $ 100.00
Second offense                        250.00
Third and subsequent offenses         500.00
Environmental infraction each offense 1,000.00
 
   (Ord. 98-3849, 8-25-1998)
      3.   Violations arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard
or requirement referred to in 40 CFR section 403.8, by an industrial user may
be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
      4.   Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is permitted to
exist constitutes a separate offense.
      5.   Seeking a penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude
the city from seeking alternative relief in the same action. Such alternative
relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement, injunctive
relief or an action at law for damages.
      6.   A person committing an environmental infraction is not subject to a
civil penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         a.   The violation results solely from a person conducting an initial
startup, cleaning, repairing, performing, scheduled maintenance, testing or
conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
         b.   The person notifies the city of the violation within twenty four
(24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
         c.   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
(8) hours.
         d.   The city shall not enforce this section against a person
committing an environmental violation until the city offers to participate in
informal negotiations with the person. If a person accepts the offer, the city
and the person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues
alleged to be the basis of the violation. (1978 Code §1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Civil Citations For Municipal And/Or Environmental Infractions:
      1.   An officer authorized by the city to enforce the code may issue a
civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.
      2.   The citation may be served by personal service as provided in rule
of civil procedure 56.1, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at the
defendant's last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner as provided in rules 60 and 60.1, Iowa rules of civil
procedure.
      3.   One copy of the citation shall be filed with the clerk of the
district court, and one copy shall be retained by the issuing officer.
      4.   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has
been committed and shall contain the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the defendant.
         b.   The name and/or description of the infraction, attested to by the
officer issuing the citation, including specific reference to the city code
section or ordinance under which the person is being cited.
         c.   The location and time of the infraction.
         d.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought or both.
         e.   The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid or
the offense cured or abated.
         f.   The time and place of court appearance.
         g.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
         h.   The enforcement official may, but shall not be required to, give
notice to abate prior to the issuance of a civil citation for a repeat offense
involving the same property and occurring within one year of the prior
violation. (1978 Code §1-22; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Enhanced Penalties For Certain Municipal Infractions:
      1.   Civil penalties for municipal infractions of certain sections of
this code as noted therein shall be punishable as provided in the following
schedule for each day a violation exists or continues:
 
First offense   $250.00
Second offense  500.00
Third offense   750.00
 
(Ord. 04-4135, 8-3-2004; amd. Ord. 09-4332, 3-10-2009)
      2.   The civil penalty for violation of sections
14-2A-5,
14-2B-5, and subsection
17-5-19X1 of this code shall be punishable as provided in the following
schedule for each day a violation exists or continues:
 
First offense                  $ 750.00
Second and subsequent offense  1,000.00
 
(Ord. 10-4390, 5-10-2010)
      3.   The civil penalty for violation of section
 17-5-14 of this code shall be punishable as provided in the following schedule
for each day a violation exists or continues:
 
First offense                 $ 500.00
Second offense                750.00
Third and subsequent offense  1,000.00
 
(Ord. 14-4570, 2-18-2014)
1-4-3: ELECTION OF REMEDIES:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense, provided the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery. (1994 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 1
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Council Districts
1-5-2: Effective Time Of Elected Officers
1-5-3: Compensation
1-5-4: Mayor
1-5-5: Meetings
1-5-6: Rules Of Procedure
 
Notes
1 1. See Charter art. II.
1-5-1: CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS 1 :
There are hereby established in the City three (3) City Council Districts. The
following "voting precincts", as defined in chapter 9 of this title, shall
comprise the three (3) City Council Districts:
   A.   City Council District A: Voting precincts 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15.
   B.   City Council District B: Voting precincts 1, 6, 12, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24.
   C.   City Council District C: Voting precincts 3, 4, 5, 11, 19, 20, 21, 22.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. See Charter §2.02 for requirement.
1-5-2: EFFECTIVE TIME OF ELECTED OFFICERS:
All elected City officers shall take office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of
January 1 which is not a Sunday or legal holiday, following the officers'
election. (1978 Code §2-19; amd. 1994 Code)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION 1 :
   A.   City Council Members: Members of the City Council (with the exception
of Mayor) shall be compensated at the rate of seven thousand seventy two
dollars ($7,072.00) annually effective January 1, 2010. Beginning January 1,
2020, members of the City Council shall be compensated at the rate of eleven
thousand nine hundred sixty dollars ($11,960.00) annually.
   B.   Mayor: Compensation for the Mayor will be the same rate as a City
Council member plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. Beginning
January 1, 2020, the Mayor shall be compensated at the rate of fourteen
thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($14,950.00) annually.
   C.   Adjustment: Staff will adjust City Council compensation based on an
annual adjustment for inflation. The annual adjustment for inflation will be
equivalent to the cumulative annual percent change in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) - All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), Midwest Region, all items, using the third
quarter ending September 30 of the prior year and September 30 of the current
year. The calculated amount will be included in the annual budget for review by
the City Council in each regular election year in accordance with State Code.
   D.   Health Insurance: Beginning January 1, 2004, health insurance shall be
available to a Council member on such terms and conditions as health insurance
is available to City employees, except that a City Council member's
participation in the City's group health insurance plan shall be at the Council
member's own expense and at no cost to the City. Beginning January 1, 2020
health insurance shall be available to Council member on such terms and
conditions as health insurance is available to half-time permanent City
employees. (Ord. 18-4774, 12-4-2018)
 
Notes
1 3. See Charter §2.05 for requirement.
1-5-4: MAYOR 1 :
   A.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The Mayor shall act as the official representative of the City. The
Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts and
officers of the State. The Mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and
perform all the duties provided by law. (1978 Code §2-46; amd. 1994 Code)
      2.   The Mayor shall sign documents on behalf of the City as required by
law. (1978 Code §2-45; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Mayor Pro Tem:
      1.   The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor in the event that the Mayor is
unable to attend City Council meetings or is unable to act in the capacity as
Mayor because of legal disability or absence from the community. In the absence
or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem's acts as such shall have the
same force and effect and legality as though performed by the regularly elected
Mayor, and such Mayor Pro Tem shall have the power to sign all resolutions and/
or ordinances and execute all contracts or documents adopted or approved by the
City Council and do all other things incident to such actions and shall have
all powers to initiate any emergency measures while acting as Mayor Pro Tem as
those possessed by the Mayor.
      2.   In the event any State or Federal law requires the selection of a
presiding officer pro tem at a specific meeting of the City Council due to the
absence of the Mayor for the purpose of a specific project, bond issue or other
proposal, the City Council shall select a presiding officer pro tem at that
meeting for that purpose.
      3.   In the absence of the Mayor Pro Tem, the City Council may elect from
one of its number a temporary Mayor Pro Tem. (1978 Code §2-42)
 
Notes
1 1. See Charter §2.06 for requirements.
1-5-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   Organizational Meeting Of Newly Elected City Council: The new elected
City Council shall meet for the first time not earlier than twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon on January 2 which is not a Sunday or legal holiday and not later than
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 6. (1978 Code §2-20)
   B.   Regular Meetings: The time and place for all regular meetings of the
City Council shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-21)
   C.   Special Meetings: The procedure for the calling of a special meeting of
the City Council shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Such procedure
shall include, but shall not be limited to, who may call such special meeting,
what notice is required thereof and how such notice shall be given to the City
Council members and any other matters determined by the City Council to be
necessary thereto. (1978 Code §2-22)
1-5-6: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
   A.   Robert's Rules Of Order: The rules of parliamentary practices comprised
in the current edition of "Robert's Rules of Order", as amended, shall govern
the sessions of the City Council in all cases in which they are applicable and
where they are not inconsistent with the standing rules of the City Council or
the laws of the State 1 . (1978 Code §2-23)
   B.   Voting Rights: The presiding officer of the City Council, whether the
regularly elected presiding officer or presiding officer pro tem, shall have a
right to cast a vote as a member of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-43)
 
Notes
1 1. See Charter §2.09.
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Personnel Procedures, Rules, Regulations And Compensation Plans
1-6-1: PERSONNEL PROCEDURES, RULES, REGULATIONS AND COMPENSATION PLANS:
   A.   Establishment By Resolution; Amendments: Personnel procedures, rules,
regulations and compensation plans for the employees of the city shall be
established by resolution of the city council at a regular or special meeting.
Such procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans may be amended by
resolution of the city council at a later meeting, and the adoption of any
procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans shall not operate to
establish any employment contract between the city and any employee, whether
directly or by implication, and shall not be construed to alter the general
nature of at-will employment recognized by state law. The city may, also, by
collective bargaining, adopt rules and regulations in regard to personnel
practices. (1978 Code §2-87; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Copies On File; Notice: Copies of the procedures, rules, regulations
and compensation plans referred to in subsection a above shall be filed in the
office of the city clerk and the city library. The city manager is hereby
authorized and directed to establish such procedures as are necessary to give
notice to and familiarize the city employees and prospective employees of such
procedures, rules, regulations and compensation plans. (1978 Code §2-88; amd.
1994 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS; CITY ATTORNEY, CITY CLERK, CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-7-1: Oath
1-7-2: Appointment And Removal
1-7-3: Powers And Duties
1-7-4: Facilities And Staff
1-7-5: Compensation
1-7-1: OATH:
Before undertaking the duties of the office, the City Attorney, City Clerk and
City Manager shall take an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of the State of Iowa and, to the best of the person's
ability, faithfully and honestly perform the duties of the office. (1978 Code
§2-55; amd. 1994 Code)
1-7-2: APPOINTMENT 1  AND REMOVAL:
The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney and City Manager, who must be
qualified electors, residing within the City. The City Council shall appoint a
City Clerk. Residency shall be preferred but not required for the City Clerk.
Within ten (10) calendar days after appointment, each appointee shall qualify
by taking the oath. Such oath shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
In the event the City Attorney, City Clerk or City Manager is removed from
office, such removal must be by a majority vote of City Council. (Ord. 17-4714,
6-20-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See charter §2.08.
1-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall exercise all powers and
perform all duties as required by this Code and City ordinances, State law and
as directed by City Council. (1994 Code)
1-7-4: FACILITIES AND STAFF:
   A.   The City Council shall provide the City Attorney, City Clerk and City
Manager with such facilities and staff as necessary.
   B.   City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall have the authority to
appoint or remove office staff, respectively. (1994 Code)
1-7-5: COMPENSATION:
The City Attorney, City Clerk and City Manager shall be paid such compensation
as set by resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §2-67; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE DEPARTMENTS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Administrative Service Departments Organized
1-8-2: Cooperation With Other Departments
1-8-3: Department Heads
1-8-4: Duties Of Department Heads
1-8-5: Additional City Staff
1-8-1: ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE DEPARTMENTS ORGANIZED:
The administrative service of the City shall be divided under the City Manager
into the following departments and heads thereof:
Department of Finance                  Director of Finance
Department of Police                   Chief of Police
Department of Fire                     Fire Chief
Department of Public Works             Director of Public Works
Department of Parks and Recreation     Director of Parks and Recreation
Department of Neighborhood and          Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services                    Development Services
Department of Transportation Services   Director of Transportation Services
 
(1978 Code §2-1; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 11-4459, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-4574, 3-5-
2014; Ord. 15-4617, 4-21-2015; Ord. 17-4713, 6-20-2017)
After March 4, 2014, any references to "Director of Housing and Inspection
Services" or "Director of Planning and Community Development" shall mean the
"Director of Neighborhood and Development Services", with the latter having all
the powers and duties granted to the former under the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 14-4574, 3-4-2014)
1-8-2: COOPERATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
Each department shall fully cooperate with all other departments and officers
of the City and shall furnish, upon the direction of the City Manager, any
other departments and officers such service, labor and materials as may be
requested by the head of such departments or officers and as facilities shall
reasonably permit, all as the same procedure and subject to the same audit and
control as other expenditures are incurred. (1978 Code §2-2; amd. 1994 Code)
1-8-3: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The heads of departments shall:
   A.   Be immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective
administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned
thereto.
   B.   Keep informed as to the latest practice in their particular field and
shall put into place, with the approval of the City Manager, such new practices
as appear to be of benefit to the service of the City and to the public at
large.
   C.   Submit department reports to the City Manager, as may be required.
   D.   Establish and maintain a system of records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental
activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the City Manager.
   E.   Have power, when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and to
remove departmental staff, subject to personnel procedures 1  of the City.
   F.   Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all City property and
equipment used in the department. (1978 Code §2-3; amd. 1994 Code)
   G.   Reside within the Municipal limits of the City of Iowa City. These
residency requirements are a condition of employment. (Ord. 11-4459, 11-22-
2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-6-1 of this title.
1-8-4: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS:
Each department head shall perform the duties required of the office by State
law, this Code and the ordinances of the City and such other duties required by
the City Manager. (1978 Code §2-4; amd. 1994 Code)
1-8-5: ADDITIONAL CITY STAFF:
In addition to City departments, nothing herein shall preclude the City
Manager, with the approval of the City Council, to create any other positions
deemed necessary and appropriate to the good order and management of the City.
(1994 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CITY ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Permanent Registration
1-9-2: Limitation On Campaign Contributions
1-9-3: Voting Precincts
1-9-1: PERMANENT REGISTRATION:
   A.   Permanent Registration Required: There is hereby adopted in the city
the plan of permanent registration for voters therein, and no qualified voter
shall be permitted to vote at any election unless such voter shall register as
provided in the code of Iowa, as amended.
   B.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, the word "election" shall
be held to mean general, city, special, school or primary elections and shall
include state, county and city elections. (1978 Code §10-1; amd. 1994 Code)
1-9-2: LIMITATION ON CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS 1 :
   A.   Definitions:
   CAMPAIGN FUNCTION: Any meeting related to a candidate's campaign for
election.
   CANDIDATE: Any individual who has taken affirmative action to seek
nomination or election to a municipal public office.
   CANDIDATE'S COMMITTEE: The committee designated by the candidate to receive
contributions as defined in chapter 56 of the state code of Iowa.
   CONTRIBUTION:
      1.   A gift, loan, advance, deposit, rebate, refund, or transfer of money
or a gift in kind.
      2.   The payment, by any person other than a candidate, of compensation
for the personal services of another person which are rendered to a candidate
for any such purpose.
      3.   "Contribution" shall not include a person's time donated to aid or
promote a candidate's nomination for election. "Contribution" shall not include
refreshments served at a campaign function so long as such refreshments do not
exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) in value or transportation provided to a
candidate so long as its value computed at a rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per
mile does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in value in any single
election.
      4.   "Contribution" shall not include something provided to a candidate
for the candidate's personal consumption or use and not intended for or on
behalf of the candidate's committee.
   ELECTION: Any primary, general, or special election held in the city.
   MUNICIPAL PUBLIC OFFICE: The city council.
   PERSON: Without limitation, any individual, corporation, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership
or association, labor union, political action committee, or any other legal
entity. (Ord. 01-3955, 2-6-2001; amd. Ord. 03-4068, 4-8-2003)
   B.   Limitation On Campaign Contributions By Persons: With regard to
elections to fill a municipal public office:
      1.   No person shall make, and no candidate or candidate's committee
shall solicit or accept, any contribution which will cause the total amount
contributed by any such contributor with respect to a single election in
support of or opposition to such candidate, to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   A person shall not make a contribution in the name of another
person, and a person shall not knowingly accept a contribution made by one
person in the name of another. (Ord. 01-3955, 2-6-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See charter art. VI.
1-9-3: VOTING PRECINCTS:
   A.   Precincts Established: There are hereby established in the city the
voting precincts set out in this section. (1978 Code §10-34)
   B.   Boundaries Of Precincts: The area encompassed within the voting
precincts shall be indicated as follows:
      Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of 1st Avenue and Court Street;
east on Court Street to Friendship Street; north on Friendship Street to
Washington Street; east on Washington Street to Scott Boulevard; north along
Scott Boulevard to Rochester Avenue; west on Rochester Avenue to Post Road;
south on Post Road to Princeton Road; northwest along Princeton Road to 1st
Avenue; south along 1st Avenue to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of Sunset and Benton Streets;
west on Benton Street to Emerald Street; north on Emerald Street to Melrose
Avenue; starting in an easterly direction along Melrose Avenue and continuing
along the corporate limits of University Heights to the Iowa Interstate Railway
tracks; west on the railroad tracks to Mormon Trek Boulevard; south on Mormon
Trek Boulevard to Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue to Westgate Street;
south on Westgate Street to Keswick Drive; along Keswick Drive to the
intersection with Benton Street; east on Benton Street to Teg Drive; south on
Teg Drive and continuing east along Aber Avenue to Sunset Street; Sunset Street
to Ashley Drive; along Ashley Drive to Wylde Green Road; along Wylde Green Road
to Edingale Drive; along Edingale Drive to Weeber Street; north on Weeber
Street to Benton Street; east on Benton Street to Oaknoll Drive; north on
Oaknoll Drive to Oakcrest Street; west on Oakcrest Street to George Street;
north on George Street to the corporate limits of University Heights and
continuing westerly along said corporate limits to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railway
tracks and Mormon Trek Boulevard; northeast on Mormon Trek Boulevard to Highway
6; east on Highway 6 to Iowa Avenue; east on Iowa Avenue to the Iowa River;
south along the Iowa River to the Iowa Interstate Railway bridge; then west
along the railroad tracks to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 4: Beginning at the intersection of Newton Road and Riverside
Drive; west on Riverside Drive and Highway 6 to the Iowa City Corporate Limits;
north along the corporate limits to the Iowa River; proceeding west and north
along the Iowa River to a point where the river intersects with the extended N
boundary line of lot 108 of Peninsula Neighborhood Phase 2A; southeasterly to
Walker Circle and continuing along Foster Road to Dubuque Street; south on
Dubuque Street to Park Road; west on Park Road to the west bank of the Iowa
River; south along the river to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 5: Beginning at the intersection of Park Road and Dubuque
Street; south on Dubuque Street to Market Street; west on Market Street to
Clinton Street; south on Clinton to Iowa Avenue; east on Iowa Avenue to Dubuque
Street; south on Dubuque Street to College Street; east on College Street to
Linn Street; south on Linn Street to Burlington Street; west on Burlington
Street to the Iowa River; north along the river to Park Road; east on Park Road
to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 6: Beginning at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railroad
tracks and Scott Boulevard; west along the tracks to 2nd Avenue; north on 2nd
Avenue to J Street; west on J Street to 3rd Avenue; north on 3rd Avenue to I
Street; west on I Street to 5th Avenue; north on 5th Avenue to F Street; east
on F Street to 4th Avenue; north on 4th Avenue to Muscatine Avenue; east on
Muscatine Avenue to the Iowa City corporate limits and continuing along said
corporate limits to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 7: Beginning at the intersection of Walden Road and Mormon Trek
Boulevard; north along Mormon Trek Boulevard to Bartelt Road; along Bartelt
Road to Roberts Road; along Roberts Road to Westwinds Drive; north along
Westwinds Drive to Melrose Avenue; west along Melrose Avenue to Hawkeye Park
Road; along Hawkeye Park Road to Mormon Trek Boulevard; north on Mormon Trek
Boulevard to the Iowa Interstate Railway and the Iowa City corporate limits;
westerly and continuing along said corporate limits to Melrose Avenue; east on
Melrose Avenue to Galway Drive; along Galway Drive to Donegal Court; southerly
along Donegal Court to Tipperary Road; southerly along Tipperary Road to its
intersection with the NW corner of lot 195 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10;
along the western boundary of said lot 195 to its SW corner; easterly to the SE
corner of lot 194 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10; southerly to Willow Creek;
easterly to the west boundary of Shannon Drive; southerly along Shannon Drive
to Irving Avenue; northerly and easterly along Irving Avenue to Jensen Street;
south along Jensen Street to Walden Road; northeasterly along Walden Road to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
      Precinct 8: Beginning at the SE corner of 1715 Mormon Trek Boulevard
where Mormon Trek Boulevard and Hwy 218 intersect; thence NW and continuing
along the Iowa City corporate limits to Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue
to Galway Drive; along Galway Drive to Donegal Court; southerly along Donegal
Court to Tipperary Road; southerly along Tipperary Road to where it intersects
with the western boundary of lot 195 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10;
southerly along said western boundary and continuing easterly to the SE corner
of lot 194 Galway Hills Subdivision Part 10; southerly to Willow Creek;
easterly to the west boundary of Shannon Drive; southerly along Shannon Drive
to Irving Avenue; northerly and easterly along Irving Avenue to Jensen Street;
south along Jensen Street to Walden Road; northeasterly along Walden Road to
Mormon Trek Boulevard; south along Mormon Trek Boulevard to the point of
beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
      Precinct 9: Beginning at the intersection of Mormon Trek Boulevard and
Melrose Avenue; east on Melrose Avenue to Westgate Street; south on Westgate
Street to Keswick Drive; south on Keswick Drive to Benton Street; east on
Benton Street to Teg Drive; south along Teg Drive and Aber Avenue to Sunset
Street; south on Sunset Street to the centerline of the southbound lane of
Highway 1; west along the centerline of the southbound lane of Highway 1;
crossing Highway 218 and continuing southwesterly along the centerline of the
southbound lane of Highway 1 to Naples Avenue; southeast to the Iowa City
corporate limits; southwest along the corporate limits to where the Iowa City
corporate limits shift north at Kitty Lee Road; north along Kitty Lee Road and
continuing along said corporate limits to the SE corner of 1715 Mormon Trek
Boulevard which is the intersection of the right-of-ways of Mormon Trek
Boulevard and Highway 218; north along Mormon Trek Boulevard to Bartelt Road;
along Bartelt Road to Roberts Road; along Roberts Road to Westwinds Drive;
north along Westwinds Drive to Melrose Avenue; west along Melrose Avenue to
Hawkeye Park Road; along Hawkeye Park Road to Mormon Trek Boulevard; south on
Mormon Trek Boulevard to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
      Precinct 10: Beginning at the intersection of Highway 6 and the Iowa
River; east along Highway 6 to Boyrum Street; then south on Boyrum Street to
Southgate Avenue; then east on Southgate Avenue to Keokuk Street; then south on
Keokuk Street to Sandusky Drive; then east on Sandusky Drive to Taylor Drive;
then south on Taylor Drive to Burns Avenue; then east on Burns Avenue to
Sycamore Street; then south on Sycamore Street to the Iowa City corporate
limits; then following along the Iowa City corporate limits to the point where
the corporate limits intersects the centerline of the CRANDIC Railroad in
Section 21, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then continuing north along said
centerline of the CRANDIC to the centerline of the Iowa River; then north along
said centerline to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
      Precinct 11: Beginning at the intersection of Burlington and Gilbert
Streets; south on Gilbert Street to Highway 6; west on Highway 6 to Miller
Avenue; north on Miller Avenue extended to the Iowa Interstate Railroad; east
along the railroad to the Iowa River; north along the river to Burlington
Street; east on Burlington Street to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 12: Beginning at the intersection of Industrial Park Road and
Highway 6; north on Industrial Park Road and the centerline of Industrial Park
Road extended to the centerline of the Iowa Interstate Railroad; then east on
said centerline to the centerline of Scott Boulevard; then north to the north
right-of-way line of the Iowa Interstate Railroad; then southeasterly along
said right-of-way to the west line of the southeast quarter of Section 19,
Township 79 N, Range 5 W; then following the Iowa City corporate limits north,
east, south, west, south, east, south, west, south, west, north, west, south,
and westerly along the Iowa City corporate limits to the east line of Section
24, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then southerly along said east line to the
centerline of Hwy 6; then northwesterly, south, west, south, west, south, west,
south, west, south, and west to the east right-of-way line of Soccer Park Road;
then southerly along the east right-of-way of Soccer Park Road to Napoleon
Street; then west along Napoleon Street to the intersection with the west
right-of-way line of Soccer Park Road; then along the west right-of-way line of
Soccer Park Road and Iowa City corporate limits northerly to the south line of
the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then following
the Iowa City corporate limits westerly and northerly to the north right-of-way
line of Nursery Lane; then following the Iowa City corporate limits east,
north, east, south, east, north, east, north, and west to the intersection of
Sycamore Street and the south line of Section 23, Township 79 N, Range 6 W;
then north on Sycamore Street to California Avenue; then east on California
Avenue to Miami Drive; then southwest on Miami Drive to Nevada Avenue; then
southeast on Nevada Avenue to Lakeside Drive; then east and north on Lakeside
Drive to Highway 6 and to the point of beginning. Due to annexations that
occurred after the 2010 federal census, the annexed portion of Iowa City
located within the census block identified by GEOID 191030105001112 is part of
this Iowa City Precinct 12.
      Precinct 13: Beginning at the intersection of Benton Street and Miller
Avenue; south on Miller Avenue to Highway 1; east on Highway 1 to the Iowa
River; south on the Iowa River to the centerline of the CRANDIC Railroad;
southwesterly along said centerline to its intersection with the Iowa City
corporate limits just south of Mormon Trek Boulevard; then west, north, west,
north, northwesterly, and southwesterly along said corporate limits to the west
line of Section 21, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; then following the Iowa City
corporate limits south, easterly, south, and westerly to the east right-of-way
line of US Highway 218; southeasterly along said right-of-way to the south line
of Section 20, Township 79 N, Range 6 W; west along said south line to the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 20, northerly on said west line
and the centerline of Naples Avenue to the centerline of Highway 1;
northeasterly along the centerline of Highway 1 to its intersection with Sunset
Street extended; northwesterly on Sunset Street to Ashley Drive; along Ashley
Drive to Wylde Green Road; along Wylde Green Road to Edingale Drive; along
Edingale Drive to Weeber Street; along Weeber Street to Benton Street; east on
Benton Street to Oaknoll Drive; north on Oaknoll Drive to Oakcrest Street; west
on Oakcrest Street to George Street; north on George Street to the University
Heights corporate limits; following said corporate limits north, east, north,
and east to the centerline of the Iowa Interstate Railroad; southeast along
said centerline to a point south of the southern-most corner of Brookland Park;
south along an extension of Miller Avenue and continuing along Miller Avenue to
Benton Street; west along Benton Street to the point of beginning. Due to
annexations that occurred after the 2010 federal census, the annexed portion of
Iowa City located within the census block identified by GEOID 191030104004015
is part of the West Lucas Township Precinct.
      Precinct 14: Beginning at the intersection of Highway 6 and Sycamore
Street; north on Sycamore Street to Lower Muscatine Road; northwest on Lower
Muscatine Road to Kirkwood Avenue; west along Kirkwood Avenue to Gilbert
Street; south along Gilbert Street to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to Boyrum
Street; south on Boyrum Street to Southgate Avenue; east along Southgate Avenue
to Keokuk Street; south on Keokuk Street to Sandusky Drive; east on Sandusky
Drive to Taylor Drive; north on Taylor Drive to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to
Sycamore Street and the point of beginning.
      Precinct 15: Beginning at the intersection of Burns Avenue and Taylor
Drive; north on Taylor Drive to Highway 6; east on Highway 6 to Sycamore
Street; north on Sycamore Street to Lower Muscatine Road; northwest on Lower
Muscatine Road to Pine Street; north on Pine Street to the Iowa Interstate
Railway; southeast along the railroad to its intersection with Industrial Park
Road extended; south along Industrial Park Road to Highway 6 and crossing
Highway 6 to Lakeside Drive; south on Lakeside Drive to Nevada Avenue; north on
Nevada Avenue to Miami Drive; north on Miami Drive to California Avenue; west
on California Avenue to Sycamore Street; south on Sycamore Street to Burns
Avenue; west on Burns Avenue to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 16: Beginning at the intersection of Muscatine Avenue and Scott
Boulevard; north on Scott Boulevard to Washington Street; west on Washington
Street to Friendship Street; south on Friendship Street to Court Street; west
on Court Street to 1st Avenue; south on 1st Avenue to Friendship Street; west
on Friendship Street to 5th Avenue; south on 5th Avenue to Muscatine Avenue;
following Muscatine Avenue east to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 17: Beginning at the intersection of 5th Avenue and Muscatine
Avenue; northwest on Muscatine Avenue to Burlington Street; west on Burlington
Street to Governor Street; north on Governor Street to Jefferson Street; east
on Jefferson Street to Parsons Avenue; north on Parsons Avenue to Rochester
Avenue; east along Rochester Avenue to 1st Avenue; south on 1st Avenue to
Friendship Street; west on Friendship Street to 5th Avenue; south on 5th Avenue
to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 18: Beginning at the intersection of Muscatine Avenue and
Burlington Street; west along Burlington Street to Governor Street; south along
Governor Street to Bowery Street; west along Bowery Street to Lucas Street;
south along Lucas Street to the Iowa Interstate Railroad tracks; west on the
tracks to Gilbert Street; south on Gilbert Street to Kirkwood Avenue; east on
Kirkwood Avenue to Lower Muscatine Road; southeast along Lower Muscatine Road
to Pine Street; north on Pine Street to the railroad tracks; southeast along
the tracks to 2nd Avenue; north on 2nd Avenue to J Street; west on J Street to
3rd Avenue; north on 3rd Avenue to I Street; west on I Street to 5th Avenue;
north on 5th Avenue to F Street; east on F Street to 4th Avenue; north on 4th
Avenue to Muscatine Avenue; northwest along Muscatine Avenue to the point of
beginning.
      Precinct 19: Beginning at the intersection of Dodge Street and Bowery
Street; east on Bowery Street to Lucas Street; south on Lucas Street to the
Iowa Interstate Railroad tracks; west on the railroad tracks to Gilbert Street;
north on Gilbert Street to Burlington Street; west on Burlington Street to Linn
Street; north on Linn Street to College Street; east on College Street to Van
Buren Street; south on Van Buren to Burlington Street; east on Burlington
Street to Dodge Street; south on Dodge Street to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 20: Beginning at the intersection of Dodge Street and Burlington
Street; west on Burlington Street to Van Buren Street; north on Van Buren
Street to College Street; west on College Street to Dubuque Street; north on
Dubuque Street to Iowa Avenue; west on Iowa Avenue to Clinton Street; north on
Clinton Street to Market Street; east on Market Street to Dodge Street; south
on Dodge Street to Jefferson Street; east on Jefferson Street to Governor
Street; south on Governor Street to Bowery Street; west on Bowery Street to
Dodge Street; north on Dodge Street to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 21: Beginning at the intersection of Governor Street and
Jefferson Street; west on Jefferson Street to Dodge Street; north on Dodge
Street to Market Street; west on Market Street to Dubuque Street; north on
Dubuque Street to Kimball Road; east on Kimball Road to Governor Street; south
on Governor Street to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 22: Beginning at the intersection of Gilbert Street and Kimball
Road; west on Kimball Road to Dubuque Street; north on Dubuque Street to Foster
Road; along Foster Road and continuing along Walker Circle to where the NE
boundary line of lot 108 Peninsula Neighborhood Phase 2A extended intersects
with the Iowa River and the Iowa City corporate limits; north along said
corporate limits and continuing across Interstate 80 to Dubuque Street;
continuing southerly along the corporate limits to Interstate 80; east along I-
80 to Prairie du Chien Road; south along Prairie du Chien Road to North Dodge
Street and Highway 1; southwest to Governor Street; northwest on Governor
Street to Kimball Road; westerly along Kimball Road to the point of beginning.
      Precinct 23: Beginning at the intersection of Jefferson Street and
Governor Street; north on Governor Street to its intersection with North Dodge
Street/Highway 1; northeast along Dodge Street to Prairie du Chien Road; north
on Prairie du Chien Road to Interstate 80 and the Iowa City corporate limits;
starting east along the corporate limits and following the corporate limits
around to Rochester Avenue; west on Rochester Avenue to Post Road; south on
Post Road to Princeton Road; northwest on Princeton Road to 1st Avenue; north
on 1st Avenue to Rochester Avenue; west along Rochester Avenue to Parsons
Avenue; south on Parsons Avenue to Jefferson Street; west on Jefferson Street
to the point of beginning. Due to annexations that occurred after the 2010
federal census, the annexed portion of Iowa City located within the census
blocks identified by GEOID 191030001001045, 191030001001004, 191030101004030,
191030001001000, and 191030001001007 are part of the Newport Township Precinct.
(Ord. 11-4442, 8-31-2011, eff. 1-15-2012)
      Precinct 24: Beginning at the SE corner of Scott Park on the Iowa City
corporate limits; following the corporate limits south to American Legion Road;
west on American Legion Road to Scott Boulevard; north along Scott Boulevard to
Rochester Avenue; east on Rochester Avenue to the Iowa City corporate limits;
starting east along the corporate limits and continuing to follow the corporate
limits back to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 16-4680, 10-18-2016)
CHAPTER 10
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Civil Service Commission
1-10-1: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION:
   A.   The Civil Service Commission is established.
   B.   The Civil Service Commission shall consist of five (5) members.
   C.   The members of the Civil Service Commission serving upon enactment of
this chapter shall continue to serve their existing terms.
   D.   In order to stagger the four (4) year terms when increasing the
commission from three (3) members to five (5) members, one person shall be
appointed to serve a term ending April 4, 2027, and one person shall be
appointed to serve a term ending April 1, 2029, whose successors shall be
appointed for a term of four (4) years. (Ord. 25-4958, 8-5-2025)
TITLE 2
HUMAN RIGHTS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Definitions
2-1-2: Purpose
2-1-3: Construction
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   AGE: Chronological age of any person.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who: a) claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice; or b) believes that such person will be
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
   CITY ATTORNEY: The duly appointed attorney for the city or such person
designated by the city attorney.
   COMMISSION: The Iowa City human rights commission.
   COMPLAINANT: A person who has filed a report of discrimination as provided
for by this title.
   COMPLAINT: A report of discrimination as provided for by this title.
   CONCILIATION: The attempt by the human rights coordinator to reach a
resolution with both parties in a case in which a determination of probable
cause has been made.
   CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTION: As defined in section 537.1301(11) of the code
of Iowa, as amended.
   COURT: The district court of the state of Iowa or any judge of the court if
the court is not in session at that time.
   COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING:
   A.   A building consisting of four (4) or more dwelling units if the
building has one or more elevators; or
   B.   The ground floor units of a building consisting of four (4) or more
units.
   CREDIT: As defined in section 537.1301(15) of the code of Iowa, as amended.
   CREDITOR: As defined in section 537.1301(17) of the code of Iowa, as
amended.
   DEPENDENT: Any person, regardless of age, who resides in a household and who
derives primary care or support from that household.
   DISABILITY:
   A.   The physical or mental impairment of a person which substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities, and the condition of
a person with a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis
of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune
deficiency syndrome related complex, or any other condition related to acquired
immune deficiency syndrome. The inclusion of a condition related to a positive
human immunodeficiency virus test result in the meaning of "disability" under
the provisions of this title does not preclude the application of the
provisions of this title to conditions resulting from other contagious or
infectious diseases.
   B.   A record of having such an impairment.
   C.   Being regarded as having such an impairment. "Disability" does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
defined by chapter 124A of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
   DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   ELDERLY: Any person who has attained the age of fifty five (55) years.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who works for wages, salary or commission or any
combination thereof, and persons who are seeking or applying for employment.
   EMPLOYER: Includes any person, wherever situated, who solicits individuals
within the City to apply for employment within the City or elsewhere. The term
includes the City itself, and to the extent not inconsistent with State law,
all other political subdivisions, public corporations, governmental units
conducting any activity within the City and public agencies or corporations.
   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person undertaking to procure employees or
opportunities to work for any other person.
   FAMILIAL STATUS:
   A.   One or more individuals under the age of eighteen (18) domiciled with
one of the following:
      1.   A parent or another person having legal custody of the individual or
individuals.
      2.   The designee of the parent or the other person having custody of the
individual or individuals, with the written permission of the parent or other
person.
   B.   Protections against discrimination on the basis of familial status
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18)
years.
   FAMILY: For purposes of this title "family" includes a single individual,
and includes persons who are registered as domestic partners and who are
eligible to obtain a certified statement of the domestic partnership from the
City Clerk, as provided in chapter 6 of this title.
   GENDER IDENTITY: A person's gender-related identity, appearance, or
expression, whether or not traditionally associated with the person's
biological sex or sex at birth, incorporating the person's attitudes,
preferences, beliefs, and practices pertaining thereto, including being
physically and/or behaviorally androgynous.
   HOUSING TRANSACTION: The sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property
and the offer to sell, exchange, rent or lease real property.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any organization which exists for the purpose in whole
or in part of collective bargaining, of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or
protection in connection with employment.
   MARITAL STATUS: The state of being married, single, divorced, separated or
widowed.
   PERSON: One or more individuals; partnerships; associations; corporations;
legal representatives; trustees; receivers; the City or any board, commission,
department or agency thereof; all other governmental units conducting any
activity in the City; labor organizations; trustees in cases under title 11 of
the United States Code, as amended; and fiduciaries.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: Each and every place, establishment or facility of
whatever kind, nature or class that caters or offers services, facilities or
goods to the general public for a fee or charge. Each and every place,
establishment or facility that caters or offers services, facilities or goods
to the general public gratuitously shall be deemed a public accommodation if
the accommodation receives any substantial governmental support or subsidy.
Public accommodation shall not mean any bona fide private club or other place,
establishment or facility which is by its nature distinctly private, except
that, when such distinctly private place, establishment or facility caters or
offers services, facilities or goods to the general public for a fee or charge
or gratuitously, it shall be deemed a public accommodation during such period.
   PUBLIC ASSISTANCE SOURCE OF INCOME: Income and support derived from any tax
supported Federal, State or local funds, including, but not limited to, social
security, supplemental security income, temporary assistance for needy
families, family investment program, general relief, food stamps, and
unemployment compensation but not including rent subsidy programs. Housing
choice voucher subsidies and similar rent subsidy programs shall also be
included in this definition immediately upon the event of either of the
following:
   A.   The repeal of Iowa Code section 364.3(16) and any similar statutes
preempting cities from prohibiting owners, lessors, sublessors, managing
agents, or other persons having the right to lease, sublease, or rent out a
dwelling unit from refusing to lease or rent out the dwelling unit to a person
because of the person's use of a federal housing choice voucher issued by the
United States department of housing and urban development; or
   B.   A court with lawful jurisdiction invalidates Iowa Code section 364.3
(16) and any statutes of similar effect.
   RESPONDENT: A person who is alleged to have committed an act prohibited by
this title, against whom a complaint has been filed under this title, or who
has been identified in the course of investigation as required with respect to
respondents so identified under subsection
2-4-4A of this title.
   SEXUAL HARASSMENT: A form of sex discrimination. Sexual harassment may take
the form of deliberate or repeated comments, questions, representations or
physical contacts of a sexual nature which are unwelcome to the recipient.
Sexual harassment may also take the form of conduct that has the purpose or
effect of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual, history of, or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality.
   STATE, STATE PARTY AND STATE PARTIES: As used in the preamble and part I of
the "International Convention On the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (1966)", as amended, shall mean the City of Iowa City, Iowa.
   UNFAIR PRACTICE OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE: Those practices specified as
unfair or discriminatory in sections 216.6, 216.7, 216.8, 216.8A, 216.9,
216.10, 216.11, and 216.11A of the Code of Iowa, as amended, or this title.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-
1997; Ord. 00-3921, 3-7-2000; Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015; Ord. 16-4658, 2-16-2016, eff. 6-1-2016; Ord. 18-4736, 1-2-2018; Ord. 18-
4739, 2-20-2018; Ord. 23-4911, 9-19-2023)
2-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to protect individuals of the City against
discrimination as defined in this chapter. Moreover, this title provides for
execution within the City of the policies of the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965,
as amended, the Federal Civil Rights Acts, as amended, the preamble and part I
(articles 1 - 7) of the "International Convention On the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination (1966)", as amended, and the promotion of
cooperation among the City, State and Federal agencies which are charged,
presently and in the future, with enforcing these Acts and instruments. (Ord.
03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-1-3: CONSTRUCTION:
This title shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purpose, and shall be
enforced by the Iowa City Human Rights Commission consistent with the intent,
language and spirit of the preamble and part I (articles 1 - 7) of the
"International Convention On the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (1966)", as amended. However, the construction and enforcement
of the preamble and part I of said international convention shall in no event
operate to diminish protection that otherwise exists under this title, the Iowa
Civil Rights Act, as amended, the Federal Civil Rights Acts, as amended, or the
Constitution of the State of Iowa, as amended, or the Constitution of the
United States of America, as amended. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
CHAPTER 2
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Established; General Duties
2-2-2: Powers
2-2-3: Structure
2-2-4: Records To Be Confidential; Exceptions
2-2-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; GENERAL DUTIES:
There is hereby established the Iowa City human rights commission whose duties
shall be to disseminate information, educate the public on illegal
discrimination and human rights, provide the enforcement necessary to further
the goals of this title, and protect individuals from unfounded charges of
discriminatory practices. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
2-2-2: POWERS:
The commission created by this chapter shall have the following powers: (Ord.
03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   A.   Receive complaints alleging unfair or discriminatory practices.
   B.   Investigate and study the existence, character, causes and extent of
discrimination in the areas covered by this title, and to eliminate
discrimination by education, conciliation and enforcement where necessary.
   C.   Issue publications and reports of the research and investigations of
the commission subject to the limitations of confidentiality.
   D.   Prepare and transmit to the city council from time to time, but not
less often than once each year, reports describing the proceedings,
investigations, hearings, decisions and other work performed by the commission.
   E.   Make recommendations to the city council for such further legislation
concerning discrimination as it may deem necessary and desirable.
   F.   Cooperate, within the limits of any appropriations made for its
operation, with other agencies or organizations, both public and private, whose
purposes are not inconsistent with those of this title, and in the planning and
conducting of programs designed to eliminate racial, religious, cultural and
other intergroup tensions.
   G.   Educate the public on human rights and illegal discrimination, such as
organizing and facilitating educational public forums that address one or more
of the broad range of topics included within the rubric of human rights.
   H.   Seek injunctive relief as may be appropriate to preserve the rights of
the complainant and the public interest when it appears that a complainant may
be irreparably injured before a public hearing can be called to determine the
merits of the complaint.
   I.   Issue subpoenas and order discovery as provided by this section to aid
in investigations of allegations of discrimination. The subpoenas and discovery
may be ordered to the same extent and are subject to the same limitations as
subpoenas and discovery in a civil action in district court. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-
16-2003)
2-2-3: STRUCTURE:
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, appointed by vote of the city
council. Appointees shall serve for a term of three (3) years and thereafter
until a successor has been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term. Appointments shall take into consideration
persons of the various racial, religious, cultural, social and economic groups
in the city. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
2-2-4: RECORDS TO BE CONFIDENTIAL; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The disclosure of information, whether a charge has been filed or not,
or revealing the contents of any file is prohibited except in the following
circumstances:
      1.   A written request is received by a party or party's attorney
following a probable cause determination.
      2.   If the commission has issued a right to sue letter, a party or a
party's attorney may have access to the commission case file on that complaint.
(Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
      3.   If a mediation agreement regarding a housing complaint is made
public according to the provisions of section
2-4-2 of this title.
      4.   The final investigative report is made available to the parties or a
party's attorney according to the provisions of section
2-4-2 of this title. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   B.   No member of the commission staff shall disclose the filing of a
charge, the information gathered during the investigation, or the endeavors to
eliminate such discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, mediation,
conciliation or persuasion, except as may be necessary to conduct an
investigation of a complaint. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
commission from releasing such information concerning alleged or acknowledged
discriminatory practices to the state civil rights commission, the United
States civil rights commission, the federal equal employment opportunity
commission, and other agencies or organizations whose primary purpose is the
enforcement of civil rights legislation. This section does not prevent any
complainant, witness or other person from publicizing the filing of a complaint
or the matter therein complained of. Violation of these provisions by a member
of the commission or its staff shall constitute grounds for removal. (Ord. 03-
4105, 12-16-2003)
CHAPTER 3
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Employment; Exceptions
2-3-2: Public Accommodation; Exceptions
2-3-3: Credit Transactions; Exceptions
2-3-4: Education
2-3-5: Housing; Exceptions
2-3-6: Additional Unfair Or Discriminatory Housing Practices
2-3-7: Effect On Other Law
2-3-8: Aiding Or Abetting; Retaliation; Intimidation
2-3-1: EMPLOYMENT; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any employer to refuse to hire, accept,
register, classify, promote or refer for employment, or to otherwise
discriminate in employment against any other person or to discharge any
employee because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital
status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 03-
4105, 12-16-2003)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any labor organization to refuse to admit to
membership, apprenticeship or training an applicant, to expel any member, or to
otherwise discriminate against any applicant for membership, apprenticeship or
training or any member in the privileges, rights or benefits of such
membership, apprenticeship or training because of age, color, creed,
disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion,
sex or sexual orientation of such applicant or member.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any employer, employment agency, labor
organization or the employees or members thereof to directly or indirectly
advertise or in any other manner indicate or publicize that individuals are
unwelcome, objectionable or not solicited for employment or membership because
of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national
origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
   D.   Employment policies relating to pregnancy and childbirth shall be
governed by the following:
      1.   A written or unwritten employment policy or practice which excludes
from employment applicants or employees because of the employee's pregnancy is
a prima facie violation of this title.
      2.   Disabilities caused or contributed to by the employee's pregnancy,
miscarriage, childbirth and recovery therefrom are, for all job related
purposes, temporary disabilities and shall be treated as such under any health
or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan available in connection
with employment or any written or unwritten employment policies and practices
involving terms and conditions of employment as applied to other temporary
disabilities.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or require as a
condition of employment of any employee or prospective employee a test for the
presence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus. An agreement
between an employer, employment agency, labor organization or their employees,
agents or members and an employee or prospective employee concerning
employment, pay or benefits to an employee or prospective employee in return
for taking a test for the presence of the antibody to the human
immunodeficiency virus, is prohibited. The prohibitions of this subsection do
not apply if the state epidemiologist determines and the director of public
health declares through the utilization of guidelines established by the center
for disease control of the United States department of health and human
services, that a person with a condition related to acquired immune deficiency
syndrome poses a significant risk of transmission of the human immunodeficiency
virus to other persons in a specific occupation.
   F.   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
      1.   Any bona fide religious institution or its educational facility,
association, corporation or society with respect to any qualifications for
employment based on religion when such qualifications are related to a bona
fide religious purpose. A religious qualification for instructional personnel
or an administrative officer, serving in a supervisory capacity of a bona fide
religious educational facility or religious institution shall be presumed to be
a bona fide occupational qualification. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
      2.   An employer or employment agency which chooses to offer employment
or advertise for employment to only the disabled or elderly. Any such
employment or offer of employment shall not discriminate among the disabled or
elderly on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital
status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation. (Ord. 95-
3697, 11-7-1995)
      3.   The employment of individuals for work within the home of the
employer if the employer or members of the family reside therein during such
employment.
      4.   The employment of individuals to render personal service to the
person of the employer or members of the employer's family. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-
8-1994)
      5.   The employment on the basis of sex in those certain instances where
sex is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the
normal operation of a particular business or enterprise. The bona fide
occupational qualification shall be interpreted narrowly. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-
2003)
      6.   A state or federal program designed to benefit a specific age
classification which serves a bona fide public purpose. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-
1994)
      7.   The employment on the basis of disability in those certain instances
where presence of disability is a bona fide occupational qualification
reasonably necessary to the normal operation of a particular business or
enterprise. The bona fide occupational qualification shall be interpreted
narrowly. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
      8.   Any employer who regularly employs less than four (4) individuals.
For purposes of this section, individuals who are members of the employer's
family shall not be counted as employees. (Ord. 08-4312, 8-11-2008)
2-3-2: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deny any other person the full
and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages
of any place of public accommodation because of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. (Ord. 00-3950, 11-7-2000; amd. Ord. 13-4560, 10-15-2013)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to directly or indirectly advertise or in any
other manner indicate or publicize that the patronage of persons is unwelcome,
objectionable or not solicited because of age, color, creed, disability, gender
identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
   C.   This section shall not apply to any bona fide religious institution
with respect to any qualifications the institution may impose based on religion
when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose. (Ord.
94-3647, 11-8-1994)
   D.   Public accommodations may be designated specifically for the elderly
and disabled. However, public accommodations may not be restricted among the
elderly and disabled on the basis of age, color, creed, disability, gender
identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
   E.   It shall not be unlawful for a public accommodation to take any action
otherwise prohibited by this section where age is a bona fide factor or
qualification based on health, safety or developmental differences between age
groups. In order to establish that the exception applies, a place of public
accommodation must show the restriction or policy is necessary to protect the
health, safety, or developmental differences of persons based on age alone.
Developmental differences of persons based on age means the social, emotional,
physical and intellectual development of a person based on the chronological
age of a person.
   F.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit restrictions regarding the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by those under the legal drinking age or the
presence of persons under the legal drinking age in places of public
accommodation where alcoholic beverages are served.
   G.   This section shall not apply to discounts for services or
accommodations based upon age. (Ord. 13-4560, 10-15-2013)
2-3-3: CREDIT TRANSACTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Consumer Credit: It shall be unlawful for any creditor to refuse to
enter into any consumer credit transaction or to impose finance charges or
other terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly extended by that
creditor to consumers of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color,
creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race,
religion, sex or sexual orientation.
   B.   Extension Of Credit: It shall be unlawful for any person authorized or
licensed to do business in this state pursuant to chapter 524, 533, 534, 536,
or 536A of the code of Iowa, as amended, to refuse to loan or to extend credit
or to impose terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly extended to
persons of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed,
disability, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion,
sex or sexual orientation.
   C.   Insurance:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any creditor to refuse to offer credit,
life or health and accident insurance because of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation. Refusal by a creditor to offer credit, life or health and accident
insurance based upon the age or physical disability of the consumer shall not
be an unfair or discriminatory practice if such denial is based solely upon
bona fide underwriting considerations not prohibited by title XIII, subtitle 1,
code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed by negative
implication or otherwise to narrow or restrict any other provisions of this
title. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-3-4: EDUCATION:
   A.   It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any educational
institution to discriminate on the basis of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex or sexual
orientation in any program or activity. Such discriminatory practices shall
include, but not be limited to, the following practices:
      1.   Exclusion of a person or persons from participation in, denial of
the benefits of, or subject to discrimination in any academic, extracurricular,
research, occupational training or other program or activity.
      2.   Denial of comparable opportunity in intramural and interscholastic
athletic programs.
      3.   Discrimination among persons in employment and the conditions of
employment.
      4.   On the basis of sex, the application of any rule concerning the
actual or potential parental, family or marital status of a person, or the
exclusion of any person from any program or activity or employment because of
pregnancy or related conditions dependent upon the physician's diagnosis and
certification. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995)
   B.   For the purpose of this section, "educational institution" includes any
preschool, elementary, secondary or merged area school, area education agency
or postsecondary college and their governing boards, with the exception that
this section shall not include the University Of Iowa or any other educational
division of the state.
   C.   This section does not prohibit an educational institution from
maintaining separate toilet facilities, locker rooms or living facilities for
the different sexes so long as comparable facilities are provided. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting any bona fide religious
institution from imposing qualifications based on religion when such
qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose or any institution
from admitting students of only one sex. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-3-5: HOUSING; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be an unlawful or discriminatory practice for any person: (Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015)
   A.   To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign, sublease, refuse to negotiate
or to otherwise make unavailable, or deny any real property or dwelling or
part, portion or interest therein, to any person because of the age, color,
creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national
origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of
dependents or public assistance source of income of that person. (Ord. 15-4650,
12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
   B.   To discriminate against any other person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of any real estate transaction because of age, color, creed,
disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or
public assistance source of income.
   C.   To directly or indirectly advertise, or in any other manner indicate or
publicize in any real estate transaction that any person is not welcome or not
solicited because of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital
status, familial status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of
income. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   D.   To discriminate against the lessee or purchaser of any real property or
dwelling or part, portion or interest of the real property or dwelling, or
against any prospective lessee or purchaser of the property or dwelling because
of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial
status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or
absence of dependents, or public assistance source of income of persons who may
from time to time be present in or on the lessee's or owner's premises for
lawful purposes at the invitation of the lessee or owner as friends, guests,
visitors, relatives or in any similar capacity. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; amd.
Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
   E.   The following exceptions are applicable to this section and section
 2-3-6 of this chapter:
      1.   Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any
qualifications it may impose based on religion, when these qualifications are
related to a bona fide religious purpose unless the religious institution owns
or operates property for a commercial purpose or membership in the religion is
restricted on account of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity,
marital status, familial status, national origin, race, sex, sexual
orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of
income.
      2.   Any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion
or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion
is restricted on account of age, color, creed, disability, gender identity,
marital status, familial status, national origin, race, sex, sexual
orientation, presence or absence of dependents or public assistance source of
income. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
      3.   Restrictions based on sex in the rental or leasing of dwellings
within which residents of both sexes would share a common bathroom facility on
the same floor of the building. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678,
10-4-2016)
   F.   The following are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in this
section and section
2-3-6 of this chapter with the exception of the prohibition on discrimination
in advertising set forth in subsection C of this section: (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
      1.   The rental or leasing of four (4) or fewer rooms within a single
dwelling by the owner of such dwelling, if the owner resides therein. (Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
      2.   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently
of each other, if the owner occupies the premises, or some portion thereof, and
actually resides therein.
   G.   Nothing in this title limits the applicability of the city's
restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling. Nor does any provision in this title regarding familial status apply
with respect to housing for older persons. For the purposes of this title,
"housing for older persons" means housing:
      1.   Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically
designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or
federal program and as determined by the secretary of housing and urban
development); or
      2.   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty two (62) years
of age or older; or
      3.   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty
five (55) years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing
qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the regulations
promulgated by the secretary of housing and urban development shall apply and
at least the following two (2) criteria must be present:
         a.   That at least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by
at least one person fifty five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
         b.   The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures
which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for
persons fifty five (55) years of age or older.
However, such housing may not otherwise be restricted on the basis of age,
color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, public assistance
source of income or presence or absence of dependents. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
2-3-6: ADDITIONAL UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES:
   A.   A person shall not induce or attempt to induce another person to sell
or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into a neighborhood of a person of a particular age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents, or public
assistance source of income.
   B.   A person shall not represent to a person of a particular age, color,
creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national
origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of
dependents, or public assistance source of income that a dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is available for
inspection, sale or rental. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
   C.   A person shall not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling to a buyer or renter because of a disability of
any of the following persons:
      1.   That buyer or renter.
      2.   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is sold, rented or made available.
      3.   A person associated with that buyer or renter.
   D.   A person shall not discriminate against another person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability
of any of the following persons:
      1.   That person.
      2.   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is sold, rented or made available.
      3.   A person associated with that person.
   E.   For the purposes of this section only, discrimination includes any of
the following circumstances:
      1.   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
person if the modifications are necessary to afford the person full enjoyment
of the premises. In the case of a rental, a landlord may, where reasonable to
do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreement to
restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
      2.   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services, when the accommodations are necessary to afford the
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994;
amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
      3.   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design
and construct those dwellings in a manner that meets the following
requirements: (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; Ord. 99-
3905, 10-12-1999; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
         a.   The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons.
         b.   All doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises
within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons
in wheelchairs.
         c.   All premises within the dwellings contain the following features
of adaptive design:
            (1)   An accessible route into and through the dwelling.
            (2)   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations.
            (3)   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation
of grab bars.
            (4)   Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that a person in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
         d.   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the "American
National Standard For Buildings And Facilities Providing Accessibility And
Usability For Physically Handicapped People", as amended, commonly cited as
"ANSI A 117.1", satisfies the requirements of subsection E3c of this section.
      4.   Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made
available to a person whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the
health or safety of other persons or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   F.   A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate
related transactions shall not discriminate against a person in making a
residential real estate related transaction available or in terms or conditions
of a residential real estate related transaction because of age, color, creed,
disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence of dependents or
public assistance source of income. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995; amd. Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015)
   G.   For the purpose of this section, "residential real estate related
transaction" means any of the following:
      1.   To make or purchase loans or provide other financial assistance to
purchase, construct, improve, repair or maintain a dwelling, or to secure
residential real estate.
      2.   To sell, broker or appraise residential real estate. (Ord. 94-3647,
11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   H.   A person shall not deny another person access to, or membership or
participation in a multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in terms or conditions
of access, membership or participation in such organization because of age,
color, creed, disability, gender identity, marital status, familial status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, presence or absence
of dependents, or public assistance source of income. (Ord. 95-3697, 11-7-1995;
amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-3-7: EFFECT ON OTHER LAW:
   A.   This chapter does not affect a reasonable local or state restriction on
the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or restriction
relating to health or safety standards.
   B.   This chapter does not affect a requirement of nondiscrimination in
other city ordinances. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-3-8: AIDING OR ABETTING; RETALIATION; INTIMIDATION:
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for:
   A.   Any person to intentionally aid, abet, compel or coerce another person
to engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by this
title.
   B.   Any person to discriminate against another person because such person
has either lawfully opposed any discriminatory practice forbidden by this
title, obeyed the provisions of this title, or has filed a complaint,
testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this title. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-
1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   C.   Any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this title. (Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 4
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
2-4-1: Persons Who May File Complaints; Method Of Filing Complaint; Amending
Complaint
2-4-2: Investigation Of Complaints; Predetermination Settlement
2-4-3: Proceedings On Complaints; Probable Cause
2-4-4: Additional Proceedings; Housing
2-4-5: Conciliation Procedures
2-4-6: Remedial Action
2-4-7: Notice And Hearing
2-4-8: Findings And Order
2-4-9: Judicial Review; Enforcement
2-4-10: Sixty Day Release From Administrative Process; Alternative Judicial
Proceedings Upon Complaints Regarding Employment, Public Accommodations, Credit
And Education
2-4-11: Complaints
2-4-12: Civil Proceedings - Housing
2-4-13: Time Limits
2-4-1: PERSONS WHO MAY FILE COMPLAINTS; METHOD OF FILING COMPLAINT; AMENDING
COMPLAINT:
   A.   All persons claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair
practice within this city may, by themselves or by counsel make, sign and file
with the commission a verified, written complaint which shall state the name
and address of the person alleged to have committed the discriminatory or
unfair practice of which complained, shall set forth the particulars thereof,
and shall contain such other information as may be required by the commission.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   B.   Upon the filing of a complaint, the human rights coordinator shall
serve notice on the complainant acknowledging the filing and advising the
complainant of the time limits and choice of forums provided under the law.
(Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
   C.   The commission, a commissioner, the city attorney or any other person
aware of the existence of a discriminatory practice may in like manner make,
sign and file such complaint. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 97-3785, 5-
20-1997)
   D.   Complaints and answers may be amended as follows:
      1.   The complainant shall have the power to amend any complaint at any
time prior to the human rights coordinator's probable cause recommendation.
      2.   The human rights coordinator shall have the power to amend any
complaint after a probable cause finding and prior to the decision to have a
public hearing.
      3.   At the discretion of the administrative law judge, the complaint may
be amended after the decision to have a public hearing.
      4.   The respondent shall have like power to amend such respondent's
answer, at any time prior to hearing, and thereafter at the discretion of the
administrative law judge.
      5.   Amendments to the complaint and answer alleging additional acts
which constitute unfair or discriminatory practices related to or growing out
of the subject matter of the original complaint will relate back to the date
the original complaint or answer was filed. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
   E.   A claim under this title shall not be maintained unless a complaint is
filed with the commission within three hundred (300) days after the alleged
discriminatory or unfair practice occurred. (Ord. 08-4312, 8-11-2008)
   F.   A verified copy of a complaint filed with the state civil rights
commission, or its successor, under the provisions of chapter 216, code of
Iowa, as amended; or EEOC, or its successor; or HUD, or its successor, shall be
sufficient complaint for the purpose of this title if it alleges either in the
text thereof or in accompanying statements that the alleged discriminatory
practice occurred within this city. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   G.   A complaint or any part thereof may be withdrawn by the complainant at
any time prior to notice of a public hearing and thereafter at the discretion
of the commission. However, nothing herein shall preclude the human rights
coordinator from continuing the investigation and initiating a complaint on the
commission's behalf against the original respondent whenever it deems it in the
public interest. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-2: INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; PREDETERMINATION SETTLEMENT:
   A.   Upon the filing of a verified complaint, the human rights coordinator
shall serve notice on the respondent. Notice shall include both a copy of the
complaint and a statement of the respondent’s procedural rights and obligations
under the law or ordinance. Service shall be effected by certified mail, email,
or personal service within twenty (20) days of filing for complaints in the
areas of employment, public accommodation, credit or education, and within
seven (7) days of filing for complaints alleging discrimination in the area of
housing.
   B.   The human rights coordinator may draft and mail to the parties written
questionnaire/document requests to which respondent and complainant are
required to respond. Answers and documents are to be received by the human
rights coordinator’s office within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
questionnaire/document request for complaints in the areas of employment,
public accommodation, credit and education, and within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the questionnaire/document request for complaints in the area of
housing. The human rights coordinator may grant extensions of time to respond.
   C.   After reviewing materials responsive to the questionnaire/document
request, the human rights office shall determine whether the complaint warrants
further investigation. If the human rights office finds there is a reasonable
possibility of a probable cause determination or the legal issues present in
the complaint need further development, the human rights office shall promptly
resume the investigation of the complaint. A complaint determined by the human
rights office not to warrant further processing by the human rights office
shall be administratively closed. Notice of such closure shall be promptly
served upon the complainant and the respondent by certified mail, email, or
personal service. Service is effective upon mailing or emailing. Such notice
shall state the reasons for administrative closure.
   D.   A complainant may object to the administrative closure within ten (10)
days of service by filing a written request for review that states the basis
for the objection. If a complainant makes a timely written request for review
of the administrative closure, the human rights office shall promptly review
the complainant’s request and all relevant material. If, after review by the
human rights office, it is determined that the complaint does not warrant
further processing, the human rights office shall close the file and notify the
complainant and respondent of the final decision of administrative closure. If,
after review, the human rights office determines that there is a reasonable
possibility of a probable cause determination or the legal issues presented in
the complaint need further development, the allegations will be investigated
further.
   E.   A complaint may be administratively closed at any time if the
complainant cannot be contacted after diligent efforts or is uncooperative
causing unreasonable delay in the processing of a complaint.
   F.   Upon completion of the investigation, the human rights office shall
issue a written investigative summary and recommendation as to whether probable
cause exists that the person charged in the complaint has committed a
discriminatory practice.
   G.   Any time after a complaint is filed under this title, but before the
human rights office issues a probable cause determination, the human rights
office may seek a disposition of the complaint through a predetermination
settlement.
   H.   A complaint may be closed as satisfactorily adjusted when the
respondent has made an offer of settlement acceptable to the human rights
coordinator but not the complainant. Notice of intended closure shall state the
reasons for closure and be served by certified mail, email, or personal service
upon the complainant. The complainant shall be allowed thirty (30) days to
respond in writing to the human rights coordinator either stating the reasons
why the offer is unacceptable or accepting the offer. The human rights
coordinator will review and consider the response before making a closure
decision.
   I.   In all complaint areas except housing, the complainant or respondent
may request mediation of the complaint at any time during the complaint process
prior to the probable cause determination. Mediation shall not be undertaken
unless both the complainant and respondent agree to participate. Mediation may
be discontinued at the request of either party. If the complainant and
respondent do not reach a mediation agreement, the complaint process shall
continue to resolution as provided in this section.
      1.   A mediation agreement is an agreement between the respondent and
complainant. It is not subject to review or approval of the commission.
      2.   All verbal or written information relating to the subject matter of
a mediation agreement and transmitted between either the complainant or
respondent and a mediator to resolve a complaint filed under this chapter,
whether reflected in notes, memoranda, or other work product, is confidential
as provided in subsection
2-2-4B of this title.
   J.   In the area of housing, the commission shall, during the period
beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with the finding that there
is or is not probable cause as defined in this chapter, to the extent feasible,
engage in mediation with respect to the complaint.
      1.   A mediation agreement is an agreement between a respondent and the
complainant and is subject to commission approval.
      2.   A mediation agreement may provide for binding arbitration or other
method of dispute resolution. Dispute resolution that results from a mediation
agreement may authorize appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
      3.   A mediation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant
and respondent agree otherwise, and the commission determines that disclosure
is not necessary to further the purposes of this chapter relating to unfair
practices or discrimination in housing or real estate.
      4.   The proceedings or results of mediation shall not be made public or
used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the
written consent of the persons who are party to the mediation. (Ord. 94-3647,
11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; Ord. 12-4484, 5-15-2012; Ord. 15-
4606, 1-20-2015; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; Ord. 21-4845, 1-19-2021)
2-4-3: PROCEEDINGS ON COMPLAINTS; PROBABLE CAUSE:
   A.   If the human rights office finds that probable cause exists regarding
the allegations of the complaint, the human rights office shall notify the
complainant and the respondent of the finding. The human rights office shall
promptly endeavor to eliminate the discriminatory or unfair practice by
conference, conciliation and persuasion.
   B.   If the human rights office finds that no probable cause exists, the
human rights office shall issue a written finding dismissing the complaint and
notifying the parties of the complainant’s right to appeal the finding. Notice
of the no probable cause determination shall be promptly mailed to the
complainant and to the respondent by certified mail or email. Service is
effective upon mailing or emailing. The no probable cause determination may
also be personally sesrved.
   C.   A complainant may object to the finding of no probable cause within ten
(10) days of service by filing a written request for review that states the
basis for the objection. If a complainant makes a timely written request for
review of the finding, the human rights office shall hear the complainant’s
evidence within thirty (30) days of the request for review. If no probable
cause is again the finding after further review by the human rights office, the
human rights office shall notify the complainant in writing of the decision,
and shall close the file. If the human rights office finds probable cause after
review, the human rights office shall proceed with efforts to eliminate the
discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion.
   D.   In the area of housing, the commission shall determine based on the
facts whether probable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing or
real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur. The commission shall
make this determination not later than one hundred (100) days after a complaint
is filed unless any of the following applies:
      1.   It is impracticable to make the determination within that time
period.
      2.   The commission has approved a mediation agreement relating to the
complaint.
      3.   If it is impracticable to make the determination within the time
period provided by this subsection, the commission shall notify the complainant
and respondent in writing of the reasons for the delay.
      4.   The final administrative disposition of a complaint shall be made
within one year of the date of receipt of the complaint, unless it is
impracticable to do so. If final administrative disposition within one year is
impracticable, the human rights coordinator shall notify the complainant and
respondent in writing. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 12-4484, 5-15-2012;
Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; Ord. 21-4845, 1-19-2021)
2-4-4: ADDITIONAL PROCEEDINGS; HOUSING:
   A.   The commission may join a person not named in the complaint as an
additional or substitute respondent if, in the course of the investigation, the
commission determines that the person should be alleged to have committed a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice.
   B.   In addition to the information required in the notice, the commission
shall include in a notice to a respondent joined under this section an
explanation of the basis for the determination under this section that the
person is properly joined as a respondent. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   C.   If the commission concludes, following the filing of a complaint, that
prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purpose of this title
relating to unfair or discriminatory housing or real estate practices, the
commission may authorize a civil action for appropriate temporary or
preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint and the city
attorney and/or a designated agent shall promptly commence and maintain such
proceedings. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   D.   The commission shall prepare a final investigative report. A final
report under this section may be amended by the commission if additional
evidence is discovered.
   E.   After the completion of the commission's investigation, the commission
shall make available to the aggrieved person and the respondent information
derived from the investigation and the final investigative report relating to
that investigation.
   F.   If the commission determines that probable cause exists to believe that
a discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to
occur, the commission shall immediately issue a determination unless the
commission determines that the legality of a zoning or land use law or
ordinance is involved as provided in subsection H of this section. A
determination issued under this subsection must include all of the following:
      1.   A short and plain statement of the facts on which the commission has
found probable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing or real estate
practice has occurred or is about to occur.
      2.   The determination must be based upon the final investigative report.
      3.   The determination need not be limited to the facts or grounds
alleged in the complaint.
   G.   Not later than twenty (20) days after the commission issues a
determination, the commission shall send a copy of the determination with
information concerning the election under this title to all of the following
persons:
      1.   Each respondent. The respondent shall also receive a notice of the
opportunity for a hearing as provided under this title.
      2.   Each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed.
   H.   If the commission determines that the matter involves the legality of a
state or local zoning or other land use ordinance, the commission shall not
issue determination and shall immediately refer the matter to the city attorney
for appropriate action.
   I.   If the commission determines that no probable cause exists to believe a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to
occur, the commission shall promptly dismiss the complaint. The commission
shall make public disclosure of each dismissal under this section.
   J.   The commission shall not issue a determination under this section
regarding an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice after the
beginning of a trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under
federal or state law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing
or real estate practice.
   K.   If the commission determines that probable cause exists to believe a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred, the commission
may, after notice, provide for a hearing on the charges in the complaint. The
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 17A, code of Iowa, as
amended, for contested cases.
   L.   If the commission determines at a hearing under subsection K of this
section that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory
housing or real estate practice, the commission may order the appropriate
relief, including actual damages, reasonable attorney fees, court costs and
other injunctive or equitable relief. To vindicate the public interest, the
commission may assess a civil penalty against the respondent. (Ord. 94-3647,
11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-5: CONCILIATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Following a probable cause determination, the human rights coordinator
shall endeavor to eliminate the discriminatory or unfair practice by
conciliation, conference and persuasion, unless the coordinator determines
conciliation efforts are impracticable. If the conciliation process is
determined to be impracticable, the coordinator shall state in writing the
reason(s) for bypassing conciliation efforts. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   B.   A conciliation agreement shall become effective after it has been
signed by the respondent, or authorized representative, the complainant, or
authorized representative and by the human rights coordinator on behalf of the
commission. Copies of the agreement shall be served on all parties. The
commission shall be informed of the agreement.
   C.   The terms of a conciliation agreement reached with the respondent may
require the respondent to refrain in the future from committing discriminatory
or unfair practices of the type stated in the agreement; to take remedial
action which, in the judgment of the human rights coordinator, will carry out
the purposes of this title; and to consent to the entry in an appropriate
district court of a consent decree embodying the terms of the conciliation
agreement. Violation of such a consent decree may be punished as contempt by
the court in which it is filed, upon a showing by the human rights coordinator
of the violation at any time within six (6) months of its occurrence. In all
cases in which a conciliation agreement is entered, the human rights
coordinator shall issue an order stating its terms and furnish a copy of the
order to the complainant, the respondent, and such other persons as the
coordinator deems proper. At any time, in the discretion of the human rights
coordinator, the coordinator may investigate whether the terms of the agreement
are being complied with by the respondent. Upon a finding that the terms of the
conciliation agreement are not being complied with by the respondent, the human
rights coordinator shall take appropriate action to assure compliance. (Ord.
03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-6: REMEDIAL ACTION:
For the purposes of this title, remedial action includes, but is not limited
to, the following: (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   A.   Hiring, reinstating or promoting of employees with or without pay.
Interim earned income and unemployment compensation shall operate to reduce the
pay otherwise allowable. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
   B.   Admission or restoration of individuals to a labor organization,
admission to or participation in a guidance program, apprenticeship training
program, on the job training program or other occupational training or
retraining program, with the utilization of objective criteria in the admission
of individuals to such programs.
   C.   Admission of individuals to a public accommodation or an educational
institution.
   D.   Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real property
to an individual.
   E.   Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment of the
advantages, facilities, privileges and services of the respondent denied to the
complainant because of the discriminatory or unfair practice.
   F.   Reporting as to the manner of compliance.
   G.   Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of
business in a form prescribed by the commission and inclusion of notices in
advertising material. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   H.   Payment to the complainant of damages caused by the discriminatory or
unfair practice which may include actual damages, emotional distress damages,
front pay, court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003;
amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   I.   In addition to the remedies in the preceding provisions of this
section, the commission may issue an order requiring the respondent to cease
and desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take such
affirmative action as in the judgment of the commission will carry out the
purposes of this chapter as follows:
      1.   In the case of a respondent operating by virtue of a license issued
by the state or a political subdivision or agency, if the commission, upon
notice to the respondent with an opportunity to be heard, determines that the
respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice and that the
practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or knowingly or
recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the respondent or by an
officer or executive agent acting within the scope of their employment, the
commission shall so certify to the licensing agency. Unless the practice is
reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of discrimination is
binding on the licensing agency. If a certification is made pursuant to this
subsection, the licensing agency may initiate licensee disciplinary procedures.
      2.   In the case of a respondent who is found by the commission to have
engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice in the course of performing
under a contract or subcontract with the state or political subdivision or
agency, if the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or
knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board or executive agent acting within
the scope of their employment, the commission shall so certify to the
contracting agency. Unless the commission's finding of a discriminatory or
unfair practice is reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of
discrimination is binding on the contracting agency.
      3.   Upon receiving a certification made under this subsection, a
contracting agency may take appropriate action to terminate a contract or
portion thereof previously entered into with the respondent, either absolutely
or on condition that the respondent carry out a program of compliance with the
provisions of this title, and assist the state and all political subdivisions
and agencies thereof to refrain from entering into further contracts. (Ord. 94-
3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   J.   The election of an affirmative order under subsections A through H of
this section shall not bar the election of affirmative remedies provided in
subsection I of this section. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   K.   In connection with housing discrimination complaints only under this
title, the commission may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil
penalty against the respondent in an amount not to exceed those established by
code of Iowa chapter 216.15A as amended. Funds collected under this section
shall be paid to the city for deposit to the city treasury to the credit of the
general fund. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   L.   Any other relief that the administrative law judge finds to be
appropriate. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-7: NOTICE AND HEARING:
   A.   Litigation Worthy: Upon notification by the human rights coordinator
that conciliation has been bypassed or unsuccessful, the city attorney shall
form an opinion as to whether the case is litigation worthy and make a
recommendation to two (2) members of the commission whether the case should be
dismissed or proceed to public hearing. If both members of the commission wish
to proceed contrary to the recommendation of the city attorney, they may
authorize the human rights coordinator to do so. Otherwise, the human rights
coordinator shall dismiss the case or proceed to public hearing in accordance
with the recommendation of the city attorney.
   B.   Representative Of Commission: The commission's case in support of the
complaint shall be presented by the city attorney or designee.
   C.   Statement Of Charges:
      1.   When a complaint proceeds to public hearing, the human rights
coordinator shall prepare a written statement of charges in support of the
complaint, which shall contain:
         a.   An allegation that the respondent is a proper respondent within
the meaning of and subject to provisions of this title.
         b.   A factual allegation or allegations of an unfair or
discriminatory practice or practices, substantially as uncovered in the
investigation, stated in the complaint (including amendments thereto), or
stated in the probable cause decision.
      2.   A statement of charges is sufficient if it:
         a.   Names the respondents and complainants;
         b.   States the section(s) of the code alleged to be violated; and
         c.   Incorporates by reference the complaint and any amendments to the
complaint.
      3.   The statement of charges shall also specifically identify all
allegations, if any, in the complaint, as amended, which:
         a.   Have been closed by other than a probable cause finding; or
         b.   The commission has elected not to prosecute despite a probable
cause finding.
      4.   None of the allegations identified pursuant to subsection C3 of this
section shall be considered as a claim of discrimination in the contested case
proceeding, but evidence on such allegations may be considered when relevant to
other allegations of discrimination or as background evidence.
   D.   Scheduling Conference: The administrative law judge may set the matter
for a scheduling conference in order that the parties, including the
commission, and the presiding officer may arrive at a mutually agreed date for
the public hearing.
   E.   Notice Of Hearing: Delivery of the notice of hearing constitutes the
commencement of the contested case proceeding. Delivery shall be executed by
any of the following means: certified mail, with return receipt requested,
personal service as provided in the Iowa rules of civil procedure, first class
mail, or publication as provided by the Iowa rules of civil procedure to all
interested parties or their attorneys at least thirty (30) days before the date
of the hearing. Certified mail return receipts, returns of service, or similar
evidence of service shall be filed with the presiding officer. The notice shall
include:
      1.   The time and place of hearing;
      2.   The nature of the hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction
under which the hearing is being held;
      3.   A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. This
requirement may be satisfied by a statement of the issues as described by the
statement of charges or an incorporation of the attached statement of charges;
      4.   The reference to the sections of this title involved;
      5.   Identification of all parties including the name, address and
telephone number of the person who will act as advocate for the commission and
of parties' counsel where known; and
      6.   Identification of the administrative law judge.
   F.   Answer To Notice Of Hearing: The respondent is encouraged to file an
answer to the allegation contained within the notice of hearing within twenty
(20) days of the service of the notice of hearing. Answers are encouraged as a
means of sharpening the issues and preserving claimed error.
   G.   Default:
      1.   If a party fails to appear or participate in a contested case
proceeding after proper service of notice, the administrative law judge may, if
no adjournment is granted, enter a default decision or proceed with the hearing
and render a decision in the absence of the party.
      2.   Default decisions or decisions rendered on the merits after a party
has failed to appear or participate in a contested case proceeding become final
agency action unless, within fifteen (15) days after the date of notification
of mailing of the decision, a motion to vacate is filed and served on all
parties or an appeal of a decision on the merits is timely initiated.
      3.   "Good cause" for purposes of this rule shall have the same meaning
as "good cause" for setting aside a default judgment under Iowa rules of civil
procedure 1.977.
   H.   Filing And Service Of Documents: After the notice of hearing, all
pleadings, motions, documents or other papers shall be filed with the
administrative law judge with a copy to parties of record, with separate copies
to the city attorney. Except as provided by these rules, the Iowa rules of
civil procedure pertaining to discovery, or other laws, all pleadings, motions,
documents or other papers that are required to be served upon a party shall be
filed simultaneously with the administrative law judge.
   I.   Discovery:
      1.   Discovery procedures applicable in civil actions as set forth in the
Iowa rules of civil procedure, are applicable in contested cases. Unless
lengthened or shortened by these rules or by order of the administrative law
judge, time periods for compliance with discovery shall be as provided in the
Iowa rules of civil procedure.
      2.   When discovery of information from the complainant is sought,
discovery should be made upon the complainant with a copy thereof provided to
the city attorney. When discovery of information from the commission is sought,
discovery should be made upon the commission with a copy thereof provided to
the complainant or the complainant's representative.
   J.   Subpoenas:
      1.   A commission subpoena shall be issued to a party upon request. Such
a request should be in writing, but oral requests may be honored by the
administrative law judge. The request shall include the name, address, and
telephone number of the requesting party.
      2.   Parties are responsible for service of their own subpoenas and
payment of witness fees and mileage expenses.
   K.   Motions:
      1.   No technical form for motions is required. However, prehearing
motions must be in writing, state the grounds for relief, and state the relief
sought. Any motion for summary judgment shall comply with the Iowa rules of
civil procedure. Motions made during the hearing may be stated orally upon the
record.
      2.   Any party may file a written response to a motion within fourteen
(14) days after the motion is served, unless the time period is extended or
shortened by the administrative law judge.
      3.   Motions for summary judgment shall comply with the requirements of
the Iowa rules of civil procedure 1.981.
   L.   Prehearing Conferences: Upon the administrative law judge's own motion
or the motion of the parties, the administrative law judge may direct the
parties or their counsel to meet with the administrative law judge for a
conference to consider:
      1.   Simplification of issues;
      2.   Necessity or desirability of amendments to pleadings for purposes of
clarification, simplification, or limitation;
      3.   Stipulations, admissions of fact and of contents and authenticity of
documents;
      4.   Limitation of number of witnesses;
      5.   Scheduling dates for the exchange of witness lists and proposed
exhibits;
      6.   Identifying matters which the parties intend to request be
officially noticed; and
      7.   Such other matters, including discovery matters, as may tend to
expedite the disposition of the proceedings.
   M.   Continuances: Unless otherwise provided, applications for continuances
shall be made to the administrative law judge.
   N.   Disqualification: A person shall not be appointed as an administrative
law judge and an administrative law judge shall withdraw from participation in
the making of any proposed or final decision in a contested case if that
person:
      1.   Has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party or a
representative of a party;
      2.   Has personally investigated, prosecuted or advocated in connection
with that case, the specific controversy underlying that case, another pending
factually related contested case, or a pending factually related controversy
that may culminate in a contested case involving the same parties;
      3.   Is subject to the authority, direction or discretion of any person
who has personally investigated, prosecuted or advocated in connection with
that contested case, the specific controversy underlying that contested case,
or a pending factually contested case or controversy involving the same
parties;
      4.   Has acted as counsel to any person who is a private party to that
proceeding within the past two (2) years, unless all parties agree to the
administrative law judge;
      5.   Has a personal financial interest in the outcome of the case or any
other significant personal interest that could be substantially affected by the
outcome of the case;
      6.   Has a spouse or relative within the third degree of relationship
that: a) is a party to the case, or an officer, director or trustee of a party;
b) is a lawyer in the case; c) is known to have an interest that could be
substantially affected by the outcome of the case; or d) is likely to be a
material witness in the case; or
      7.   Has any other legally sufficient cause to withdraw from
participation in the decision making in that case.
   O.   Ex Parte Communication: Unless required for the disposition of ex parte
matters specifically authorized by this title or the Iowa rules of civil
procedure, following issuance of the notice of hearing, there shall be no
communication, directly or indirectly, between the administrative law judge and
any party or representative of any party or any other person with a direct or
indirect interest in such case in connection with any issue of fact or law in
the case except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate.
   P.   Powers Of Administrative Law Judge: The administrative law judge who
presides at the hearing shall have all powers necessary to the conduct of a
fair and impartial hearing including, but not limited to, the power to:
      1.   Conduct formal hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
title;
      2.   Administer oaths and examine witnesses;
      3.   Compel production of documents and appearance of witnesses in
control of the parties;
      4.   Issue subpoenas;
      5.   Issue decisions and orders;
      6.   Rule on motions, and other procedural items or matters;
      7.   Require the submission of briefs;
      8.   Issue such orders and rulings as will ensure the orderly conduct of
the proceedings;
      9.   Receive, rule on, exclude or limit evidence and limit lines of
questioning or testimony which are irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly
repetitious;
      10.   Maintain the decorum of the hearing including the power to refuse
to admit or to expel anyone whose conduct is disorderly;
      11.   Take any action authorized by these rules; and
      12.   Impose appropriate sanctions against any party or person failing to
obey an order.
   Q.   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   Objections: All objections shall be timely made and stated in the
record. Any objection not duly made before the administrative law judge shall
be deemed waived.
      2.   Representation Of Parties: Parties have the right to participate or
to be represented in all hearings or prehearing conferences related to their
case.
      3.   Rights Of Parties: Subject to terms and conditions prescribed by the
administrative law judge, parties have the right to introduce evidence on
issues of material fact, cross examine witnesses present at the hearing as
necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts, present evidence in
rebuttal, and submit briefs and engage in oral argument.
      4.   Sequestration Of Witnesses: At the request of a party or sua sponte,
the administrative law judge may order witnesses sequestered so they cannot
hear the testimony of other witnesses.
      5.   Contents Of Record: The record in a contested case before the
administrative law judge shall include:
         a.   All pleadings, motions, and rulings.
         b.   All evidence received or considered and all other submissions.
         c.   A statement of matters officially noticed.
         d.   All questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings
thereon.
         e.   All proposed findings and exceptions.
         f.   Any decision, opinion, or report by the administrative law judge
at the hearing. Deliberations of the commission when deciding whether to adopt
a proposed decision are not part of the record unless expressly made part of
the record by order of the commission or the administrative law judge.
   R.   Evidence:
      1.   The administrative law judge shall rule on admissibility of evidence
and may, where appropriate, take official notice of facts in accordance with
all applicable requirements of law.
      2.   Stipulation of facts is encouraged.
      3.   Evidence in the proceeding shall be confined to the issues as to
which the parties receive notice prior to the hearing unless the parties waive
their right to such notice by express or implied waiver, or the administrative
law judge determines that good cause justifies their expansion. (Ord. 03-4105,
12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
      4.   With the exception of hearings regarding housing, the rules of
evidence do not apply in a contested case hearing. Findings shall be based upon
the kind of evidence on which reasonably prudent persons are accustomed to rely
for the conduct of their serious affairs, and may be based upon such evidence
even if it would be inadmissible in a jury trial. In a hearing concerning
housing, the federal rules of evidence shall apply. The administrative law
judge shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. (Ord. 15-
4650, 12-15-2015)
      5.   No evidence shall be received at any hearing concerning offers or
counter offers of adjustment during efforts to conciliate or settle an alleged
unfair or discriminatory practice.
      6.   The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of evidence.
   S.   Evidence Of Past Sexual Practices:
      1.   Discovery: In a contested case alleging conduct which constitutes
sexual harassment, a party seeking discovery of information concerning the
complainant's sexual conduct with persons other than the person who committed
the alleged act of sexual harassment must establish specific facts showing good
cause for discovery, and that the information sought is relevant to the subject
matter of the action, and reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of
admissible evidence.
      2.   Evidence: In a contested case against a respondent who is accused of
sexual harassment, or whose agent or employee is accused of sexual harassment,
evidence concerning the past sexual behavior of the alleged victim is not
admissible.
   T.   Cost Of Copies Of Record: Upon request by a party the commission shall
provide a copy of the whole or any portion of the record at cost. The cost of
preparing a copy of the record shall be paid by the requesting party.
   U.   Posthearing Briefs:
      1.   Submission Of Posthearing Briefs: The administrative law judge may
fix times for submission of posthearing briefs. Unless otherwise ordered, such
briefs shall be filed simultaneously by all parties and there shall be no page
limit nor any other formal requirements.
      2.   Reply Briefs: If simultaneous briefs are filed, then any party may
file a reply brief within ten (10) days after service of the brief to which the
reply is made.
   V.   Requests To Present Additional Evidence:
      1.   In General: A party may request the taking of additional evidence
only by establishing that the evidence is material, that good cause existed for
failure to present the evidence at the hearing, and that the party has not
waived the right to present the evidence.
      2.   Filing Request: If a request to present additional evidence is made
after the issuance of the proposed decision, then the request must be filed
with the appeal or, by a nonappealing party, within fourteen (14) days after
the service of the appeal. If the commission grants the motion to present
additional evidence, the commission shall remand the case to the administrative
law judge for the taking of the additional evidence and any appropriate
modification of the proposed order.
   W.   Proposed Decision: After a review of the transcript, the evidence, and
the briefs, the administrative law judge shall set forth, in writing, findings
of fact, conclusions of law, and a proposed decision and order. The proposed
decision becomes the final decision of the commission without further
proceedings unless there is an appeal to, or review on motion of, the
commission within thirty (30) days.
   X.   Review Of Proposed Decision On Appeal To Commission:
      1.   Appeal By Party: Any adversely affected party may appeal a proposed
decision to the commission within thirty (30) days after issuance of the
proposed decision.
      2.   Review: The commission may initiate review of a proposed decision on
its own motion at any time within thirty (30) days following the issuance of
such a decision.
      3.   Notice Of Appeal: An appeal of a proposed decision is initiated by
filing a timely notice of appeal with the commission. The notice of appeal must
be signed by the appealing party or a representative of that party and contain
a certificate of service. The notice shall specify:
         a.   The parties initiating the appeal;
         b.   The proposed decision or order appealed from;
         c.   The specific findings or conclusions to which exception is taken
and any other exceptions to the decision or order;
         d.   The relief sought; and
         e.   The grounds for relief.
      4.   Oral Argument: All parties or their attorneys shall be allowed ten
(10) minutes to present oral argument to the commission whenever the commission
reviews a proposed decision pursuant to this rule. The commission may, in its
discretion, allow oral argument to continue longer.
      5.   Briefs And Arguments: Unless otherwise ordered, within twenty (20)
days of the notice of appeal or order for review, each appealing party may file
exceptions and briefs. Within ten (10) days thereafter, any party may file a
responsive brief. The commission may shorten or extend the briefing period as
appropriate.
   Y.   Scope Of Review By Commission:
      1.   Whenever the commission reviews a proposed decision, it has all the
power it would have in initially making the final decision. The commission may
adopt, modify, or reject the administrative law judge's proposed decision or it
may remand the case to the administrative law judge for the taking of
additional evidence and the making of any further proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, or decision that it deems necessary.
      2.   Whenever the commission reviews a proposed decision, it shall
consider only those issues actually presented to the administrative law judge
unless the issue was one which either:
         a.   Was raised prior to the proposed decision by a party, but not
ruled upon; or
         b.   Was discussed in the proposed decision, but not argued on brief
by the parties.
   Z.   Intervention:
      1.   Motion: A motion for leave to intervene in a contested case
proceeding shall state the grounds for the proposed intervention, the position
and interest of the proposed intervenor, and the possible impact of
intervention on the proceeding. A proposed answer or petition in intervention
shall be attached to the motion. Any party may file a response within fourteen
(14) days of service of the motion to intervene unless the time period is
extended or shortened by the administrative law judge.
      2.   Grounds For Intervention: The movant shall demonstrate that: a)
intervention would not unduly prolong the proceedings or otherwise prejudice
the rights of existing parties; b) the movant is likely to be aggrieved or
adversely affected by a final order in the proceeding; and c) the interests of
the movant are not adequately represented by existing parties.
      3.   Effect Of Intervention: A person granted leave to intervene is a
party to the proceeding. The order granting intervention may restrict the
issues that may be raised by the intervenor or otherwise condition the
intervenor's participation in the proceeding.
   AA.   Awards Of Attorney Fees:
      1.   In any final decision in which it is determined that the complainant
is entitled to an award of attorney fees, but the actual amount has not yet
been determined, there is, by operation of this provision, an express retention
of jurisdiction of the case by the commission in order to determine the actual
amount of attorney fees to which the party is entitled and to enter a
subsequent order awarding those fees, regardless of whether or not such
retention of jurisdiction is expressed in the final decision. In such case, the
decision is final in all other respects except the determination of the amount
of the attorney fees.
      2.   If the amount of attorney fees is not stipulated to by the parties,
the administrative law judge shall schedule a hearing on the issue of the
amount of the attorney fees. The administrative law judge's decision is a
proposed decision, and either party may appeal as provided in subsections V
through X of this section.
   BB.   Waiver, Modification Of Rules:
      1.   Upon notice to all parties, the administrative law judge may, with
respect to matters pending, modify or waive any rule herein upon a
determination that no party will be prejudiced and that the ends of justice
will be served.
      2.   Unless otherwise precluded by law, the parties in a contested case
proceeding may waive any provision of this chapter. However, the administrative
law judge, in the discretion of the presiding officer, may refuse to give
effect to such a waiver when the administrative law judge deems the waiver to
be inconsistent with the public interest.
   CC.   Application For Rehearing:
      1.   By Whom Filed: Any party to a contested case proceeding may file an
application for rehearing from a final order.
      2.   Content Of Application: The application for rehearing shall state on
whose behalf it is filed, the specific grounds for rehearing, and the relief
sought. In addition, the application shall state whether the applicant desires
reconsideration of all or part of the decision on the existing record and
whether the applicant requests an opportunity to submit additional evidence.
      3.   Time Of Filing: The application shall be filed with the commission
within twenty (20) days after the issuance of the final decision.
      4.   Notice To Other Parties: A copy of the application shall be timely
mailed by the applicant to all parties of record not joining therein.
      5.   Disposition: Any application for a rehearing shall be deemed denied
unless the commission grants the application within twenty (20) days after its
filing. The commission shall notify the parties in writing that the application
was denied.
   DD.   Assessment Of Costs Of Hearing:
      1.   General Rule: If the commission prevails in the hearing, the
respondent shall pay the "contested case costs" incurred by the commission. If
the respondent prevails in the hearing, the commission shall itself bear the
"contested case costs" incurred by the commission.
      2.   Mixed Results: Where the commission is successful as to part of the
remedies sought at the hearing and unsuccessful as to part of the remedies, the
administrative law judge may recommend an equitable apportionment of "contested
case costs" between the commission and the respondent.
      3.   Costs Allowable: The following "contested case costs" and no others
will be assessed or apportioned:
         a.   The daily charge of the court reporter for attending and
transcribing the hearing.
         b.   All mileage charges of the court reporter for traveling to and
from the hearing.
         c.   All travel time charges of the court reporter for traveling to
and from the hearing.
         d.   The cost of the original of the transcripts of the hearing.
         e.   Postage incurred by the administrative law judge in sending by
mail (regular or certified) any papers which are made part of the record.
         f.   Expenses and fees of the administrative law judge, including, but
not limited to, lodging and transportation.
   EE.   Appeals To District Court: Appeals to the district courts from the
decision of the commission shall be perfected pursuant to the provisions of
Iowa Code chapter 17A. (Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
2-4-8: FINDINGS AND ORDER:
   A.   If upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the
commission determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or
unfair practice, the commission shall state its findings of fact and
conclusions of law and shall issue an order requiring the respondent to cease
and desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice and to take the necessary
remedial action as in the judgment of the commission shall carry out the
purposes of this title. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the
respondent and complainant and to any other public officers and persons as the
commission deems proper. A description of possible remedial actions appears in
section
2-4-6 of this chapter.
   B.   If upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the
commission finds that a respondent has not engaged in any such discriminatory
or unfair practice, the commission shall issue an order denying relief and
stating the findings of fact and conclusions of the commission, and shall cause
a copy of the order dismissing the complaint to be served by certified mail,
email, or personal service on the complainant and the respondent. (Ord. 94-
3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015; Ord. 21-4845, 1-19-2021)
2-4-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The commission may obtain an order of court for the enforcement of
commission orders in a proceeding as provided in this section. Such an
enforcement proceeding shall be brought in the district court of the county
where the discriminatory practice occurred.
   B.   Such an enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a
petition in the court and the service of a copy thereof upon the person
charged. The commission shall then file with the court a transcript of the
record of the hearing before it. The court has the power to grant such
temporary relief or restraining order as it deems just and proper, and to make
and enter upon the pleadings, testimony and proceeding set forth in such
transcript an order enforcing, modifying, and enforcing as so modified, or
setting aside the order of the commission, in whole or in part.
   C.   An objection that has not been urged before the commission shall not be
considered by the court in an enforcement proceeding, unless the failure or
neglect to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordinary
circumstances.
   D.   Any party to the enforcement proceeding may move the court to remit the
case to the commission in the interest of justice for the purpose of adducing
additional specified and material evidence and seeking findings thereof,
providing such parties shall show reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce
such evidence before the commission.
   E.   In the enforcement proceeding the court shall determine its order on
the same basis as it would in a proceeding reviewing commission action under
section 17A.19, code of Iowa, as amended.
   F.   The commission's copy of the testimony shall be available to all
parties for examination at all reasonable times, without cost, and for the
purpose of judicial review of the commission's orders.
   G.   The commission may appear in court by the city attorney or a designee.
   H.   If no proceeding to obtain judicial review is instituted within thirty
(30) days from the service of an order of the commission issued pursuant to
this section, the commission may obtain an order of the court for the
enforcement of such order upon showing that the person charged is subject to
the jurisdiction of the commission and resides or transacts business within the
county in which the petition for enforcement is brought.
   I.   Judicial review of the actions of the commission may be sought in
accordance with the terms of the Iowa administrative procedure act, as amended.
Notwithstanding the terms of such act, petition for judicial review may be
filed in the district court in which an enforcement proceeding under
subsections A and B of this section may be brought. For purposes of the time
limit for filing a petition for judicial review under the Iowa administrative
procedure act, as amended, the issuance of a final decision of the commission
under this title occurs on the date notice of the decision is mailed by
certified mail to the parties. Notwithstanding the time limit provided in
section 17A.19, subsection 3 of the code of Iowa, as amended, a petition for
judicial review of no probable cause decisions and other final agency actions
which are not of general applicability must be filed within thirty (30) days of
the issuance of the final agency action. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-10: SIXTY DAY RELEASE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS; ALTERNATIVE JUDICIAL
PROCEEDINGS UPON COMPLAINTS REGARDING EMPLOYMENT, PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS, CREDIT
AND EDUCATION:
This section applies to all complaints except housing. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
   A.   Conditions For Release: A person claiming to be aggrieved by an unfair
or discriminatory practice must initially seek administrative relief by filing
a complaint with the commission in accordance with section
 2-4-1 of this chapter. After the proper filing of a complaint with the
commission, a person may subsequently commence an action for relief in the
district court if all of the following conditions have been satisfied:
      1.   The complainant has timely filed the complaint with the commission
as provided in subsection
2-4-1E of this chapter.
      2.   The complaint has been on file with the commission at least sixty
(60) days and the commission has issued a release to the complainant pursuant
to subsection B of this section. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord. 15-4650,
12-15-2015)
   B.   Requirements For Issuance Of Release: Upon a request by the
complainant, and after the expiration of sixty (60) days from the timely filing
of a complaint with the commission, the human rights coordinator shall issue to
the complainant a release stating that the complainant has a right to commence
an action in the district court. A release under this subsection shall not be
issued if a finding of no probable cause has been made on the complaint, or a
conciliation agreement has been executed, or the commission has served notice
of hearing upon the respondent, or the complaint is closed as an administrative
closure and two (2) years have elapsed since the issuance date of the closure.
(Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
   C.   Availability Of Documents: (Rep. by Ord. 03-4105, 12-16-2003)
   D.   Commencement Of Action: An action authorized under this section is
barred unless commenced within ninety (90) days after issuance by the
commission of a release under subsection B of this section. If a complainant
obtains a release from the commission under subsection B of this section, the
commission shall be barred from further action on that complaint.
   E.   Venue: Venue for an action under this section shall be in Johnson
County, Iowa.
   F.   Relief: The district court may grant any relief in an action under this
section which is authorized by section 2-4-6 of this chapter. The district
court may also award the respondent reasonable attorney fees and court costs
when the court finds that the complainant's action was frivolous.
   G.   Legislative Intent: It is the legislative intent of this section that
every complaint be at least preliminarily screened by the commission during the
first sixty (60) days. This subsection does not authorize administrative
closures if an investigation is warranted. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994; amd. Ord.
15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-11: COMPLAINTS:
This section applies only to complaints in the area of housing.
   A.   A complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf a
complaint alleging a violation of section
2-3-5 or
2-3-6 of this title was filed, may elect to have the claims asserted in that
charge decided in a civil action.
      1.   The particular party electing to have his or her case decided in a
civil rather than administrative action under subsection
2-4-4J of this chapter, must do so no later than twenty (20) days after the
date of receipt of the probable cause determination. In the event the
commission makes such election, it must be made not later than twenty (20) days
after the date the determination was issued.
      2.   The person making the election shall give notice to the human rights
coordinator and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the election
relates.
      3.   The election to have the charges of a complaint decided in a civil
action as provided here is available only if it is alleged there has been a
violation of section
 2-3-5 or
2-3-6 of this title.
   B.   An aggrieved person may file a civil action in district court not later
than two (2) years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged
discriminatory housing or real estate practice, whichever occurs last, to
obtain appropriate relief with respect to the discriminatory housing or real
estate practice or breach of a conciliation agreement.
      1.   The two (2) year period does not include the time between the filing
of a housing or real estate practice discrimination complaint and the
disposition of that complaint by the city attorney.
      2.   An aggrieved person may file an action under this section whether or
not a discriminatory housing or real estate complaint has been filed under
sections
2-3-5 and/or
2-3-6 of this title, and without regard to the status of any discriminatory
housing or real estate complaint filed under those sections, but:
         a.   If the human rights coordinator obtains a conciliation agreement
with the consent of an aggrieved person, the aggrieved person shall not file an
action under this section with respect to the alleged discriminatory practice
that forms the basis for the complaint except to enforce the terms of the
agreement.
         b.   An aggrieved person shall not file an action under this section
with respect to an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice that
forms the basis of a probable cause determination issued by the human rights
office if the commission has begun a hearing on the record under this chapter
with respect to the charge. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-12: CIVIL PROCEEDINGS - HOUSING:
   A.   If timely election to district court is made under subsection
2-4-11 of this chapter, the human rights coordinator may authorize, not later
than thirty (30) days after the election is made, the filing of a civil action
on behalf of the complainant in district court and the city attorney, or its
designated agent, may commence and maintain such action. (Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-
2015)
   B.   A commission order for remedial action and a commission order that has
been substantially affirmed by judicial review, do not affect a contract, sale,
encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the commission issued the
order and involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant who did not
have actual notice of the charge issued under this title.
   C.   If the commission issues an order with respect to a discriminatory
housing practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to a
licensing or regulation by a governmental agency, the commission, not later
than thirty (30) days after the date of the issuance of the order, shall do all
of the following:
      1.   Send copies of the findings and the order to the governmental
agency.
      2.   Recommend to the governmental agency appropriate disciplinary
action.
   D.   In an action under section
2-4-11 of this chapter, if the district court finds that a discriminatory
housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur, the district
court may award or issue to the plaintiff one or more of the following:
      1.   Actual and punitive damages.
      2.   Reasonable attorney fees.
      3.   Court costs.
      4.   Subject to subsection E of this section, any permanent or temporary
injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order
enjoining the defendant from engaging in the practice or ordering appropriate
affirmative action.
   E.   Relief granted under this section does not affect a contract, sale,
encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the granting of the relief
and involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant who did not have
actual notice of the filing of a complaint under this title or a civil action
under this section.
   F.   The city attorney, on behalf of the commission or other party at whose
request a subpoena is issued, may enforce the subpoena in appropriate
proceedings in district court. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-20-1997; amd. Ord. 15-4650, 12-
15-2015)
   G.   A court in a civil action brought under this section, or the commission
in an administrative hearing under subsection
 2-4-4K of this chapter, may award reasonable attorney fees to the prevailing
party and assess court costs against the nonprevailing party. (Ord. 97-3785, 5-
20-1997; amd. Ord. 99-3905, 10-12-1999; Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
2-4-13: TIME LIMITS:
With respect to any time limit within this chapter that is stated as a number
of days, said time period shall be computed in accordance with Iowa Code
section 4.1(34). (Ord. 16-4678, 10-4-2016)
CHAPTER 5
FAIR HOUSING
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4650, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 6
DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP
SECTION:
2-6-1: Purpose
2-6-2: Requirements And Eligibility
2-6-3: Statements Of Domestic Partnership; Registration
2-6-4: Termination
2-6-5: Records
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The city recognizes that nationwide debate has advanced an expanded
concept of familial relationships beyond traditional marital and blood
relationships. This expanded concept recognizes the relationship of two (2)
nonmarried but committed adult partners. Recognizing this, the city hereby
adopts a process to provide persons to declare themselves as domestic partners,
thus enabling employers to voluntarily provide equal treatment in employment
benefits for such partners and their dependents.
   B.   This chapter establishes a mechanism for the public expression and
documentation of the commitment reflected by the domestic partnership whose
members cannot or choose not to marry.
   C.   It is appropriate and fair that certain of the societal privileges and
benefits now accorded to members of a marriage be extended to those who meet
the qualifications of a domestic partnership. The mechanism established by this
chapter will facilitate the definition of those entitled to such privileges.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-2: REQUIREMENTS AND ELIGIBILITY:
A domestic partnership shall exist between two (2) adults if all of the
following are true:
   A.   The persons are not related by blood closer than permitted under the
marriage laws of the state.
   B.   Neither person is married.
   C.   The persons are competent to enter into a contract.
   D.   The persons declare that they are each other's sole domestic partner.
   E.   The persons declare that they are in a relationship of mutual support,
caring and commitment and are responsible for each other's welfare. For these
purposes, "mutual support" means that they contribute mutually to each other's
maintenance and support.
   F.   The persons file a statement of domestic partnership as set forth in
this chapter.
   G.   The persons agree to notify the city of the termination of their
domestic partnership, or a change in their employment or residence which would
render them ineligible to register as domestic partners under this chapter.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-3: STATEMENTS OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP; REGISTRATION:
   A.   The city clerk shall accept an application to register as domestic
partners from persons who state in such application that they meet the
definition of "domestic partners" in this chapter. The city clerk shall provide
forms as necessary to interested individuals.
   B.   The city clerk shall only accept applications for registration of
domestic partnership from those persons:
      1.   In a partnership where at least one person resides in Iowa City; or
      2.   In a partnership in which at least one person is employed in Iowa
City.
   C.   The city clerk shall charge an application fee as set by resolution of
the city council for the registration of a domestic partnership. The payment of
this fee entitles the person filing a statement on behalf of the domestic
partnership to two (2) copies of the statement certified by the city clerk.
Additional certified copies may be purchased by the person. These copies of the
certified statement shall not be issued prior to the third working day after
the date of application.
   D.   The application and certified statement may be used as evidence of the
existence of a domestic partners relationship. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-4: TERMINATION:
   A.   Either person in a domestic partnership may initiate termination of the
domestic partnership by written notification to the city clerk. The person
filing the termination statement must declare that:
      1.   The domestic partnership is terminated; and
      2.   A copy of the termination statement has been mailed to the other
domestic partner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   B.   A domestic partnership terminates when the earlier of the following
occurs:
      1.   One of the persons in the domestic partnership dies; or
      2.   Ninety (90) days elapse after both partners file a notice of
termination of domestic partnership; or
      3.   Ninety (90) days elapse after one partner files a notice of
termination of domestic partnership and provides the city clerk proof that the
notice of termination of partnership has been mailed to the other partner at
the last known address, or that the partner cannot be located or refuses to
accept the mailed notice. A properly mailed notice which is returned as refused
or undeliverable shall be adequate proof.
   C.   If any of the criteria under section
2-6-2 of this chapter cease to exist, the parties shall be ineligible for any
benefits based upon the domestic partnership unless otherwise provided by law
or the employer.
   D.   When an employer permits or provides benefits to the domestic partner
of an employee, the domestic partner may be eligible to continue to receive
benefits for a period of sixty (60) days after the death of the employee. The
employer shall give the domestic partner written notice by U.S. mail, postage
prepaid, at the address provided by the employee stating whether such benefits
are available to the partner. Said notice shall state the date on which group
benefit coverage, if any, terminates, and shall state the right, if any, of the
domestic partner to transfer benefit coverage to a nongroup plan without lapse
of coverage and without providing evidence of good health.
   E.   No person who has registered as a domestic partner pursuant to section
2-6-3 of this chapter shall be eligible to file a new application for
registration as a domestic partner until ninety (90) days have elapsed after
the domestic partnership has terminated. (Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
2-6-5: RECORDS:
The city clerk shall maintain records of domestic partnership statements,
showing the name and address of applicants for domestic partnership, and the
date of application, certification and termination of domestic partnerships.
(Ord. 94-3647, 11-8-1994)
TITLE 3
FINANCES, TAXATION AND FEES
CHAPTER 1
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
3-1-1: Tax Imposed; Rate
3-1-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
There is hereby imposed a hotel and motel tax at a rate of seven percent (7%)
upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all sleeping rooms,
apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house,
rooming house, mobile home which is tangible personal property or tourist court
or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests
for rent, whether with or without meals, within the corporate limits of the
city, all as authorized in the code of Iowa, as amended, and subject to the
limitations, restrictions, conditions, provisions and penalties contained
therein. (1978 Code §32.1-21; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Exemption Established
3-2-3: Term And Amount Of Exemption; Limitations
3-2-4: Application For Exemption
3-2-5: Application For Prior Approval
3-2-6: Dual Exemptions Prohibited
3-2-7: Repeal Of Exemption Provisions
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ACTUAL VALUE ADDED: The actual value added as of the first year for which
the exemption is received, except actual value added by improvements to
machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the assessor as
of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
   DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A building or storage used primarily for the storage of
goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
"Distribution center" does not mean a building or structure used primarily for
any of the following purposes: to store raw agricultural products, by a
manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, for the
storage of petroleum products or for the retail sale of goods.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: New buildings and structures and new buildings and
structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. "New construction" does not include reconstruction of an existing
building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the city
council upon the recommendation of the Iowa development commission or its
successor.
   NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT: New machinery and equipment assessed as real
estate pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, unless the machinery or
equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or
expand the existing operational status.
   RESEARCH SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted
primarily to research and development activities, including but not limited to
the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental
use and corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of
providing on site services to the public.
   WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the
storage of goods pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, except it does not
mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products
or from which goods are sold at retail. (1978 Code §32.1-32; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-2: EXEMPTION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a partial exemption from property taxation of the
actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment
assessed as real estate pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code
§32.1-31; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-3: TERM AND AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION; LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Term And Amount Of Exemption:
      1.   The actual value added to industrial real estate for the reasons
specified in section
 3-2-2 of this chapter is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five (5) years. The amount of exemption from taxation allowed
for actual value added shall be as follows:
 
For the first year  75 percent
For the second year 60 percent
For the third year  45 percent
For the fourth year 30 percent
For the fifth year  15 percent
 
      2.   However, if property ceases to be classified as industrial real
estate or ceases to be used as a research service facility, warehouse or
distribution center, the partial exemption for the value added shall not be
allowed for subsequent assessment years. (1978 Code §32.1-33)
   B.   Limitations: The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or
structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate
being reduced below the assessed value for the industrial real estate before
the start of the new construction added. (1978 Code §32.1-34)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed with the city assessor for each project resulting
in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. The application for
exemption shall be filed by the property owner by February 1 of the assessment
year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. Applications for
exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the state director of revenue
and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its
cost and other information deemed necessary by the state director of revenue or
successor. (1978 Code §32.1-35; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-5: APPLICATION FOR PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the city council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for tax exemption on new construction. The city council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with title 14, "Zoning Code", of this
code. The ordinance may be enacted not less than thirty (30) days after a
public hearing is held in accordance with the code of Iowa, as amended. Such
prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the
new construction has been completed and found by the city assessor to be
qualified real estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction is
not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal to the city council to
approve or reject. (1978 Code §32.1-36; amd. 1994 Code)
3-2-6: DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (1978 Code §32.1-38)
3-2-7: REPEAL OF EXEMPTION PROVISIONS:
When, in the opinion of the city council, continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the city, the city council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration. (1978 Code §32.1-37)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL BOND FINANCING
SECTION:
3-3-1: Lost Or Stolen Bonds
3-3-2: Duplicate Bonds
3-3-3: Inadvertent Payment Of Original Bonds; Enforcement Of Indemnity Bond
3-3-1: LOST OR STOLEN BONDS:
In the event of claim made for payment of the principal of or interest on bonds
issued by the city, the director of finance shall be provided with satisfactory
evidence of proof of ownership and of loss of said bonds or coupons and shall
require the filing with the director of finance of a satisfactory indemnity
bond of a surety acceptable to the director of finance, indemnifying the city
in the event any or all of the original bonds or coupons are inadvertently paid
or presented for payment by a bona fide holder in due course. (1978 Code §32.1-
100)
3-3-2: DUPLICATE BONDS:
   A.   Issuance; Costs: Upon receipt of such proof of ownership, loss and
indemnity bond, the controller is authorized to proceed with the printing of
duplicate bonds or coupons and shall charge for the issuance of the duplicate
bonds and coupons any amount sufficient to reimburse the city for the actual
expense incurred by it in connection with the issuance thereof. The city
officials designated are authorized to execute the duplicate bonds and coupons
in the same manner as provided with respect to the original bonds. (1978 Code
§32.1-101)
   B.   Substitute For Original Issue Bonds: Duplicate bonds and coupons of
like tenor, amount, date and maturity shall be deemed to be issued in lieu of
and in substitution for each of the bonds or coupons so numbered of the
original issue and shall be so noted on the books of the city kept for that
purpose. (1978 Code §32.1-102)
3-3-3: INADVERTENT PAYMENT OF ORIGINAL BONDS; ENFORCEMENT OF INDEMNITY BOND:
In the event any or all of the original bonds or coupons shall be inadvertently
or for any reason paid by the city or presented for payment by a bona fide
holder in due course or if the city shall incur any expense or liability by
reason of refusing to honor the original bonds or coupons, the indemnity bond
on file shall be immediately enforced. (1978 Code §32.1-103)
CHAPTER 4
SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES, CHARGES, BONDS, FINES AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Broadband Telecommunications Franchise 1  (Rep. by Ord. 95-3700, 12-5-
1995)
3-4-3: Potable Water Use And Service
3-4-4: Wastewater Treatment Works User Charges
3-4-5: Solid Waste Disposal
3-4-6: Stormwater Utility Fee
3-4-7: Public Transportation
3-4-8: Parking
3-4-9: Violation Of Various Code Sections
3-4-10: Nonmotorized Vehicle Violations
3-4-11: Bicycle And E-Device Violations
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12, chapter 4 of this Code.
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth those fees, rates, charges, bonds,
fines and penalties authorized to be charged by the City pursuant to State law
governing City utilities or enterprises, as defined in chapter 384, Code of
Iowa, as amended, and to set forth specific fines for certain simple
misdemeanor offenses. (Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003)
3-4-2: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 95-3700, 12-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 12, chapter 4 of this Code.
3-4-3: POTABLE WATER USE AND SERVICE:
Description Of Fee, Charge,Bond, Fine Or Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty                                  Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge,Bond,   Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Fine Or Penalty
Water service charges (see section Meter Size     Charge
16-3A-4 of this Code):             (Inches)
                                   5/8, 5/8 x 3/4 $ 9.04
                                   3/4            9.88
  For first 100 cubic feet or less 1              11.63
 of water used, based on meter    11/2           23.19
  size                             2              31.18
                                   3              57.63
                                   4              100.50
                                   6              202.23
 There will be no minimum monthly charge for a single purpose water meter for
  the months of November to March if no water is used.   
User charges for water in excess   Monthly
of 100 cubic feet per month:       Usage          Charge Per 100 Cubic Feet
                                   (Cubic Feet)
 Dual purpose meters              101 - 3,000    $4.21
                                   Over 3,000     3.03
 Single purpose meters            Over 100       4.21
Other charges and discounts:                      Charge
 Low income discount                             75 percent of minimum monthly
                                                  water charge
Temporary water use (see
subsection                          
16-3A-4B of this Code):
  During construction for the
  first 90 days from the date of
 the connection to the water main               Charge Per Month
  for a new water service or a
  maximum of 90 days for
  reconstruction:
   Single- and two-family                       $ 21.14
    residences
  Multi-family residences                      21.14
  Commercial structures                        35.22
  After 90 days for any structure,
 until the water meter is                       140.82
  installed
 
                         Charge
Direct purchase of
water fee, per 100
gallons or fraction      $ 0.50
thereof (see subsection
16-3A-4C of this Code)
Deposit and delinquency
fee for combined City
water and/or sanitary
sewer and/or solid       
waste collection
accounts (see section
16-3A-5 of this Code):
 Residential owner      0.00
  account
 Residential tenant     120.00
  account
                        An amount equal to an average 2 month billing for
 Commercial account    commercial service for City water and/or sanitary sewer
                        service, or $120.00, whichever is greater
  10 percent delinquency charge on current billed portion of the outstanding
 amount on combined water and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste account
  that is not paid within 22 days of billing date. Can be waived once every 12
  months   
Delinquency deposit fee
for combined water and/
or sanitary sewer and/  An amount equal to an average 2 month billing for the
or solid waste          delinquent account. Can be waived if the account holder
collection accounts     enrolls in SurePay
(see section
16-3A-5 of this Code)
To connect water main     Charge
extensions, per acre         $555.60
                        Service Fees
                        During Normal          After Normal
                        Working Hours    Working Hours1
Reconnection of         $45.00                 $97.31
discontinued service
Posting fee for                                Not done after normal working
shutting off water in   $0                  hours
collection procedure
 
                   Service Fees
                During Normal     After Normal
                Working Hours  Working Hours1
Frozen water    $40.13, plus      $97.31, plus cost of meter
meters          cost of meter
Shut off water
service at curb No charge         $97.31, plus hourly overtime rate beyond 2
and check for                  hours
exterior leaks
Broken or       Repair cost       $97.31, plus repair cost
damaged hydrant
Location of
City owned      No charge         No charge
water main for
other utilities
Location of
City owned                        $97.31, plus hourly overtime rate beyond 2
water main for  No charge      hours
private
enterprise
Check water
meter for
accuracy at     $93.67            Not done after normal working hours
consumer's
request
Annual fire
hydrant fee for
inspection and
operation of
fire hydrants
which are       110.69            Not done after normal working hours
privately owned
or owned by
other
government
agencies
After hours
callout fee for
any water work  Not applicable    $97.31, plus hourly overtime rate beyond 2
done outside of                hours
normal working
hours
 
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty                                   Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge,  Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Water tap fee                Tap Size                   Charge
                             1" through 2"              $120.00
                             4"                         $490.00
                           6"                         $510.00
                             8"                         $540.00
                             10"                        $580.00
                             12"                        $620.00
One-Time Only, Non-          Meter Size                 Charge
Refundable Water Meter Fee   (inches)
                             5/8                        $300.00
                             5/8 x 3/4                  $300.00
                             Short length               $430.00
 Standard Neptune T10 Water 1                          $430.00
  Meters                     1 1/2                      $560.00
                             2                          $1,090.00
                             All strainers and any type $1,370.00
                             of larger diameter meter   Actual Cost
  Strainers, turbine, compound, and ultrasonic meters are special orders and
 not kept in stock by the Water Division. The actual cost of the meter and
  related items such as kits are charged based on the actual order invoice.
User charges for Fire        Usage Cubic Feet (CF)      Charges
Hydrant Meter:
 Fire Hydrant Meter         Minimum less than 900 CF   $35.00 Flat Fee
                             Over 900 CF                $4.09 per 100 CF
 Meter deposit                                         $500.00
Portable Meter Kit Rental    Charge
Fee                          $35.00
Fire Hydrant Flow Test       Charge
                             $150.00
                             Service Fees
                             During Normal Working      After Normal Working
                             Hours                      Hours1
Fire hydrant meter                                      $94.48, plus hourly
connection                   $45                        overtime rate beyond 2
                                                        hours
Fire hydrant meter                                      $94.48, plus hourly
disconnection                $45                        overtime rate beyond 2
                                                        hours
Location of private service  $45 per hour; after first  $94.48, plus hourly
lines                        30 minutes                 overtime rate beyond 2
                                                        hours
 
Note:
    1.The Water Division's normal working hours are 7:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.,
Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 19-4792, 5-21-2019, eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 20-4830, 10-20-2020; Ord.
23-4902, 5-16-2023, eff. 7-1-2023; Ord. 24-4924, 5-21-2024, eff. 7-1-2024; Ord.
24-4933, 8-20-2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 24-4935, 9-3-2024, eff. 10-1-2024;
Ord. 25-4955, 5-20-2025, eff. 7-1-2025)
 
3-4-4: WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES:
 
Sanitary Sewer Service
Charges;                    Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Minimum monthly charge
(includes the first 100     $8.73                  16-3A-4
cubic feet of water used)
Monthly charge for each
additional 100 cubic feet   4.27                   16-3A-4
of water used
Low income discount         75 percent of monthly  16-3A-4
                            minimum charge
 
Sanitary Sewer Service
Charges; Description Of Fee, Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Charge, Bond, Fine Or        Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Penalty
Sanitary Sewer Service                                City Code Chapter,
Charges; Description Of     Amount Of Fee, Charge,    Article Or Section
Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or  Bond, Fine Or Penalty     Reference
Penalty
Monthly surcharge:                                    
  BOD (per pound) 300 or    Included in charge for
 less MPL1                 100 cubic feet of water   16-3A-4
                            used
 BOD (per pound) from 301  $ 0.305                   16-3A-4
  MPL to 2,000 MPL1
 BOD (per pound) greater   0.456                     16-3A-4
  than 2,000 MPL1
 Suspended solids (SS)     0.244                     16-3A-4
  (per pound)
Monthly minimum, unmetered  35.73                     16-3A-4
user
Manufactured housing park,  35.73                     16-3A-4
monthly minimum per lot
Holding tank waste - plus   0.035 per gallon          16-3A-4
landfill fees
Holding tank waste hauler - 971.40 per year           16-3A-4
annual permit
Deposit and delinquency fee
for combined City water                               16-3A-5,
and/or sanitary sewer and/                           16-3A-7
or solid waste collection
accounts:
  Residential owner
  account, per combined
  residential service for
 City water and/or         0.00                       
  sanitary sewer and/or
  solid waste collection
  service
  Residential tenant
  account, per combined
  residential service for
 City water and/or         120.00                     
  sanitary sewer and/or
  solid waste collection
  service
  10 percent delinquency
  charge on current billed
  portion of the            10.0 percent current
  outstanding amount on     billed portion. Can be
 combined water and/or     waived once every 12       
  sanitary sewer and/or     months
  solid waste account that
  is not paid within 22
  days of billing date
                            An amount equal to an
Delinquency deposit fee for average 2-month billing
combined City water and/or  for the delinquent        16-3A-5
sanitary sewer and/or solid account. Can be waived if
waste collection accounts   the account holder
                            enrolls in SurePay
 
Sanitary Sewer Service
Charges; Description Of Fee, Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Charge, Bond, Fine Or        Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Penalty
Sanitary Sewer Service        Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Charges; Description Of Fee,  Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty
Laboratory Testing Fees                               
 Regular (CBOD/TSS/Ammonia/  $64.62                 16-3A-4
  pH)
 pH                          $8.40                  16-3A-4
 Zinc                        $15.75                 16-3A-4
 Metals                      $21.00                 16-3A-4
 Oil and Grease              $19.95                 16-3A-4
 Total Phosphorous (as P)    $36.40                 16-3A-4
 Total Nitrogen (as N)       $36.40                 16-3A-4
 6 month sample (combined    $398.58                16-3A-4
  metal and VOC)
Car Wash Load Fee             $525.00                16-3A-4
 
Note:
    1.    Milligrams per liter (MPL).
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018; amd. Ord. 23-4902, 5-16-2023, eff. 7-
1-2023; Ord. 23-4913, 10-3-2023; Ord. 24-4924, 5-21-2024, eff. 7-1-2024; Ord.
24-4933, 8-20-2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 24-4935, 9-3-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
3-4-5: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL:
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Charge
Or Penalty
Yard waste collection fees:
 Per dwelling unit, per month         $3.50
 Low income discount                  75 percent of monthly charge
 Additional yard waste carts over 1,     $3.50
  per month
 Per sticker for each bag or bundle   $2.00
Collection of large items fees:
 Appliance collection, per item       $20.00
  collected
 Bulky solid waste                    $20.00 per stop and 1 item; $10.00 per
                                       additional items
 Tire collection                      $3.75 per tire; $7.50 tire and rim
 
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Charge
Penalty
Residential solid waste collection fees:   
 Curbside household refuse:               
  Per dwelling unit, per month          $14.00
  Low income discount                   75 percent of monthly charge
  Per sticker for each additional bag   $ 2.50 each
    beyond each unit's monthly allotment
  Additional refuse carts over 1, per   14.00 each
    month
  Per 2 rooming units, per month (in    15.90
    addition to the dwelling unit fees)
  Electronic waste                      TVs or monitors $21.50 per item
 Curbside recycling:
  Per dwelling unit, per month          $8.50
  Low income discount                   75 percent of monthly charge
Iowa City community compost               $20.00 per ton, $2.00 minimum
Wood chip mulch                           No charge
Deposit and delinquency fee combined for
City water and/or sanitary sewer and/or
solid waste collection accounts:
  Residential owner account, per combined
 residential service for City water and/ $ 0.00
  or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste
  collection service
  Residential tenant account, per
 combined residential service for City   120.00
  water and/or sanitary sewer and/or
  solid waste collection service
  10 percent delinquency charge on
  current billed portion of the
 outstanding amount on combined water    10 percent current billed portion.
  and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid      Can be waived once every 12 months
  waste account that is not paid within
  22 days of billing date
 
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Charge
Penalty
Delinquency deposit for combined water    An amount equal to an average 2-month
and/or sanitary sewer and/or solid waste  billing for the delinquent account.
collection service                        Can be waived if the account holder
                                          enrolls in SurePay
Special wastes disposal fees:              
  Disposal of special wastes (except for  2 times the landfill use fees in this
 asbestos containing material and        section
  contaminated soils)
 Minimum fee                             2 times the landfill use fee for 1
                                          ton
 Asbestos containing material (ACM):
    Nonfriable ACM, from Iowa City
  premises subject to a Property Tax    $100.00/ton
    and City owned property
  Nonfriable ACM, from other locations  105.00/ton
    Friable ACM, from Iowa City premises
  subject to a Property Tax and City    100.00/cubic yard
    owned property
  Friable ACM, from other locations     105.00/cubic yard
  Minimum fee for any regulated ACM     100.00
 Contaminated soil:                      50.00/ton
  Minimum fee for contaminated soil     150.00
Disposal of large items fees (see also
Collection of large items fees above):
 Appliance disposal fees:
  Commercial per item disposed          1.00/cubic foot
  Residential per item disposed         $12.50 (at landfill scale house)
 Tire disposal fee:
  Per pound                             $ 0.15
  Subject to minimum fee                3.00
 Untreated wood waste and yard waste:    24.00/ton
  Minimum yard waste fee in lieu of     5.00
    tonnage fees (400 pounds or less)
 
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Penalty Charge
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or Charge
Penalty
Landfill use fees:                         
 Arriving at the landfill with an         
  unsecured or uncovered load:
  First instance in trailing 12 months     Warning
  Second or subsequent instances in     $50.00
    trailing 12 months
 Electronic waste                        $3.00 per item; TVs or monitors
                                          $15.00 per item
  Solid waste from Iowa City premises
 subject to a Property Tax and City       
  owned property:
  Total landfill fee per ton (includes  $47.50
    State fee per ton)
 All other solid waste:                   
  Total landfill fee per ton (includes  $52.50
    State fee per ton)
 Minimum fee in lieu of tonnage fees      
  (600 pounds or less):
    Solid waste from Iowa City premises
  subject to a Property Tax and City    $14.00
    owned property
  All other solid waste                 15.00
 
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018; amd. Ord. 20-4823, 5-19-2020; Ord. 21-
4861, 8-17-2021; Ord. 22-4879, 5-17-2022, eff. 7-1-2022; Ord. 23-4902, 5-16-
2023, eff. 7-1-2023; Ord. 23-4913, 10-3-2023; Ord. 24-4924, 5-21-2024, eff. 7-
1-2024; Ord. 24-4933, 8-20-2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 25-4955, 5-20-2025, eff.
7-1-2025)
3-4-6: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE:
 
Description Of Fee, Bond, Charge, Fine Or Amount Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine Or
Penalty                                   Penalty
Stormwater utility fee. Users include all 1 equivalent residential unit (ERU) =
users owning or occupying developed       $5.50
property in the City of Iowa City
Low income discount                       75 percent of the monthly charge
 
(Ord. 19-4792, 5-21-2019, eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4902, 5-16-2023, eff. 7-
1-2023; Ord. 24-4933, 8-20-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
3-4-7: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION:
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or      Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Penalty
General fares and rates:
 Standard fare, general public          $ 1.00
 24 hour pass                           2.00
 Children (K - 12)                      0.75
 Children under 5 years old             Free
 School field trip (per person)         0.75
Bus passes:
 31 day pass (adult, 18 years old and   32.00
  up)
 31 day pass (youth, K - 12)            27.00
 31 day pass (bulk sales)               28.00
 31 day pass (low income)               27.00
 31 day pass (City employee)            Half price of 31 day pass (adult)
 10 ride pass                           $ 8.50
 20 ride pass (University of Iowa)      17.00
 University of Iowa semester pass       100.00
  (prorated)
 Kirkwood semester pass (prorated)      100.00
 Youth semester pass (K - 12, prorated) 100.00
Special fares:
 Elderly persons (off peak only, 60+    0.50
  years)
 Elderly low income (off peak only,     Free
  pass required)
 Person with disability (off peak only, Free
  pass required)
 Saturday family fare (up to 2 adults   1.00
  and 2 children)
Bicycle lockers:
 Annual (prorated)                      75.00
Miscellaneous:
 Use of City vehicle and operator       Fully allocated cost per hour
 Bus and shop                           $0.35
 
(Ord. 12-4474, 4-3-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
3-4-8: PARKING:
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Penalty
Description Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or      Amount Of Fee, Charge, Fine Or Penalty
Penalty
Parking ramp fees:
  Hourly parker (Court Street
  Transportation Center, Tower Place,    First hour = Free
 Capital Street, Chauncey Swan,         Hours 2+ = $2.00 per hour
  Harrison Street and Dubuque Street
  parking ramps), per hour
  Monthly all day permits with advance
  payment (Court Street Transportation
 Center, Chauncey Swan, Harrison        90.00
  Street, Tower Place, Capital Street,
  and Dubuque Street parking ramps), per
  month
  Annual all day permits with advance
  payment (Court Street Transportation
 Center, Chauncey Swan, Harrison        1,026.00
  Street, Tower Place, Capital Street,
  and Dubuque Street parking ramps), per
  year
 Reissue of monthly, quarterly or       25.00
  annual permit, each reissue
 City employee monthly all day permits, Half price
  per month
 City council monthly all day permits,  No charge
  per month
 Monthly evening and weekend permits    75% of monthly all day ramp permit
  per month; designated ramps
 Lost ticket fee                        $ 30.00
Surface lot fees:
 Monthly all day permits, per month     70.00
 Monthly all day permits (annual        798.00
  advance payment), per year
 Monthly evening and weekend permits,   75% of monthly all day surface lot
  per month; designated surface lots     permit
Parking meter fees (except as otherwise
marked):
 Central business district on street    2.25
  meter, per hour
 Central business district lot meter,   2.25
  per hour
 100 - 300 blocks of East Jefferson     2.25
  Street, per hour
 100 - 200 block of North Clinton       1.50
  Street, per hour
 10 block of West Court Street, per     1.50
  hour
 10 - 300 block of East Court Street,   1.50
  per hour
 300 block of South Linn Street, per    1.50
  hour
 300 block of South Dubuque Street, per 1.50
  hour
 300 block of South Clinton Street, per 1.50
  hour
 100 - 300 blocks of East Market        1.50
  Street, per hour
 100 - 200 block of North Linn Street,  1.50
  per hour
 400 block of Iowa Avenue, per hour     1.50
 Market Street and Schuman parking      1.50
  lots, per hour
 Peripheral lot meter (outside central  1.50
  business district), per hour
 Peripheral on street meter (outside    1.50
  central business district), per hour
 Fee for contractor reservation of      25.00
  space, per day
Moped/scooter/motorcycle permit (annual permit):
 January 1, 2015 - December 31, 2023    90.00
 January 1, 2024 -                      95.00
Fines for parking violations:
 Overtime parking                       15.00
 Commercial loading zone; each period runs from July 1 until June 30 of
  subsequent year
 First citation each period             $25.00
 Second + citation each period          $40.00
 Expired meter; each period runs from July 1 until June 30 of the subsequent
  year:
 First citation each period             Warning
 Second citation each period            $ 10.00
 Third citation each period             15.00
 Fourth citation each period            20.00
 Fifth citation each period             30.00
 Sixth+ citation each period            40.00
 Prohibited zone                        25.00
  Illegal parking; handicapped parking space$200.00, or as specified in Iowa
 Code section 321.236(1)(b), as amended, for violations of Iowa Code section
  321L.4(2)
 Library patron only parking            20.00
 Library outside book drop off only     20.00
 Parking in passenger loading zone      25.00
 Parking where prohibited or restricted 50.00
  during a snow emergency
 Parking in front of fire hydrant       50.00
 Parking in fire lane                   40.00
 Parking permit violations              30.00
 All other illegal parking violations   25.00
 Increases:
  30 days after issue, all parking
  violations, if not already paid or
 appealed, shall increase in amount by  Original ticket amount plus $10.00
  $10.00, or as allowed by Iowa Code
  section 321.236(1)(b), as amended
 
(Ord. 13-4535, 6-4-2013, eff. 7-1-2013; amd. Ord. 15-4647, 11-10-2015; Ord. 16-
4684, 11-1-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 17-4699, 3-21-2017, eff. 7-1-2017; Ord.
23-4910, 9-5-2023; Ord. 23-4902, 5-16-2023, 7-1-2023; Ord. 24-4924, 5-21-2024,
eff. 7-1-2024; Ord. 24-4939, 9-17-2024)
3-4-9: VIOLATION OF VARIOUS CODE SECTIONS:
Description Of Fee, Charge, Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Bond, Fine Or Penalty       Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Description Of Fee, Charge, Bond, Fine  Amount Of Fee,       City Code Chapter,
Or Penalty                              Charge, Bond, Fine   Article Or Section
                                        Or Penalty           Reference
Animal bites reporting requirements     $ 65.00              8-4-4B
Animal licensing and vaccination        65.00                8-4-3
requirements
Animal nuisances                        65.00                8-4-5
Animal owner responsible                65.00                8-4-2
Animal permits                          65.00                8-4-12
Animal prohibited acts and conditions   65.00                8-4-10C to G
Animal prohibitions and requirements    65.00                8-4-6
Cigarette sales to persons under 18                         8-6-1
years of age:
   Civil Municipal infraction, civil                      
penalty:
  First offense                       75.00                 
  Second offense                      150.00                
  Subsequent offenses                 250.00                
                                        As set in Iowa Code
 Simple misdemeanor                    section 903.1(1)(a),  
                                        as amended
Engine braking                          $ 50.00              8-5-8
Littering except for City Plaza1        70.00                16-3H-10A
Littering in City Plaza1                300.00               16-3H-10A
                                        $500.00 fine and 30
Nuclear weapons free zone               days' imprisonment   6-5-5A
                                        for each violation
Open container of alcohol               $ 50.00              4-5-5
Public urination and defecation         50.00                8-5-13
 
Note:
   1.    "City Plaza" is defined in section
10-5-2 of this Code.
(1978 Code §§24-8, 24-145; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003; Ord. 04-
4115, 3-16-2004; Ord. 05-4182, 10-4-2005; Ord. 06-4209, 4-18-2006; Ord. 06-
4233, 9-5-2006; Ord. 08-4314, 9-9-2008; Ord. 09-4350, 6-30-2009; Ord. 19-4782,
3-12-2019)
3-4-10: NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE VIOLATIONS:
Description Of Fee, Charge, Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Bond, Fine Or Penalty       Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Description Of Fee, Charge, Amount Of Fee, Charge, City Code Chapter, Article
Bond, Fine Or Penalty       Bond, Fine Or Penalty  Or Section Reference
Clinging onto motor         $15.00                 9-1-8
vehicles
Follow flow of traffic      10.00                  9-1-7 A2b
Must yield to pedestrians   10.00                  9-1-7 C
on sidewalks
Obey traffic laws           10.00                  9-1-7 A2d
Operate in careful and      10.00                  9-1-7 A2c
prudent manner
Prohibited in parking ramps 10.00                  9-1-7 B
and lots
Prohibited on arterial
streets in central business 10.00                  9-1-7 A1
district
Prohibited on sidewalks in  10.00                  9-1-7 D
central business district
Reflective device or
clothing required after     10.00                  9-1-7 A2e
dusk
Stay far to the right of
the road (except when       10.00                  9-1-7 A2a
making a left turn)
 
(Ord. 03-4072, 5-6-2003; amd. Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
3-4-11: BICYCLE AND E-DEVICE VIOLATIONS:
 
Description Of Fine                  Amount Of Fine City Code
Operation of bicycle                 $15.00         9-8
Operation of electric assist bicycle 15.00          9-8
Operation of electric scooter        15.00          9-10
Operation of electric skateboard     15.00          9-10
 
(Ord. 19-4807, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Costs For Issuance Of Industrial Revenue Bonds
3-5-2: Amortization Of Conditional Deficiency Assessments On Public Improvement
Projects
3-5-1: COSTS FOR ISSUANCE OF INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS:
   A.   Financing Fee: The city shall charge a financing fee at the time that
industrial revenue bonds are issued. The fee shall reflect the actual costs
incurred by the city in preparation for the issuance of the industrial revenue
bonds, including but not limited to the fees of legal counsel and of a bond
consultant retained by the city, the time of city staff and publication costs.
The applicant shall receive a detailed statement of estimated costs at least
three (3) days prior to the public hearing.
   B.   Payment For Actual Costs: Should the applicant withdraw the application
or should the project be terminated for any reason, the city shall charge the
applicant for actual costs incurred, and the applicant shall reimburse the city
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the statement of costs. (1978 Code §2-
206)
3-5-2: AMORTIZATION OF CONDITIONAL DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS ON PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS:
Amortization of conditional deficiency assessments on public improvement
projects shall be as set out in the code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ASSESSOR
SECTION:
3-6-1: Establishment Of Office
3-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE:
The office of the city assessor is hereby established, as provided by chapter
441, code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 7
IOWA CITY DOWNTOWN SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-7-1: Established
3-7-2: Boundaries
3-7-3: Benefit To Property Within District
3-7-4: Operation Fund
3-7-5: Disbursements
3-7-6: Tax Rate
3-7-1: ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with Iowa code chapter 386 there is hereby established and
created in the city of Iowa City, a self- supported municipal improvement
district as defined in the act, the name of which shall be the "Iowa City
downtown self-supported municipal improvement district" (herein the
"district"), which district is also known as the Iowa City downtown district.
(Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-2: BOUNDARIES:
The district shall include all property within the following described
boundaries:
Beginning at the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street where it intersects
the south line of the east-west alley in block 57, original town of Iowa City,
Iowa;
Thence west along the south line of said alley to its intersection with the
west right-of-way line of Linn Street;
Thence south along the west right-of-way line of Linn Street to the northeast
corner of the south 60 feet of lot 8, block 69, original town of Iowa City,
Iowa;
Thence west along the north line of said south 60 feet of lot 8, to a point on
the west line of said lot 8;
Thence south along the west line of said lot 8 and its southerly extension to a
point on the south right-of-way line of Bloomington Street;
Thence east 5.00 feet along said southerly right-of-way line of Bloomington
Street to the northwest corner of auditor's parcel 2012099 as recorded in plat
book 57 at page 120 in the records of the Johnson County recorder's office;
Thence southerly, along the westerly line of said auditor's parcel 2012099, to
the southwest corner of said auditor's parcel 2012099;
Thence east along the north line of the platted east-west alley in block 68,
original town of Iowa City, Iowa, to a point on the west right-of-way line of
Linn Street;
Thence south along said west right-of-way line to a point on the south line of
said platted east-west alley in said block 68;
Thence west along said south line of the platted east-west alley in block 68,
to a point on the east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of Jefferson Street;
Thence east along the south right-of-way line of Jefferson Street, to its
intersection with the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street;
Thence south along said west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street, to a point 10
feet south of the northeast corner of lot 3, block 60, original town of Iowa
City, Iowa;
Thence east along the westerly extension of the north line of lot 5, block 45
original town of Iowa City, Iowa and along the north line of said lot 5, to the
northeast corner of said lot 5;
Thence south along the east line of said lot 5, to a point on the north right-
of-way line of Iowa Avenue;
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue, to its
intersection with the east right-of-way line of Clinton Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Clinton Street to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of Washington Street;
Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Washington Street to its
intersection with the east right-of-way line of Capitol Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of Capitol Street to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of Burlington Street;
Thence east along the south right-of-way line of Burlington Street to a point
on the west line of the east 25 feet of lot 8, block 101, original town of Iowa
City, Iowa (see retracement plat of survey recorded in plat book 57 at page 336
in the records of the Johnson County recorder's office);
Thence south along said west line and along the west line of the east 25 feet
of the north 50 feet of lot 7, block 101;
Thence east to a point on the east line of said lot 7;
Thence north along the east line of lot 7, 10 feet;
Thence east 20 feet to a point on the west line of lot 2, block 101;
Thence south along the east line of a north-south alley in block 101, to a
point on the north line of the south 70 feet of lot 4;
Thence east along said north line, and its easterly extension to a point on the
east right-of-way line of Clinton Street;
Thence north along the east line of Clinton Street, to a point on the south
line of the north 44 feet of lot 5, block 102, original town of Iowa City,
Iowa;
Thence east along said south line and its easterly extension, to a point on the
east line of the platted north- south alley in said block 102;
Thence north along the east line of said platted north-south alley, to a point
on the south line of the north 37 feet of lot 1, block 102;
Thence east along said south line of the north 37 feet of lot 1, block 102, and
its easterly extension, to a point on the east right-of-way line of Dubuque
Street;
Thence south along said east right-of-way line of Dubuque Street to the
southwest corner of lot 8, block 103, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence east along the south line of said lot 8 and the south line of lot 1,
block 103 and its easterly extension, to a point on the east right-of-way line
of Linn Street;
Thence south along the east line of Linn Street, to a point on the south line
of the north 35 feet of lot 10, Johnson's Subdivision of out lot 24, in Iowa
City;
Thence east along said south line of the north 35 feet of lot 10, Johnson's
Subdivision of out lot 24 and its easterly extension, to a point on the east
line of the platted north- south alley in said Johnson's Subdivision of out lot
24;
Thence north along the east line of said platted north-south alley, in said
Johnson's Subdivision of outlot 24 to the southwest corner of lot 6, said
Johnson's Subdivision of out lot 24;
Thence east along the south line of said lot 6, a distance of 35.44 feet more
or less;
Thence north 4.71 feet more or less;
Thence east 115 feet more or less to a point 105 feet south of the northeast
corner of said lot 6;
Thence continuing east to a point on the east right-of-way line of Gilbert
Street;
Thence north along the east right of way line of Gilbert Street to a point 85
feet south of the northwest corner of lot 1, Lyman Cook's Subdivision of outlot
25 of the original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence east 185 feet;
Thence north 81 feet;
Thence west 10 feet;
Thence north 4 feet to a point on the south right-of-way line of Burlington
Street;
Thence east to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Van Buren
Street;
Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Van Buren Street, to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue;
Thence west along the south right-of-way line of Iowa Avenue to the northeast
corner of lot 3, block 44, original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence north along the southerly extension of the east line of lot 6, block 45,
original town of Iowa City, Iowa, along said east line of lot 6 and along its
northerly extension to a point on the north line of the east-west alley in said
block 45;
Thence west along the north line of said east-west alley, to its intersection
with the east right-of-way line of Gilbert Street;
Thence north along the east right-of-way line of Gilbert Street, to its
intersection with the north right-of-way line of Jefferson Street;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Jefferson Street to its
intersection with the east line of the west 65 feet of lot 6, block 46,
original town of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence north along the east line of the west 65 feet of lot 6, block 46 and its
northerly extension, to its intersection with the north line of the east-west
alley in block 46;
Thence west along the north line of the east-west alley in block 46, to the
southeast corner of lot 4, block 46;
Thence north along the east line of lot 4, block 46 and its northerly extension
and along the east line of the south 25 feet of lot 5, block 47, original town
of Iowa City, Iowa;
Thence west along the north line of the south 25 feet of lot 5, block 47, and
its westerly extension to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of
Gilbert Street;
Thence north along the west right-of-way line of Gilbert Street to the point of
beginning; and excepting those properties zoned neighborhood public, which are
as follows:
The north 110' of the west 58.5' of lot 4 block 65
Lots 7, 8, and the east 20' lot 6 block 65
The west 58.5' of N 110' of lot 4 block 65
Lot 5 and the west 28.66' of lot 6 block 61
The east 38.3' lot 6, all of lot 7, and the west 39.7' of lot 8 block 58.
(Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-3: BENEFIT TO PROPERTY WITHIN DISTRICT:
It is hereby found and determined that all of the property within the district
is similarly related so that the present and potential use or enjoyment of the
property is benefited by the condition, performance of administration,
redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance of the district and the owners of
property in the district have a present and potential benefit from the
condition, performance of administration, redevelopment, revitalization and
maintenance of the district. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-4: OPERATION FUND:
Pursuant to the provisions of the act, there is hereby established and created
a self- supported municipal improvement district operation fund with respect to
the district to be known as the "Iowa City downtown self-supported municipal
improvement district operation fund" (herein the "operation fund"), for which
the city may certify taxes (the "operation tax") against the property, as
defined in the act, within the district (the "property") each year, in addition
to all other taxes, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection in the
fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016, for the purposes of paying the
administrative and operational expenses of the district, as defined and
authorized in the act or paying part or all of the maintenance expenses of
"improvements" or "self-liquidating improvements", as defined in the act, for a
period of ten (10) years. Property assessed as residential property for
property tax purposes is exempt from the tax levied under this chapter except
property classified as residential property under Iowa code section 441.21,
subsection 14, paragraph a, subparagraph (6). (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015; amd.
Ord. 22-4875, 2-1-2022)
3-7-5: DISBURSEMENTS:
The city may disburse the amounts collected in the operation fund, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Iowa City downtown district board of
directors as described in paragraph 5 of the petition, for one or more of the
following purposes:
   A.   Development and management of activities in support of marketing,
business retention and attraction, including, but not limited to:
      A contingency fund for extraordinary expenses.
      Establish customer relations management (CRM) or other property
databases.
      Establishment and promotion of special events, festivals, and activities.
      Marketing, advertising, and informational campaigns, including
advertising, social media, print and digital media releases.
      Miscellaneous business support services.
      Space referrals and assistance.
   B.   Physical or other improvements designed to enhance the image and
appearance of the district, including, but not limited to:
      Decorative enhancements, signage and campaign banners.
      Landscaping.
      Lighting improvements.
      Public or private art.
   C.   To employ an executive director and staff who shall work for the board
of directors of the district to manage the work of the district and to fulfill
the intent of the petition and ordinance. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
3-7-6: TAX RATE:
The rate of the operation tax to be levied annually, in addition to all other
taxes, as aforesaid, shall not exceed: a) for the period of July 1, 2016
through June 30, 2021, a rate of two dollars ($2.00) per one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of taxable value, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection
in the five (5) fiscal years beginning July 1, 2016; and b) for the period July
1, 2021 through June 30, 2026, a rate of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of taxable value for collection in the five
(5) fiscal years beginning July 1, 2021. (Ord. 15-4649, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 8
SOUTH DISTRICT SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-8-1: Established
3-8-2: Boundaries
3-8-3: Benefit To Property Within District
3-8-4: Operation Fund
3-8-5: Disbursements
3-8-6: Tax Rate
3-8-1: ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 386 ("the Act") there is hereby
established and created in the City of Iowa City, a self-supported municipal
improvement district as defined in the Act, the name of which shall be the
"South District Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District" (herein the
"South District SSMID"). (Ord. 22-4872, 1-18-2022)
3-8-2: BOUNDARIES:
The South District SSMID shall include all property within the following
described boundaries:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 1, part of Block 2 Braverman Center,
Iowa City, Iowa according to the plat recorded in Plat Book 7, page 20, in the
Records of the Johnson County Recorder's office; Thence northwesterly along the
southerly line of said Lot 1, and its northwesterly extension to a point on the
centerline of Broadway Street; Thence south along said centerline of Broadway
Street to its intersection with the easterly extension of the northerly right-
of-way line of Cross Park Avenue; Thence west along said easterly extended
northerly right-of-way line and along the northerly right-of-way line of Cross
Park Avenue, to the southeast corner of Lot 17, of a portion of Block 1,
Braverman Center, Iowa City, Iowa, according to the plat recorded in Plat Book
31, Page 137 in said Recorder's office; Thence north along the east line of Lot
17 and Lot 16, of said a portion of Block 1, Braverman Center, Iowa City, Iowa,
to the northeast corner of said Lot 16; Thence west along the northerly line of
said Lot 16 and its westerly extension to its intersection with the centerline
of Keokuk Street; Thence north along said centerline of Keokuk Street to its
intersection with the South line of Braverman Center, Lot 2 of Block 1 and
Blocks 5, 6 and 7, according to the plat recorded in Plat Book 8, Page 69 in
said Recorder's office; Thence west along said south line to the southwest
corner of Lot 8, Block 7 of said Braverman Center; Thence north along the west
line of said Lot 8, Block 7 of Braverman Center and its northerly extension to
the centerline of Southgate Avenue; Thence west along said centerline of
Southgate Avenue to its intersection with the southerly extension of the east
line of the west 60 feet of Lot 4 of Block 5 of the resubdivision of portions
of Blocks 5 and 6, Braverman Center, Parts 1 and 2, Iowa City, Iowa according
to the plat recorded in Plat Book 19, Page 93 in said Recorder's office; Thence
north along said southerly extended line and along said east line of the West
60 feet of Lot 4 of Block 5 and along the west line of Lot 5 of Block 5 of said
resubdivision of portions of Blocks 5 and 6, Braverman Center, Parts 1 and 2,
to its intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of Olympic Court;
Thence north to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Olympic Court,
said point being on the west line of Lot 6 of Block 5 of said resubdivision of
portions of Blocks 5 and 6, Braverman Center, parts 1 and 2; Thence north along
the west line of said Lot 6 of Block 5 to the northwest corner of said Lot 6 of
Block 5 of the resubdivision of portions of Blocks 5 and 6, Braverman Center,
Parts 1 and 2; Thence east along the north line of said Lot 6 of Block 5 of the
resubdivision of portions of Blocks 5 and 6, Braverman Center, Parts 1 and 2,
to its intersection with the west line of Auditor's Parcel 2020034, City of
Iowa City, Johnson County, Iowa, according to the plat recorded in Plat Book
64, page 135 in said Recorder's Office; Thence north along said west line of
Auditor's Parcel 2020034 and its northerly extension, to its intersection with
the centerline of the east bound lane of U.S. Highway 6; Thence southeasterly,
along said centerline of the east bound lane of U.S. Highway 6, to its
intersection with the northerly extension of the east line of part of Block 2,
Braverman Center, Iowa City, Iowa, according to the plat recorded in Plat Book
7, Page 20 in said Recorder's office; Thence south along said northerly
extended line and along said east line of part of Block 2, Braverman Center,
Iowa City, Iowa to the southeast corner of Lot 1, Part of Block 2, Braverman
Center, Iowa City to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 22-4872, 1-18-2022)
3-8-3: BENEFIT TO PROPERTY WITHIN DISTRICT:
It is hereby found and determined that all property within the South District
SSMID is similarly related so that the present and potential use or enjoyment
of the property is benefitted by the condition, performance of administration,
redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance of the South District SSMID and
the owners of property in the South District SSMID have a present and potential
benefit from the condition, performance of administration, redevelopment,
revitalization and maintenance of the South District SSMID. (Ord. 22-4872, 1-
18-2022)
3-8-4: OPERATION FUND:
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, there is hereby established and created
a self-supported municipal improvement district operation fund with respect to
the South District SSMID to be known as the "South District Self-Supported
Municipal Improvement District Operation Fund" (herein the "Operation Fund"),
for which the City may certify taxes, against the property within the South
District SSMID, to the extent allowed by the Act, each year (the "Operation
Tax"), in addition to all other taxes, commencing with the levy of taxes for
collection in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2022 for the purposes of paying
the administrative and operational expenses of the district, as defined and
authorized in the Act and this chapter, or paying part or all of the
maintenance expenses of "improvements" or "self-liquidating improvements", as
defined in the Act, for a period of five (5) years. (Ord. 22-4872, 1-18-2022)
3-8-5: DISBURSEMENTS:
The City may disburse the amounts in the Operation Fund to a South District
SSMID Advisory Board, pursuant to an agreement between the City and said Board
("Operating Agreement"), for one or more of the following purposes:
   A.   Develop and manage activities in support of marketing, business
retention and attraction, including but not limited to:
      1.   Database establishment;
      2.   Space referrals and assistance;
      3.   Marketing activities, including media and advertising campaigns and
communication materials;
      4.   Miscellaneous business support services;
      5.   Establishment and promotion of special events, festivals, and
activities; and
      6.   Support of urban design and policy development that would enhance
the activities within the South District SSMID.
   B.   Physical or other improvements designed to enhance the image and
appearance of the South District, including but not limited to:
      1.   Lighting improvements;
      2.   Seasonal and decorative enhancements;
      3.   Signage and banners;
      4.   Landscaping;
      5.   Central market development; and
      6.   Maintenance and repairs.
   C.   Hire an Executive Director and other support staff, as may be
necessary, who will work for the Advisory Board to manage the work of the South
District SSMID and to fulfill the purposes of the district. (Ord. 22-4872, 1-
18-2022)
3-8-6: TAX RATE:
The rate of the operation tax to be levied annually, in addition to all other
taxes, as aforesaid, shall not exceed a rate of five dollars ($5.00) per one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of taxable value, commencing with the levy of
taxes for collection in the five (5) fiscal years. (Ord. 22-4872, 1-18-2022)
TITLE 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions Of Words And Terms
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
Subject to the following additional definitions, this chapter shall incorporate
by reference the definitions contained in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as
amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a
part of this chapter as if set forth herein:
             Any nonprofit corporation or association of individuals, which is the owner,
CLUB:        lessee, or occupant of a permanent building or part thereof, membership in which
             entails the prepayment of regular dues and is not operated for a profit other
             than such profits as would accrue to the entire membership.
             An area outside of but immediately adjacent to a building housing a licensed
             premises, which area has been approved for use for the sale, dispensing or
             consumption of alcoholic beverages or beer pursuant to the provisions of this
OUTDOOR      title, chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended, and chapter 150 of the Iowa
SERVICE      administrative code, as amended. An outdoor service area shall include any
AREA:        outdoor area where beer or liquor is to be sold, served, carried or consumed by
             the public and shall be considered as part of the licensed premises. The same
             federal and state laws and local ordinances which apply to the licensed premises
             shall also apply to the outdoor service area.
             Live person(s) performing for the entertainment of an audience by doing at least
             one of the following:
             A.   Playing musical instrument(s).
             B.   Singing.
             C.   Performing comedy.
PERFORMER:   D.   Reading works of poetry or prose.
             E.   Performing theater.
             For purposes of this title, disc jockeys (DJs) are not considered performers.
             Anyone marketed or advertised as a DJ shall be considered a DJ. Also, anyone
             playing prerecorded music outside performances of theater shall be considered a
             DJ.
PROFESSIONAL That lighting and sound equipment needed to meet all requirements of the
LIGHT AND    professional light and sound specification sheet, as approved by city council by
SOUND:       resolution.
             A business whose primary function is the service of food to customers and which
             meets the following criteria:
             A.   Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service to each floor of
             the premises which is open to the public while the kitchen is open;
             B.   Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
             C.   Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an
             employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
             D.   Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with adequate cooking
             equipment; adequate hood ventilation system that complies with state/local fire
RESTAURANT:  and building codes; two 3-compartment sinks or a commercial dish machine;
             adequate food storage, refrigeration, and holding equipment. Kitchen must meet
             basic food requirements of a full-service food establishment as certified by the
             Johnson County Health Department.
             E.   Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of the
             hours that the business is open to the public; and
             F.   Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a restaurant if
             it advertises.
             G.   Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop,
             lunchroom, or tearoom.
             A showing of entertainment at least ninety (90) minutes in duration of actual
             performance time by a live performer(s), in which at least fifty percent (50%) of
             any fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, including, but not
SHOW:        limited to, cover charges and ticket sales, are paid to the performer(s). The
             performer(s) must be capable of being heard throughout the licensed premises
             through the audio components of the professional light and sound system, and must
             be the focus of activity at the licensed premises throughout the time the
             performer(s) is performing.
TEMPORARY    Either an area outside of but immediately adjacent to a licensed premises
OUTDOOR      approved for the temporary sale of liquor, beer or wine under the license or
SERVICE      permit for that premises or an area not within a building licensed for the
AREA:        temporary sale of liquor, beer or wine under a seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen
             (14) day license or permit.
             A depiction or dramatic representation by live performers of people and/or events
             real or imagined. Theater performances must provide seating with a view of the
             stage sufficient to accommodate at least fifty percent (50%) of the occupant
             load. Additionally, during the time of the show, there can be no venue space
THEATER:     dedicated to patron dancing, or any other patron activity other than eating,
             drinking, and watching the theater performance. (1978 Code §5-1; amd. 1994 Code;
             Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995; Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3790, 6-18-1997; Ord.
             10-4412, 10-26-2010; Ord. 13-4538, 6-18-2013; Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014; Ord. 21-
             4851, 3-16-2021)
 
 
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR LICENSES AND BEER PERMITS
SECTION:
4-2-1: State Statutes Incorporated By Reference
4-2-2: Premises Requirements
4-2-3: Local Review Of Application/Investigation Of Applicant
4-2-4: Notice And Hearing
4-2-5: Civil Penalties
4-2-1: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter shall incorporate by
reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained
in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of
Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth
herein.
License or permit required
Application for license or permit
Qualifications of applicant
Investigation of applicant; action forwarded to state
Proof of financial responsibility
Classes of beer permits
Classes of liquor control licenses
Classes of wine permits
Separate beer permits for separate locations
Fees for permits and licenses
Transferability of license or permit
Surrender of permit or license; refund of fee
Application for renewal
Hours of operation
Premises requirements and inspections
Grounds for suspension or revocation of license or permit
Specific terms for revocation or suspension of license or permit
Judicial review
Effect of revocation
(1994 Code)
4-2-2: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to any other requirements, the premises for which a beer permit or
liquor control license is sought shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   No liquor control license or beer permit shall be approved for premises
which do not conform to all applicable laws, provisions of this code and other
ordinances, resolutions and health and fire regulations.
   B.   No liquor control license nor beer permit for serving and consuming on
premises shall be approved for an establishment which is not located entirely
on the ground floor of a building and which does not contain windows which
permit visibility of its interior from the public way, except for hotels,
motels, restaurants, private clubs, theaters that have live performances as
their principal function, and outdoor rooftop patios (with an occupant load
under 50) associated with an indoor commercial recreational use. An
establishment will be considered to be on the ground floor if it is located on
a mall level. This provision shall not be applicable to premises licensed prior
to July 1, 1997. (1978 Code §26; amd. Ord. 13-4564, 12-3-2013)
4-2-3: LOCAL REVIEW OF APPLICATION/INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a liquor control
license, beer permit, or wine permit, or a renewal of any of those, to complete
the applications provided by the state alcoholic beverages division and the
city addendum. The city's addendum shall require a listing of all persons with
an ownership or management interest in the applicant, identification of any
administrative sanctions imposed, and authorization of each such person for an
Iowa criminal history report from the division of criminal investigation.
   B.   The Iowa City fire chief, the Iowa City building official, and the Iowa
City chief of police must approve or disapprove the application. The fire chief
and building official must determine if the premises complies with all
applicable state and local laws, rules, and regulations and will, if necessary
to make such determination, inspect the premises. The chief of police shall
make an investigation to determine if the applicant is of good moral character
as defined in section 123.3(26) of the Iowa Code, the rules of the Iowa
alcoholic beverages division and guidelines developed by the chief of police
and approved by the city council. Each official must approve or disapprove a
completed application and if applicable, provide a memo setting forth the
reasons for disapproval no later than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
expiration of the current license in the case of renewals, or within seven (7)
days of completion of the application, including the state requirements, in the
case of applications for a new license. Renewal applications will not be
accepted more than seventy (70) days prior to expiration of the present
license. The application must be reviewed and approved or denied by the city
council. (Ord. 06-4221, 7-18-2006; amd. Ord. 09-4357, 10-6-2009)
4-2-4: NOTICE AND HEARING:
The city council shall provide the licensee or permittee an opportunity to be
heard prior to the imposition of a civil penalty, suspension or revocation or
disapproval of an application for renewal. Notice may be given by personal
service or first class mail directed to the manager or contact person of the
applicant as listed on the application. Notice by personal service must be
given at least five (5) days before the hearing. Notice by first class mail is
effective on mailing and must be given at least six (6) days before the
hearing. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
4-2-5: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Any violation of state law, local ordinance, or the rules of the
alcoholic beverages division by any employee, agent, or servant of a licensee
or permittee shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee or the permittee and
shall subject the license or permit of said licensee or permittee to civil
penalties, including suspension or revocation.
   B.   The city council may suspend a license or permit for a period not to
exceed one year, revoke the license or permit, or impose a civil penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Before suspension,
revocation, or imposition of a civil penalty the license or permit holder shall
be given written notice and opportunity for a hearing in accordance with
section
4-2-4 of this chapter.
   C.   A license or permit issued may be suspended or revoked, or a civil
penalty may be imposed on the license or permit holder by the city council for
any of the following causes:
      1.   Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such
license or permit.
      2.   Violation of any of the provisions of chapter 123, the alcoholic
beverages control provisions of the Iowa Code.
      3.   Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated
under a class A, class B, or class C liquor control license, or any wine or
beer permit, which change was not previously reported to and approved by the
city council.
      4.   Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from
receiving a license or permit when originally issued.
      5.   Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of the license or permit.
      6.   The failure or refusal on the part of any licensee or permittee to
render any report or remit any taxes due under chapter 123 of the Iowa Code.
   D.   A license or permit issued may be suspended for a period not to exceed
one year for violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city of Iowa City
relating to the purchase, possession, sale, supply, dispensing or giving of
alcohol when such ordinance or regulation has no counterpart under state law.
   E.   When a liquor license or wine or beer permit is suspended after a
hearing as a result of violation by the licensee, permittee, or the licensee's
or permittee's agents or employees, the premises which were licensed by the
license or permit shall not be relicensed for a new applicant until the
suspension has terminated or time of suspension has elapsed, or ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the commencement of the suspension, whichever occurs
first. However, this section does not prohibit the premises from being
relicensed to a new applicant before the suspension has terminated or before
the time of suspension has elapsed or before ninety (90) days have elapsed from
the commencement of the suspension, if the premises prior to the time of the
suspension have been purchased under contract, and the vendor under that
contract had exercised the person's rights under chapter 656 of the Iowa Code
and sold the property to a different person who is not related to the previous
licensee or permittee by marriage or within the third degree of consanguinity
or affinity and if the previous licensee or permittee does not have a financial
interest in the business of the new applicant.
   F.   A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to a suspension,
revocation, or imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to this section.
   G.   If the cause for suspension is a first offense violation of section
123.49, subsection 2, paragraph h of the Iowa Code or subsection
4-5-4B of this title, the city council shall impose a civil penalty in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in lieu of suspension of the license
or permit.
   H.   The city council shall notify the alcoholic beverages division of any
action taken under this section and shall notify the licensee or permit holder
of the right to appeal a suspension, revocation, or imposition of a civil
penalty to the alcoholic beverages division.
   I.   If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a
licensee or permittee is convicted of selling, giving, or otherwise supplying
any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person in violation of section
123.49, subsection 2, paragraph h of the Iowa Code or subsection
4-5-4B of this title, in addition to criminal penalties fixed for such
violations, the city council shall assess a civil penalty as follows:
      1.   Upon a first conviction, the violator's liquor control license or
wine permit or beer permit shall not be suspended, but rather, the violator
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty will result in automatic suspension
of the license or permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
      2.   Upon a second conviction within a period of two (2) years, the
violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be
suspended for a period of thirty (30) days and the violator shall also be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
      3.   Upon a third conviction within a period of three (3) years, the
violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be
suspended for a period of sixty (60) days and the violator shall also be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
      4.   Upon a fourth conviction within a period of three (3) years, the
violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be
revoked. (Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
CHAPTER 3
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS; SEASONAL, FIVE DAY OR FOURTEEN DAY LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Outdoor Service Areas
4-3-2: Temporary Outdoor Service Areas
4-3-3: Seasonal, Five Day Or Fourteen Day License Or Permit
4-3-4: Regulations And Requirements For Temporary Outdoor Service Areas And
Seasonal, Five Day And Fourteen Day Permits And Licenses
4-3-1: OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
   A.   Approval Required: Any permittee or licensee under this title or any
applicant for a license or permit under this title desiring to operate an
outdoor service area adjacent to and in conjunction with a licensed premises
must obtain the approval of the city council and of the Iowa beer and liquor
control department or its successor before commencing operation of such outdoor
service area. (1978 Code §5-39)
   B.   Application For Permission To Operate Outdoor Service Area; Approval Or
Disapproval:
      1.   An application for an outdoor service area shall be made upon the
form provided by the city and/or the state. Such application may accompany the
initial application or any renewal application for a license or permit under
this title or may be submitted at any time in conjunction with an amended
application for a license or permit. (1978 Code §5-40; amd. 1994 Code)
      2.   An application for the approval of an outdoor service area shall
include all information required to be submitted with applications for beer and
liquor licenses. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the date it is to be considered by the city council.
An outdoor service area shall be subject to the same annual renewal
requirements as are all beer and liquor licenses. Approval by the city council
of an outdoor service area shall be by application to the Iowa beer and liquor
control department or its successor with regard to the diagram, dramshop
insurance coverage and all other state requirements. (1978 Code §5-40)
      3.   Upon submitting an application for an outdoor service area, the
applicant shall provide the name and address of the owner of each abutting
property as well as every other property which is within one hundred feet
(100') of applicant's premises. The applicant shall also post on the
applicant's premises in an area readily observable to the public a sign
provided by the city regarding the applicant's intent to establish or renew an
outdoor service area. Such notice must be posted at least ten (10) days prior
to the date and time when the application will appear on the agenda for
approval by the city council. (Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997)
      4.   Approval or disapproval of an application for an outdoor service
area shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such discretion shall be
exercised with due regard to public health, safety and welfare considerations.
In the event that there is a change of ownership, the outdoor service area use
shall be permitted to continue, provided the usage is continuous. (1978 Code
§5-40)
   C.   Regulation Of Outdoor Service Areas: The operation of an outdoor
service area shall be subject to the following terms, conditions and
regulations:
      1.   Location Restrictions:
         a.   An outdoor service area must be located on private property and
may not encroach on the public right of way.
         b.   An outdoor service area shall not be located on any side of a
licensed establishment which fronts on a street unless the outdoor service area
is being operated in conjunction with a "restaurant" as defined in section
4-1-1 of this title.
         c.   An outdoor service area must be immediately adjacent to the
licensed establishment of which it is a part. (Ord. 14-4596, 8-19-2014)
         d.   An outdoor service area may be located on a rooftop if it is in
compliance with the standards of this title and the applicable standards and
approval processes for rooftop service areas, as set forth in title 14, chapter
4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this code. Note that a special
exception may be required. (Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
         e.   An outdoor service area is permissible in any central business
zone, according to the provisions of this chapter.
         f.   An outdoor service area is permissible in any riverfront
crossings zone in accordance with this chapter and subject to the following:
(Ord. 14-4596, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
            (1)   For outdoor service areas located in the RFC-G zone, hours of
operation are limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
daily, or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more restrictive. For all
other RFC zones, hours of operation for outdoor service areas are limited to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sundays through
Thursdays; and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
Fridays and Saturdays, or when the kitchen is closed, whichever is more
restrictive. However, if an outdoor service area is located within one hundred
feet (100') of a residential zone, hours of operation are limited to seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. daily, or when the kitchen is
closed, whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
            (2)   Where the outdoor service area is within one hundred feet
(100') of a residential (R) zone, the occupancy limit shall not exceed thirty
(30) persons.
            (3)   A lighting plan for the outdoor service area must be filed
with the application and approved by the city manager, or designee.
            (4)   The city council may impose additional conditions on the
outdoor service area permit if sufficient conflicts with properties in an
adjacent R (residential) zone have been identified or are to be reasonably
expected.
            (5)   In the event that property within one hundred feet (100') of
an established outdoor service area is rezoned to any R (residential) zone
classification, such outdoor service area shall be permitted to continue in
operation so long as it is continuously authorized as such by the city council
without lapse, suspension or revocation. The city council may waive operation
of this provision to permit continued operation of the outdoor service area in
the event of lapse or suspension of the license or permit for the establishment
or in the event of lapse or suspension of city council authorization for the
outdoor service area.
         g.   An outdoor service area is permissible in the CO-1, CN-1, CH-1,
CI-1, and CC-2 zones, according to the provisions of this chapter and subject
to the following limitations where any part of such outdoor service area is
located within one hundred feet (100') of an R (residential) zone:
            (1)   The outdoor service area shall be operated in conjunction
with a "restaurant", as defined in section
4-1-1 of this title.
            (2)   The outdoor service area shall only be operational while the
establishment is serving food from an on premises kitchen. Outdoor service
areas must be closed to all patrons by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or whenever the
kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
            (3)   The outdoor service area occupancy limit shall not exceed
thirty (30) persons.
            (4)   A lighting plan for the outdoor service area must be filed
with the application and approved by the city manager, or designee.
            (5)   The city council may impose additional conditions on a permit
for such an outdoor service area if sufficient conflicts with properties in the
adjacent R (residential) zone have been identified or are to be reasonably
expected.
            (6)   In the event that property within one hundred feet (100') of
an established outdoor service area is rezoned to any R (residential) zone
classification, such outdoor service area shall be permitted to continue in
operation so long as it is continuously authorized as such by the city council
without lapse, suspension or revocation. The city council may waive operation
of this provision to permit continued operation of the outdoor service area in
the event of lapse or suspension of the license or permit for the establishment
or in the event of lapse or suspension of city council authorization for the
outdoor service area.
         h.   An outdoor service area located within an R (residential) zone or
an MU (mixed use) zone may be allowed as a temporary use under certain
circumstances set forth in title 14, chapter 4, article D of this code, and
shall not be treated as a temporary outdoor service area for the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 14-4596, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015)
      2.   Screening From Public View: Outdoor service areas are required to
provide a permanent decorative fence or other suitable barrier at least three
feet (3') in height but no more than eight feet (8') in height which is
detectable by persons who are visually impaired.
      3.   Exits: Emergency exits shall comply with all building, housing and
fire codes. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
      4.   Occupancy Limits: The owner or operator of an outdoor service area
shall be required to observe the same per square foot occupancy limits that
apply to the building which it abuts. The occupancy limit for each outdoor
service area shall be determined by the city building official. In the event
inclement weather requires early closing of the outdoor service area, the
licensee or permittee shall not allow patrons of the outdoor service area to
enter that portion of the licensed premises housed in the adjacent building if
to do so would result in exceeding the occupancy limits therefor as determined
by the city building official. (1978 Code §5-41; amd. 1994 Code)
      5.   Noise Restrictions: Compliance with the city noise ordinance shall
be required. A noise mitigation plan outlining the techniques to be used to
minimize the carry of noise across property boundaries shall be included with
the outdoor service area application. The outdoor service area shall be
designed to minimize the carry of noise outside the outdoor service area
through the use of specialized screen wall materials, sound deadening
techniques, placement and orientation of speakers, control of volume, or
similar. The plan shall include anticipated decibel levels and note how the
volume will be controlled. After an outdoor service area is established, the
city reserves the right to require additional noise minimization techniques.
Amplified sound shall be prohibited in outdoor service areas, except as allowed
by title 14, chapter 4, articles C and D of this code. (Ord. 17-4694, 3-7-2017)
      6.   Advertising And Signs: Additional advertising or identification
signage beyond that permitted for the main licensed establishment shall not be
permitted.
      7.   Compliance With City And State Provisions: Outdoor service areas
shall comply with appropriate building, housing and fire codes and with all
other applicable state and city laws. (1978 Code §5-41; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Reserved. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
   E.   Inspections: Outdoor service areas shall be subject to inspection at
least annually at the same time inspection of the adjacent licensed
establishment occurs. The city may, in its discretion, inspect an outdoor
service area at any other time. (1978 Code §5-43)
   F.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permission To Operate An Outdoor Service
Area:
      1.   The city council may, after written notice to the licensee or
permittee and after hearing, suspend or revoke authorization for the operation
of an outdoor service area for any establishment when the licensee or permittee
has violated or has permitted or allowed the violation of any provision of the
code of Iowa, as amended, or this code pertaining to the operation of an
outdoor service area or when the continued operation of the outdoor service
area constitutes a threat to public health, welfare or safety or constitutes a
"nuisance" as defined in title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
      2.   The suspension/revocation procedure shall be initiated by the police
chief by the filing of an administrative hearing complaint with the city
council or the department. Written notice of hearing, as well as a copy of said
complaint, shall be served upon the licensee or permittee at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the date set for hearing. In the event of suspension or
revocation, the city shall notify the department hearing board, pursuant to
section 123.39, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §5-44; amd. 1994 Code)
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections C4 and C5 of this
section, the city council may order the immediate closure of an outdoor service
area if it is determined that its continued operation presents a clear and
imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare.
      4.   Suspension or revocation of authorization by the city for operation
of an outdoor service area shall not affect the licensing of the principal
establishment unless separate action to suspend or revoke that license/permit
is also initiated. (1978 Code §5-44)
4-3-2: TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
   A.   Application For Permission; Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   An application for permission to operate a temporary outdoor service
area in conjunction with a licensed premises shall be made upon the form
provided by the city clerk. Such application may be made at any time. The
application shall include all information required to be submitted with
applications for beer and liquor licenses. The application shall be submitted
to the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date it is to be
considered by the city council. Approval by the city council of a temporary
outdoor service area shall be by application to the department with regard to
the diagram, dramshop insurance coverage and all other state requirements.
      2.   Approval or disapproval of an application for a temporary outdoor
service area shall be at the discretion of the city council. Such discretion
shall be exercised with due regard to public health, safety and welfare
considerations.
   B.   Restrictions: A temporary outdoor service area can be operated in
conjunction with a licensed establishment on not more than two (2) occasions in
the licensing year for that establishment and for not more than three (3) days
per occasion, whether consecutive or separated.
   C.   Regulations And Requirements: A temporary outdoor service area shall be
subject to the regulations and requirements set forth in section
4-3-4 of this chapter. Inspections shall be made as necessary prior to
approval, to determine if the temporary outdoor service area will conform with
said regulations and requirements.
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permission: Permission to operate a
temporary outdoor service area may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the
procedure and for the same cause as provided in subsection
4-3-1F of this chapter. (1978 Code §5-45; amd. 1994 Code)
4-3-3: SEASONAL, FIVE DAY OR FOURTEEN DAY LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter shall incorporate by
reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained
in chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of
Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth
herein. (1994 Code)
4-3-4: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS AND
SEASONAL, FIVE DAY AND FOURTEEN DAY PERMITS AND LICENSES:
The sale of liquor or beer in a temporary outdoor service area or under a
seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit shall be subject
to the following regulations and requirements:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Temporary sales under a seasonal, five (5) day or fourteen (14) day
license or permit may be conducted in a building owned or leased by the
applicant or in a clearly designated temporary outdoor service area owned or
leased by the applicant. A temporary outdoor service area must be located on
private property and may not encroach on any public right of way. (1978 Code
§5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
      2.   A temporary outdoor service area operated in conjunction with a
licensed establishment shall not be located on any side of the licensed
establishment which fronts on a street unless the outdoor service area is being
operated in conjunction with a "restaurant" as defined in section
4-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 05-4156, 4-19-2005)
      3.   If a temporary outdoor service area is operated in conjunction with
a licensed establishment, it shall be immediately adjacent thereto and shall
not be accessible except from the licensed premises which it adjoins. (1978
Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
      4.   The sale of liquor or beer under a seasonal five (5) day or fourteen
(14) day license or permit may occur in any principal structure which does not
house a residential use, regardless of the zone in which it is located and
regardless of its proximity to other residential uses. A temporary outdoor
service area may be permitted in any one of the following qualifying
situations:
         a.   In any zone other than a commercial zone, provided the temporary
outdoor service area is not located within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use; or
         b.   In any commercial zone other than the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10 zones,
regardless of the temporary outdoor service area's proximity to a residential
use, but provided the temporary outdoor service area is not within one hundred
feet (100') of a Residential Zone; or
         c.   In the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10 Zones, regardless of the temporary
outdoor service area's proximity to a Residential Zone or a residential use.
(Ord. 11-4444, 9-20-2011)
   B.   Fence Requirements: The perimeter of temporary outdoor service areas
shall be double fenced with snow fencing or construction fencing not less than
three feet (3') in height, with the outside fence located no less than six feet
(6') distant from the inside fence. Fencing may be deleted at locations where
the temporary outdoor service areas adjoin a building. An emergency exit shall
be required of all outdoor service areas and shall comply with all Building,
Housing and Fire Codes. (Ord. 97-3764, 1-14-1997)
   C.   Security Personnel: A uniformed security officer shall be continuously
present at the site of a temporary outdoor service area if more than one
hundred (100) persons are in attendance, and an additional uniformed security
officer shall be provided for each additional fifty (50) persons attending.
   D.   Parking: Parking shall be provided for a temporary outdoor service area
or for a building wherein the sale of liquor or beer occurs under a seasonal
five (5) day or fourteen (14) day license or permit. The required number of
parking stalls shall be determined by applying the parking requirements for
that zone to that use, if any.
   E.   Building Requirements: A building which is utilized for liquor or beer
sales under a seasonal or temporary license or permit shall comply with
appropriate Building, Housing and Fire Codes and with all other applicable
State and City laws and shall be subject to inspection prior to issuance of the
license or permit and at any time while being operated under such license or
permit.
   F.   Occupancy Limits: The owner or operator of a temporary outdoor service
area operated in conjunction with a licensed establishment shall be required to
observe the same per square foot occupancy limits that apply to the licensed
establishment which it abuts. The occupancy limit for each such temporary
outdoor service area shall be determined by the City building official. In the
event inclement weather requires early closing of such temporary outdoor
service area, the licensee or permittee shall not allow patrons of the
temporary outdoor service area to enter that portion of the licensed premises
housed in the adjacent building if to do so would result in exceeding the
occupancy limits therefor, as determined by the City building official.
   G.   Sanitary Facilities: A trash container or trash containers equaling
fifty (50) gallons in volume and one restroom/toilet facility, either permanent
or temporary, must be provided on the site of the temporary outdoor service
area for each fifty (50) persons expected to attend.
   H.   Noise Control: Amplified sound equipment may be operated in a temporary
outdoor service area upon issuance of a permit as provided in subsection
4-3-1C5 of this chapter. (1978 Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
   I.   Dancing: (Rep. by Ord. 19-4787, 4-2-2019)
   J.   Advertising And Signs: Identification signage shall not be permitted.
(1978 Code §5-51; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DANCING REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 19-4787, 4-2-2019)
CHAPTER 5
PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 1
SECTION:
4-5-1: Prohibited Sales And Acts
4-5-2: Advertisements For Alcoholic Liquor, Wine Or Beer
4-5-3: Consumption Or Possession In Public Places And City Buildings
4-5-4: Regulation Of Persons Under Legal Age
4-5-5: Open Containers
4-5-6: Sales To Intoxicated Persons
4-5-7: Limitations On Sales
4-5-8: Persons Under The Legal Age In Licensed Or Permitted Establishments
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2P of this code.
4-5-1: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
   A.   No person or club holding a liquor license, retail wine or beer permit
under this title, nor the holder's agents or employees, shall do any of the
acts enumerated in this chapter.
   B.   This chapter shall incorporate by reference the definitions,
restrictions, requirements and limitations contained in chapter 123, code of
Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are
hereby made a part of this chapter as if set forth herein. (1978 Code §5-2;
amd. 1994 Code)
4-5-2: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
No signs or other matter advertising any brand of alcoholic beverages shall be
erected or placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a licensee or
permittee under this title authorized to sell alcoholic beverages at retail.
This section shall not prohibit use of signs inside a fence or similar
enclosure around the licensed premises. All such signs formerly erected shall
be removed by the owner thereof by July 1, 1974. (1978 Code §5-3; amd. 1994
Code)
4-5-3: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION IN PUBLIC PLACES AND CITY BUILDINGS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any persons to consume or drink any alcoholic
beverages on any public street, ground, highway, sidewalk, alley, or public
right of way in the city, except at the farmers' market or if said person has
purchased said alcoholic beverage from an "authorized entity", and is on an
"authorized site", as those terms are defined in this section. A person shall
not use or consume alcoholic beverages in any public place within the city,
except premises covered by a license or permit, and when applicable a public
right of way easement agreement. (Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010)
   B.   A person shall not consume or possess an alcoholic beverage in a city
park, except if said person has purchased said alcoholic beverage from an
"authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site", as those terms are defined
in this section 1 , or is doing so pursuant to a permit issued by city staff.
Any permit issued will abide by and incorporate administrative rules approved
by the city manager. This subsection shall not apply to the farmers' market or
property within a city park that is leased to another entity for ninety nine
(99) years or more. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, a
person may possess and/or consume beer or wine inside any park shelter, with
the exception of those in Napoleon Park and I.C. Kickers Park, during the time
period the shelter has been reserved. All persons reserving a shelter and all
persons possessing and/or consuming beer or wine in the shelter shall abide by
the administrative rules approved by the City Manager.
   C.   A person shall not use or consume any alcoholic beverages in any city
building, except a city building covered by a valid license or permit. Any
permit issued will abide by and incorporate administrative rules approved by
the city manager. (Ord. 12-4492, 9-4-2012)
   D.   1. The city may enter into a written agreement with an authorized
entity that allows for the sale of beer and/or wine in a city park, on public
right of way, or on a city ground excluding city buildings. The term of said
agreement shall not exceed one year.
      2.   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AGREEMENT: The official agreement between the city and an authorized entity
to sell beer and/or wine on an authorized site for consumption and possession
only on an authorized site, which includes, at a minimum, the following
provisions:
         a.   Authorized Site: Both a written description and a physical
illustration of the authorized site.
         b.   Dramshop Insurance: The authorized entity shall provide proof
that it is in compliance with the liability insurance requirements of Iowa Code
section 123.92, as amended, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
         c.   Indemnification: The authorized entity shall pay on behalf of the
city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from the sale
of beer and/or wine on the authorized site, whether sustained by any person or
persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense
and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of
the authorized site or consumption of beer and/or wine on the authorized site.
         d.   Inspection: City staff, including the police department, may
periodically inspect the authorized site without any prior notice to the
authorized entity for the purpose of enforcing the terms of the agreement.
         e.   License: The authorized entity has a state license to sell beer
and/or wine for the term of the agreement.
         f.   Premises Insurance: The authorized entity shall provide a
certificate of insurance for general liability and casualty insurance, naming
the city of Iowa City as an additional insured, which provides coverage in the
following minimum amounts: comprehensive general liability for bodily injury
and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence
and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The authorized entity
shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city before cancellation of said
insurance.
   AUTHORIZED ENTITY: A nonprofit corporation (meaning those entities granted
tax exempt status by the IRS under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code).
   AUTHORIZED SITE: A precisely described area in a city park, on public right
of way, or on a city ground excluding city buildings over which the authorized
entity has control for specified hours on specified days pursuant to a written
agreement with the city. (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004; amd. Ord. 21-4855, 5-4-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-9-2F of this code.
4-5-4: REGULATION OF PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE:
   A.   1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in
their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine, or beer given
or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer during the regular
course of the person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer
permittee under this chapter.
      2.   A person who is under legal age, other than a licensee or permittee,
who violates this section regarding the purchase of or attempt to purchase
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer, or possessing or having control of alcoholic
liquor, wine, or beer, commits the following:
         a.   A simple misdemeanor, a scheduled violation under section 805.8
of the Iowa Code, punishable by a fine prescribed in Section 805.8C(7) of the
Iowa Code for the first offense.
         b.   A second offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to any other applicable
penalty, the person in violation of this section shall choose between either
completing a substance abuse evaluation or the suspension of the person's motor
vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one year.
         c.   A third or subsequent offense shall be a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the suspension of
the person's motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed one
year.
         d.   The court may, in its discretion, order the person who is under
legal age to perform community service work under section 909.3A of the Iowa
Code, or an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this section.
         e.   In determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent
offense, conviction for violation of this section, section 123.47 of the Code
of Iowa, or an ordinance of any city or county in the State of Iowa that
substantially corresponds to this section or section 123.47 of the Code of Iowa
shall be counted as previous offenses.
   B.   1. An employee or agent of a person or club holding a liquor control
license or retail wine or beer permit shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply
any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person, knowing or failing to
exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, or
permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain
whether the person is under legal age, to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine,
or beer.
      2.   Any person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor
punishable as a scheduled violation under section 805.8, subsection 10,
paragraph "a" of the Iowa Code.
      3.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverages,
wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee. If any person under legal age
misrepresents the person's age, and the licensee or permittee establishes that
the licensee or permittee made reasonable inquiry to determine whether the
prospective purchaser was over legal age, the licensee or permittee is not
guilty of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to a person under legal age.
(Ord. 01-3968, 6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001; amd. Ord. 05-4162, 6-21-2005; Ord. 07-
4249, 1-23- 2007; Ord. 20-4827, 7-21-2020)
4-5-5: OPEN CONTAINERS:
   A.   Open Containers Prohibited Outside Licensed Premises: It shall be
unlawful for any person or for any licensee or permittee under this title and/
or agents or employees of a licensee or permittee to permit any person to carry
from a licensed premises any open container of alcoholic beverages, including,
but not limited to, bottles, cans, glasses, mugs and cups, except when such
carryout is related to and necessary for custodial, maintenance and other bona
fide employment purposes, unless the person is carrying the open container from
one licensed premises directly into another licensed premises. (Ord. 17-4707,
5-16-2017)
   B.   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any persons to possess
any open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage on any public street, ground, highway, sidewalk, alley, or
public right-of-way in the City, except if said person has purchased said
alcoholic beverage from an "authorized entity", and is on an "authorized site",
as defined in this chapter. A person shall not possess any open or unsealed
bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage in any
public place within the City, except premises covered by a license or permit,
and when applicable a public right-of-way easement agreement. This subsection
shall not apply to the farmers' market, or designated areas in City parks at
City-sponsored events pursuant to City-issued permits. (Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010;
amd. Ord. 19-4791, 5-21-2019)
4-5-6: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS:
A person shall not sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or one
simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. A person who
violates this provision shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-3968,
6-12-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
4-5-7: LIMITATIONS ON SALES:
   A.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for a holder of a liquor control
license, or wine permit or beer permit, or its employees or agents, to do any
of the following:
      1.   Sell, offer to sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption,
two (2) or more servings of any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to any one
person for the price of one such drink.
      2.   Sell, offer to sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption
an unlimited number of servings of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for a fixed
price or an unlimited number of servings for free.
      3.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, for on
premises consumption, without proportionally increasing the price charged for
such drink. (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
      4.   Dispense or serve for on premises consumption, more than two (2)
containers of any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer at any one time to any one
person. For purposes of this section a "container" is a receptacle, such as a
glass or a cup, that holds a substance or substances.
      5.   Encourage or permit any game or contest or tournament of any kind
which involves drinking any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer or the awarding of
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer as a prize.
      6.   Dispense, pour, or otherwise serve any alcoholic liquor, wine, or
beer directly into a person's mouth. (Ord. 03-4061, 2-4-2003)
   B.   Exceptions: Nothing in subsection A of this section shall be construed
to prohibit any of the following:
      1.   The holder of a liquor control license, or wine, or beer permit, or
its employees or agents, from including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor,
wine, or beer as part of a hotel or motel package which includes overnight
accommodations.
      2.   An "authorized entity", as defined in section
4-5-3 of this chapter, from hosting a tasting event, as defined and regulated
by the Iowa alcoholic beverage division, as part of a community wide attraction
that supports the economic vitality of the downtown. (Ord. 15-4644, 10-6-2015)
4-5-8: PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE IN LICENSED OR PERMITTED ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   No person, individual, association, corporation, partnership or club
holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which authorizes on the
premises consumption, nor his or her agents or employees shall allow a person
who has not yet attained the legal age to enter or remain in the licensed or
permitted establishment between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
closing. (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010,
eff. 6-1-2010)
   B.   However, the provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply
when:
      1.   The person under the legal age is an employee of the license or
permit holder, or performing a contracted service for the license or permit
holder on the premises, and is on the premises during his or her scheduled work
hours.
      2.   The person under the legal age is accompanied by a parent, guardian,
spouse or domestic partner registered as such under section
2-6-3 of this code who is the legal age or older.
      3.   The licensee or permittee applies for and qualifies for an exception
certificate from the chief of police, or his or her designee, as follows: (Ord.
12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
         a.   Qualification: A licensee or permittee whose primary business
purpose is not the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer may qualify for an
exception by filing with the city clerk a verified statement from an accountant
which establishes that on average over a calendar year more than fifty percent
(50%) of the licensee's or permittee's gross sales on the premises are from the
sale of goods or services other than alcoholic beverages, wine or beer. Income
from fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, such as cover
charges, as well as drink mixes, or any part of an alcoholic beverage as
defined in chapter 123 of the state code are to be counted as alcohol sales.
Any purchases required to gain entry shall be considered cover charges. Ticket
sales for any event performed in a theater in which the entire audience area is
consistent with traditional theater seating shall be counted as nonalcohol
sales. The statement shall recite the actual percentage of nonalcohol sales, as
defined herein, and be based on records made in the regular course of the
licensee's or permittee's business. No certificate will be issued to the
establishment if any of the following is true:
            (1)   Applicant possesses a trailing twelve (12) month possession
of alcohol under the legal age (PAULA) ratio over the allowable limit, as
defined and set by city council by resolution.
            (2)   Where operation under the exception certificate would be
detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee, or
any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or delivered alcohol to any patron
under the legal drinking age more than once within the last two (2) years, the
licensee or permittee shall serve the suspension called for under subsection
B3g of this section before being eligible for issuance of the exception
certificate. Said suspension will commence on the day the chief of police would
otherwise have approved the application. Assuming the applicant remains
eligible at that time, the chief of police shall issue the exception
certificate following completion of the suspension. (Ord. 16-4679, 10-4-2016)
         b.   Proof Of Qualification; Audit: In addition to the aforementioned
statement, proof of qualification for the exception may include the business
records on which the statement is based, profit and loss statements, state and
federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance and audits performed
to determine dramshop insurance premiums, and receipts from vendors for goods
purchased, which records shall be made available to the chief of police or
designee for review upon request. The chief of police or designee may require
an audit of the establishment by an auditor selected by the chief of police or
designee, which audit will be performed at the expense of the applicant. In
that event, the applicant must submit a deposit to the city in an amount set by
city council via resolution for the payment of the audit. At the conclusion of
the audit, any additional costs over the deposit amount must be paid by the
applicant before an application will be considered further. Any surplus funds
from the deposit will be promptly returned to the applicant. Failure to submit
the deposit or pay costs of the audit will result in a denial of the
application. The factors the chief of police or designee will consider in
determining whether to require an audit will be established by resolution of
the city council, but the final decision to require an audit will be that of
the chief of police or designee.
         c.   Issuance: If the chief of police or designee determines that the
licensee has satisfied the above requirements an exception certificate shall be
issued.
         d.   Duration: An exception certificate shall be effective for the
duration of the alcoholic liquor control license, wine or beer permit.
         e.   Temporary Certificate: A new licensee or permittee, as opposed to
one applying for a renewal of an existing license or permit, whose primary
business purpose is not the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer may
obtain a temporary six (6) month exception certificate if the licensee's or
permittee's business plan anticipates sales as required by subsection B3a of
this section and the licensee or permittee submits an affidavit which details
the nature of the new establishment and the anticipated percentage of sales of
food and nonalcoholic beverages. At the end of the six (6) month period the
licensee or permittee may obtain an exception certificate for the remainder of
the duration of the license or permit in accordance with subsections B3a
through B3c of this section if sales during the six (6) month period support an
exception, and the licensee or permittee has met the PAULA ratio requirement
referenced in subsection B3a of this section. No more than one temporary
exception certificate may be granted for any location within a three (3) year
period. Applicants who sign an affidavit pursuant to this subsection but fail
to secure renewal of the exception certificate following the six (6) month
certificate for the subject location may not be awarded an exception
certificate for any other new location within three (3) years of the granting
of the subject six (6) month certificate.
         f.   Posting Required: To be effective in excepting the licensee or
permittee from the prohibition in subsection A of this section, the exception
certificate issued by the chief of police or designee must be posted at every
entrance to the licensed or permitted establishment in view of patrons of the
licensed or permitted establishments. In addition, the licensee or permittee
must provide staff of sufficient number and capability to monitor all patrons
to prevent underage possession of alcohol. (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-
2012)
         g.   Revocation: Exception certificates may be revoked by the chief of
police, or designee, for good cause. Licensees or permittees may appeal a
revocation to the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of appeal
with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing, by first class mail,
of the revocation decision. Appeals will ordinarily be heard no later than
fourteen (14) days, and in no event later than thirty (30) days, following the
filing of an appeal in the office of the city clerk. In the event of a
revocation, the licensee may continue to operate with their exception
certificate until the ten (10) day appeal period has passed, or in the event of
an appeal to the city manager or designee, until after the city manager or
designee has issued his or her ruling on appeal. In the event the city manager
or designee affirms the revocation, the establishment's exception certificate
will expire seven (7) days from the mailing, by first class mail, of the appeal
decision. Good cause for revocation includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
            (1)   Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the
licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or
delivered alcohol to any patron under the legal drinking age more than once
within the last two (2) years; or
            (2)   Where at the end of any month the venue's trailing twelve
(12) month PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the chief of police, rises
above the maximum allowed PAULA ratio, as established by city council by
resolution; or
            (3)   Where the establishment has failed to cooperate fully with
the police department; or
            (4)   Where continued operation under the exception certificate
would be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the
city.
Revocations for violations of subsection B3g(1) of this section shall last for
thirty (30) days for the second violation within the last two (2) years, and
for ninety (90) days for the third and subsequent violations within the last
two (2) years. All other revocations shall last twelve (12) months. Following
the period of revocation, the applicant may reapply for an exception
certificate. (Ord. 16-4679, 10-4-2016)
      4.   The person under the legal age is on the premises during a time that
the licensee or permittee has, in accordance with a written notice and plan
given in advance to and approved by the chief of police or designee, suspended
dispensing alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. Said plan must provide
a method by which alcoholic beverages will be out of sight and reach of
patrons. If the plan is approved, the chief of police or designee shall issue a
certificate approving the event, which certificate shall be posted at every
entrance to the licensed establishment in view of patrons of the licensed or
permitted establishment. It shall be the strict duty of a licensee or permittee
permitting such persons under the legal age onto the licensed premises pursuant
to such a plan, and the agents and employees of the licensee or permittee, to
prevent persons under the legal age from consuming or possessing alcoholic
beverages on said premises.
      5.   The person under the legal age is a patron of an "authorized entity"
which has entered into an agreement with the city for use of an "authorized
site" in a city park, pursuant to subsection
4-5-3D of this chapter.
      6.   The person under the legal age is on the alcohol free portion of the
premises during a time that the licensee or permittee has, in accordance with a
written notice and plan given in advance to and approved by the chief of police
or designee, divided the premises into alcohol free and alcohol permitted
sections. Said plan must provide a method by which alcoholic beverages will be
out of sight and reach of underage patrons. If the plan is approved, the chief
of police or designee shall issue a certificate approving the event, which
certificate shall be posted at every entrance to the licensed establishment in
view of patrons of the licensed or permitted establishment. It shall be the
strict duty of a licensee or permittee permitting such persons under the legal
age onto the licensed premises pursuant to such a plan, and the agents and
employees of the licensee or permittee, to prevent persons under the legal age
from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages on said premises. In addition,
the following requirements must be met:
         a.   The physical setup and separation of the alcohol free and alcohol
permitted portions of the establishment must earn prior approval by the
director of housing and inspection services, or designee, for matters of safety
and code compliance, including, but not limited to, occupancy, bathrooms and
exits.
         b.   Both the alcohol free and alcohol permitted portions of the
establishment shall include city code compliant bathrooms.
         c.   The director of housing and inspection services may, but is not
required to, allow those establishments with a PAULA ratio under that set by
city council by resolution during the trailing twelve (12) months prior to the
event application, to permit patrons of both the alcohol free and alcohol
permitted spaces to share the same bathrooms, as long as the establishment
strictly enforces a rule prohibiting alcoholic beverages in the bathrooms. For
purposes of this section, the PAULA ratio shall be based on the twelve (12)
PAULA reports immediately preceding the licensee's event application, all as
calculated by the chief of police, or designee.
         d.   The alcohol free and alcohol permitted portions of the
establishment must be separated by one hour construction walls and doors, as
approved by the director of housing and inspection services, or designee, or
comparable barriers, as approved by the chief of police, or designee.
         e.   It shall be the strict duty of the licensee to exclude those
under legal age from the alcohol permitted area, and to exclude all alcoholic
beverages from the alcohol free area.
         f.   All patrons of legal age must be marked with a wristband
indicating they are of age. All patrons under legal age must be marked
indicating they are under legal age.
      7.   The licensee or permittee applies for, qualifies for, and is granted
an entertainment venue exception certificate, as follows:
         a.   Requirements: In order for an entertainment venue exception
certificate to be issued by the chief of police, or designee, the establishment
must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the chief of police, or designee, that
all the following requirements have been met:
            (1)   The venue has hosted and will continue to host shows on at
least one hundred fifty (150) calendar days each year; and
            (2)   The venue has a permanently installed (not risers) and
dedicated performance stage of at least eight feet by six feet (8' x 6') in
dimension, which shall never be used for any purpose other than by performers
during shows; and
            (3)   The venue must distribute at least fifty percent (50%) of any
fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, including, but not
limited to, cover charges and ticket sales, from the period of opening until
closing, to the show performer(s) within forty eight (48) hours of the
completion of the show; and
            (4)   The venue subscribes to at least one industry tracking
service, such as Pollstar Pro, or comparable alternative; and
            (5)   The venue has a PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the
chief of police or designee, of no greater than that allowed by city council,
as established by resolution; and
            (6)   The venue has permanently installed professional light and
sound; and
            (7)   The venue marks all patrons of legal drinking age with a
wristband, and marks all patrons under legal drinking age with either a
wristband of a different color from the legal age patrons, or permanent marker
on the hand; and
            (8)   The venue provides staff of sufficient number and capability
to monitor all patrons at all shows; and
            (9)   The venue provides to the chief of police, or designee, a
report of all upcoming show dates at least seven (7) days prior to any show;
and
            (10)   The venue provides to the chief of police, or designee,
reports detailing all dates on which a show took place, including the name of
the performer(s) for each show, which reports shall be due no later than the
ninetieth, one hundred eightieth, two hundred seventieth, and three hundred
sixtieth day following issuance of the entertainment venue exception
certificate; and
            (11)   The venue employs at least one salaried employee responsible
for booking shows by performers, and promptly provides both the employee name
and most recent salary paystub upon request from the city; and (Ord. 12-4462,
1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
            (12)   The venue employs only bartenders and servers who have
completed the alcohol compliance employee training program (e.g., I-PACT)
pursuant to Iowa Code section 123.50A; and (Ord. 13-4517, 2-19-2013)
            (13)   The venue allows city inspection, at any time and for any
reason, of the venue, professional sound and lighting equipment, and show and
performer financial records, including, but not limited to, show settlement
sheets; and (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012; amd. Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-
2014)
            (14)   The venue's licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents
thereof, has not sold, given, or delivered alcohol to any patron under the
legal drinking age more than once within the last five (5) years; and
            (15)   Granting the venue entertainment venue status would not be
detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the city.
These requirements apply to all pending and future applications for
entertainment venue exception certificates. (Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014)
         b.   Duration: Entertainment venue exception certificates shall be
valid for one year, or until expiration of the premises liquor license,
whichever is sooner.
         c.   New Businesses: New businesses may be granted an entertainment
venue exception certificate by satisfying all requirements of subsection B7a of
this section, save subsections B7a(1) and B7a(5) of this section. For
establishments previously operating under the same or substantially similar
ownership and/or management, the PAULA ratio restrictions of subsection B7a(5)
of this section apply, and will be utilized in assessing the establishment's
application. For establishments not previously meeting the minimum show day
requirements of subsection B7a(1) of this section, a credible business plan
must be accompanied by a notarized affidavit by the establishment owner (or
largest shareholder) attesting that the establishment will meet all
requirements of subsection B7a of this section.
         d.   Revocation: Entertainment venue exception certificates may be
revoked by the chief of police, or designee, for good cause. Venues may appeal
a revocation to the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of
appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing, by first class
mail, of the revocation decision. Appeals will ordinarily be heard no later
than fourteen (14) days, and in no event later than thirty (30) days, following
the filing of an appeal in the office of the city clerk. In the event of a
revocation, the venue may continue to operate as an entertainment venue until
the ten (10) day appeal period has passed, or in the event of an appeal to the
City Manager, or designee, until after the City Manager, or designee, has
issued his or her ruling on appeal. In the event the City Manager affirms the
revocation, the venue's entertainment venue exception privileges will cease
seven (7) days from the mailing, by first class mail, of the appeal decision.
Good cause for revocation includes, but is not limited to, the following: (Ord.
12-4462, 1-24-2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
            (1)   Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the
licensee, permittee, or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or
delivered alcohol to any patron under the legal drinking age more than once
within the last five (5) years; or (Ord. 14-4579, 4-1-2014)
            (2)   Where at the end of any month the venue's trailing twelve
(12) month PAULA ratio, as determined solely by the Chief of Police, rises
above the maximum allowed PAULA ratio set by City Council, as established by
resolution; or
            (3)   Where the venue has failed to cooperate fully with the Police
Department; or
            (4)   Where the venue has failed to maintain compliance with all
requirements of subsection B7a of this section; or
            (5)   Where continued operation under the entertainment venue
exception certificate would be detrimental to the safety, health, and welfare
of the residents of the City.
Revocations shall last twelve (12) months. Following the period of revocation,
the applicant may reapply for an exception certificate. (Ord. 12-4462, 1-24-
2012, eff. 5-1-2012)
   C.   Between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and closing, no person under the legal
age shall enter into or remain on the premises of a licensed or permitted
establishment which authorizes on the premises consumption unless:
      1.   The person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or domestic
partner registered as such under section
 2-6-3 of this Code who is the legal age or older; (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003,
eff. 8-1-2003; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010)
      2.   The person is an employee of the licensee or permittee or performing
a contracted service for the license or permit holder on the premises, and is
on the premises during his or her scheduled work hours;
      3.   A valid exception certificate is posted pursuant to subsection B3 of
this section or a valid certificate approving a nonalcoholic event is posted
pursuant to subsection B4 of this section; or (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-
1-2003)
      4.   The person under the legal age is a patron of an "authorized entity"
which has entered into an agreement with the City for use of an "authorized
site" in a City park, pursuant to subsection
4-5-3D of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010,
eff. 6-1-2010)
      5.   The person under the legal age is in the alcohol free portion of an
establishment hosting a split premises event approved by the Chief of Police
pursuant to subsection B6 of this section. (Ord. 10-4411, 10-26-2010)
      6.   The person is at least nineteen (19) years of age and is in an
establishment with a current and valid entertainment venue exception
certificate, as long as all of the following are true: (Ord. 10-4412, 10-26-
2010)
         a.   The entertainment venue hosted or is hosting at that time a show,
lasting past ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the evening on which the person is
found there; and
         b.   The person bears the venue's official marking as being under
legal age. (Ord. 10-4412, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 13-4517, 2-19-2013)
      7.   The person is working in conjunction with a law enforcement agency
in performance of their official duties. (Ord. 17-4724, 9-19-2017)
   D.   Unless a valid exception certificate under the provisions of subsection
B3 of this section has been obtained and posted, or a certificate approving a
nonalcoholic event under the provisions of subsection B4 of this section has
been obtained and posted for the duration of the event or the licensed premises
is an "authorized entity" which has entered into an agreement with the City for
use of an "authorized site" in a City park, pursuant to subsection
 4-5-3D of this chapter, the holder of a liquor control license, wine or beer
permit, which authorizes on premises consumption, shall obtain from the City
Clerk and post a notice at every entrance to the licensed or permitted
establishment in view of patrons of the licensed or permitted establishment,
stating: (Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004)
Notice to Persons Under The Legal Age.
You are subject to a fine ranging from $300 to $625 for being on these premises
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and closing unless:
   1.   you are accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or domestic partner
registered as such under Section
2-6-3 of the City Code who is the legal age or older; or
   2.   you are an employee of this establishment or performing a contracted
service with respect to this establishment and are on the premises during your
scheduled work hours.
(Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004; amd. Ord. 10-4388, 4-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2010; Ord. 11-
4432, 6-7-2011, eff. 7-1-2011)
Said notices will be prepared by the City Clerk and available at no charge.
(Ord. 04-4123, 4-20-2004)
The posting of this notice shall not be considered an element of the offense
delineated in subsection C of this section, and failure by a liquor license
establishment to post said notice shall not be considered a legal defense to
such charge for a patron.
   E.   1. A person under the legal age who violates the provisions of
subsection C of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as
follows:
         a.   For a first offense, a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
         b.   For a second offense, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         c.   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of six hundred twenty
five dollars ($625.00). (Ord. 11-4432, 6-7-2011, eff. 7-1-2011)
      2.   Violation of the provisions of subsection A or D of this section
shall be a Municipal infraction. (Ord. 03-4073, 5-6-2003, eff. 8-1-2003)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: License Or Authorization Required
5-1-2: Application For License Or Authorization
5-1-3: Issuance Or Denial Of License Or Authorization
5-1-4: Reserved
5-1-5: Revocation Of License Or Authorization
5-1-1: LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in any business for which a
license or authorization is required by this title or any other provision of
this code without first obtaining a license or authorization and paying the
license fee therefor as prescribed for such business by this title or other
provisions of this code. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   All persons who are required under any ordinance of the city to procure
a license or authorization for the purpose of engaging in any business or
vocation shall first make application to the city clerk for such license or
authorization, except as otherwise provided.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly misrepresent, falsify
or conceal any information required by the city in any form of application for
a license or authorization required in the ordinances of the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly orally misrepresent, falsify or conceal
any material information requested by any duly authorized officer or employee
of the city in connection with the granting of any license or authorization
required by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-3: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION 1 :
All licenses or authorizations shall be issued by the city clerk or designee,
and a record thereof kept by the city clerk or designee. The city clerk or
designee may refuse to grant a license or authorization in any case based on
health, safety and public welfare concerns. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See also charter §4.04A(10).
5-1-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
5-1-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR AUTHORIZATION 1 :
The city clerk may revoke any license or authorization issued under the
provisions of this title, after proper hearing before the city manager or
designee, by sending written notice of said hearing by regular mail to the
taxicab business or driver at the last known address not less than five (5)
calendar days before the date of said hearing; or by personal delivery with
seventy two (72) hours' notice of date of said hearing, for any of the
following causes:
   A.   Any misrepresentation on the application for license or authorization.
   B.   Violation of any federal, state or local law. (Ord. 10-4402, 8-31-2010)
Upon hearing, the city manager or designee may uphold the revocation, may
reverse the revocation, or may suspend the license or authorization. (Ord. 14-
4573, 3-4-2014, eff. 5-31-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also charter §4.04A(10).
CHAPTER 2
TAXICABS AND PEDICABS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Business Licenses
5-2-3: Accessibility Of Records
5-2-4: Driver Requirements
5-2-5: Vehicle Requirements
5-2-6: Decals
5-2-7: Liability Insurance Requirements
5-2-8: Rates
5-2-9: Horsedrawn Vehicles
5-2-10: Pedicabs
5-2-11: Revocation/Suspension Of Licenses And Authorizations
5-2-12: Fees
5-2-13: Administrative Rules
5-2-14: Violations
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AIRPORT         A vehicle furnished with a driver that carries passengers for hire exclusively on
SHUTTLE:        a route that either starts at or ends at a commercial airport, and operates
                without a taximeter.
APPLICANT:      A person or entity wishing to operate as a taxicab or pedicab business within the
                corporate city limits or a person wishing to drive a taxicab or pedicab.
                Individual who possesses a certificate showing completion of a taximeter
CERTIFIED       calibration course. Said certificate must state the individual qualifications to
CALIBRATOR:     program, calibrate, repair and maintain a taximeter. Said certificate must also
                include the name of the meter manufacturer(s), and models for which the individual
                is qualified to calibrate.
                A vehicle furnished with a driver that carries passengers for hire either on a
CHARTER         fixed route in the city or pursuant to a written contract with reservations at
TRANSPORTATION: least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the service. The vehicle shall operate
                without a meter installed and charge for services on an hourly basis or longer
                periods of time.
CONNECT:        The network communication process by which a driver accepts a requested ride via a
                web based application system.
DECAL:          A sticker issued by the city clerk for each taxicab or pedicab operated by a
                taxicab or pedicab business.
                A flat fee charged by a metered taxicab business to carry a passenger from
                anywhere within the corporate limits of Iowa City to a specified geographic
DESTINATION     location outside the corporate limits of Iowa City that is applicable at all times
RATE:           and on all days. A destination rate cannot be charged for a ride that originates
                and terminates within the corporate limits of Iowa City. Examples of a destination
                rate are: Iowa City to Riverside Casino $      and Iowa City to Eastern Iowa
                Airport $     .
                The communication process, such as by means of telephone, radio, or mobile device,
DISPATCH:       by which a metered taxicab business assigns a particular metered taxicab driver to
                a location to pick up a passenger.
DRIVER:         A person who is authorized by the city to drive a taxicab or pedicab.
ENTRY FEE:      The fee charged when the taximeter is turned on regardless of the distance
                traveled.
EXTRA PASSENGER A flat per passenger fee a metered taxicab business may charge that is calculated
FEE:            by and shown on the taximeter.
HORSEDRAWN      Any vehicle operated or pulled by a horse, furnished with a driver and carrying
VEHICLE:        passengers for hire within the City, and operates without a taximeter.
LICENSE:        Written permission by the City to operate a taxicab or pedicab business.
                A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by said driver
MANIFEST LOG:   showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the
                amount of fare of each trip. A manifest log may be stored electronically.
                A taxicab in which the taxicab business dispatches a driver to a passenger or the
METERED         driver responds to a passenger via traditional street hail, including hand
TAXICAB:        gestures and verbal statements. A metered taxicab does not include a horsedrawn
                vehicle.
                A taxicab business that operates by means of dispatching drivers and/or by means
METERED TAXICAB of traditional street hail, including hand gestures and verbal statements. A
BUSINESS:       metered taxicab business does not include taxicab services provided by horsedrawn
                vehicles.
                The person that a network taxicab business has authorized to file an application
NETWORK         for a taxicab business license and receive and accept all correspondence and
REPRESENTATIVE: notices from the City pertaining to the network taxicab business and its
                affiliated drivers.
NETWORK         A taxicab in which the driver connects with passengers via a web based
TAXICAB:        application.
NETWORK TAXICAB A taxicab business that operates its business entirely via a web based application
BUSINESS:       system to connect drivers with passengers for taxicab services.
PASSENGER:      An individual being transported by a taxicab or pedicab business.
                A vehicle propelled primarily by human power through a belt, chain or gears,
                having two (2) or more wheels, furnished with a driver and carrying passengers for
PEDICAB:        hire. A motor may assist or supplement the human power, but the pedicab cannot be
                propelled exclusively by the motor. It shall be equipped with properly functioning
                front and rear lights for nighttime operation, right and left rearview mirrors and
                right and left turn signals, and operates without a taximeter.
PEDICAB         A person or entity that provides pedicab services originating within the corporate
BUSINESS:       limits of the City of Iowa City.
PREARRANGED     A period of time that originates when a driver accepts a requested ride through a
RIDE:           web based application, continues while the driver transports the passenger, and
                terminates when the passenger departs from the network taxicab.
                A card containing the maximum fare rates. A rate card must include the information
RATE CARD:      shown on the City Clerk's rate card template, and it must be filed with the City
                Clerk.
SOFT TAXIMETER: A type of taximeter that utilizes a tablet or similar electronic device to
                calculate the charge instead of a mechanical device.
STREET:         Any street, alley, court, lane, bridge or public place within the City.
                A flat per passenger fee a metered taxicab business may charge in addition to the
                rate shown on the taximeter on the following days: "University of Iowa home
                football games" (defined as the day prior to, the day of and the day following the
                game, which typically will be Friday, Saturday and Sunday), "University of Iowa
SURCHARGE:      graduation weekends" (defined as Friday, Saturday and Sunday of the December and
                May commencements), "New Year's Eve" (defined as 12:00 noon on December 31 to 12:
                00 noon on January 1), and a "special event" (defined as a notable event as solely
                determined by the City, notice of which will be provided to the taxicab businesses
                as set forth in the administrative rules).
                All vehicles furnished with a driver that carry passengers for hire within the
                City, including, but not limited to, metered taxicabs, network taxicabs, and
TAXICAB:        horsedrawn vehicles. "Charter transportation," “pedicab” and "airport shuttle", as
                defined in this section, and a vehicle owned or operated by any governmental
                entity that provides public transportation are not taxicabs.
TAXICAB         A person or entity that provides taxicab services originating within the corporate
BUSINESS:       limits of the City of Iowa City.
TAXICAB         All activities conducted as part of or in furtherance of a taxicab business.
SERVICES:
TAXIMETER:      A device attached to a taxicab that automatically calculates at a predetermined
                rate or rates and indicates the charge for hire of a metered taxicab.
                A program that is accessed over a network or internet connection that connects
WEB BASED       passengers and drivers and provides passengers with driver, vehicle, and rate
APPLICATION:    information prior to engaging in a prearranged ride. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd.
                Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016; Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018; Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
 
5-2-2: BUSINESS LICENSES:
   A.   Taxicab business licenses shall be valid for one year. All business
licenses shall commence on July 1 of each year, and shall expire on June 30. No
business licenses will be issued unless an application is filed by June 1,
except for pedicabs and horsedrawn vehicles.
   B.   Each applicant for a taxicab business license shall file an application
with the City Clerk by June 1 on forms provided by the City.
   C.   If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with the
requirements of this chapter, the applicant has no outstanding judgments
arising from Municipal infraction citations, and the Police Chief or Chief's
designee has determined that there is no information which would indicate that
the issuance of the license would be detrimental to the safety, health or
welfare of residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a license to
conduct a taxicab business.
   D.   If the City Clerk subsequently finds that the taxicab business is not
in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter or if the Police Chief
or Chief's designee finds that continued operation of the taxicab business
would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of residents of the City,
the City Clerk may revoke or suspend the license to conduct a taxicab business
as provided in section
5-1-5 of this title.
   E.   No taxicab business shall allow a person to drive a taxicab unless the
driver has the authorization of the City Clerk.
   F.   The license may be sold, assigned, or transferred if the buyer,
assignee, or transferee, as applicable, meets all the requirements of this
chapter an applicant must meet.
   G.   Taxicab businesses shall maintain manifest logs, stored electronically
or otherwise. Manifest logs must be maintained and accessible to the City for a
minimum of sixty (60) days.
   H.   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, taxicab businesses may
provide nonemergency medical transportation services.
(Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016; Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018; Ord.
23-4905, 7-11-2023; Ord. 24-4932, 8-20-2024)
5-2-3: ACCESSIBILITY OF RECORDS:
   A.   Taxicab businesses shall maintain manifest logs, stored electronically
or otherwise, for a minimum of sixty (60) days. The manifest logs shall be
accessible to the City during the sixty (60) day period. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-
2015)
   B.   Taxicab businesses shall provide the following vehicle information and
driver information on demand to the City of Iowa City and this information must
be accessible to the City in at least one of the following ways:
      1.   a. A taxicab business shall have an accessible business office. An
"accessible business office" means a telephone number available to the Iowa
City Police Department twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
         b.   Manifest logs must be maintained by the taxicab business and made
available to the Iowa City Police Department within twelve (12) hours of a
request. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
      2.   A web based application used to connect passengers and drivers shall
display for the passenger prior to engaging in a prearranged ride, at a
minimum:
         a.   The driver's first name and a photograph of the driver;
         b.   The license plate number of the vehicle; and
         c.   The vehicle's make and model. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-4: DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No person shall operate a taxicab without authorization of the City
Clerk.
   B.   1. Each person desiring to drive a taxicab shall file an application
with the City Clerk.
      2.   If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with
the requirements of this chapter and the Police Chief or Chief's designee has
determined that there is no information which would indicate that authorization
to drive a taxicab would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
residents of the City, the City Clerk shall authorize the individual to drive a
taxicab. Names of authorized drivers will be made available in the Office of
the City Clerk during regular business hours and on the City website.
      3.   Driver authorization shall be valid for a period of one year from
date of issuance.
   C.   1. Beginning March 1, 2015, each driver while operating a taxicab,
which includes a prearranged ride, shall prominently display in locations in
both the front and rear compartments a picture identification card that is
visible to all passengers. The City shall provide the picture identification
card and shall approve the locations where it is displayed.
      2.   Prior to March 1, 2015, each driver while operating a taxicab in the
City, shall prominently display in locations in both the front and rear
compartments an identification card that is visible to all passengers which is
issued by the taxicab business showing the full name of the driver and the
taxicab business. The card must be at least eight and one-half inches (81/2")
in width and five and one-half inches (51/2") in height. The City issued
identification card satisfies this provision.
   D.   No driver shall smoke or use an electronic cigarette while transporting
a passenger. No driver shall allow a passenger to smoke or use an electronic
cigarette. “Electronic cigarette” means vapor product as defined in section
453A.1 of the Code of Iowa.
   E.   No driver shall take a circuitous route to a destination, or any route
other than the most direct route, without the express consent of the passenger.
   F.   No driver operating a network taxicab, unless it is also a metered
taxicab, may solicit potential passengers. "Solicit" means an appeal by words
or gestures for immediate patronage of a taxi. A network taxicab driver shall
not direct people to a network taxicab that is parked, stopped, standing or
moving upon the street.
   G.   No driver operating a network taxicab, unless it also is a metered
taxicab, may accept or respond to passengers' or potential passengers' request
for service via traditional street hail, including hand gestures and verbal
statements.
   H.   "Shared ride" means a taxi ride in which one or more passengers
expressly request to share a ride with one or more additional passengers. No
driver may request a passenger to share a ride, and no driver shall pick up an
additional passenger at any point after the taxi ride begins without the
express request of the passengers in the taxicab. If shown on the rate card,
the driver may charge a fee for each passenger ("extra passenger fee") who
shares the ride.
   I.   A network taxicab is not a "commercial vehicle" for purposes of the
parking restrictions in title 9, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-
2015; amd. Ord. 15-4611, 2-23-2015; Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
5-2-5: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as provided herein, each taxicab shall be subject to an annual
inspection, and no taxicab shall pass inspection unless it complies with this
chapter, the vehicle equipment requirements of the Code of Iowa, and
administrative rules.
   B.   The City may require reinspection of a taxicab on belief that it is not
mechanically fit.
      1.   In the event any taxicab is determined by the City Equipment
Superintendent or designee not to be mechanically fit, the decal shall be
confiscated and returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and
determination that the taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new
decal will be issued and charged as established by Council resolution.
      2.   The Police Chief or designee may require reinspection of a taxicab
on belief that it is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person. In the
event any taxicab is determined by the Police Chief or designee to be in such
unsafe condition as to endanger any person, the decal shall be confiscated and
returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and determination that the
taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new decal will be issued
and charged as established by Council resolution.
      3.   In the event any network taxicab is determined by the City Equipment
Superintendent or designee not to be mechanically fit, the City shall notify
the network representative, and the network representative must immediately
deny the driver access to the network's system. After reinspection and
determination that the taxicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, the
City shall notify the network representative and the driver may be allowed
access to the network's system.
   C.   In order to solicit passengers, be hailed, or be dispatched to a
passenger, a metered taxicab business and driver, and pedicabs and horsedrawn
vehicles as applicable, must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Taximeter: All taxicabs must be equipped with a taximeter that is in
good operating order.
         a.   A taximeter that is not a soft taximeter shall be calibrated and
sealed by a certified calibrator. Dated documentation must be provided to the
City Equipment Superintendent, on a form provided by the City, with each
inspection and filed with the City Clerk when the inspection is completed.
Calibration date must be within thirty (30) days prior to the annual
inspection.
         b.   A soft taximeter shall be certified by a third party as required
by the City Clerk within thirty (30) days prior to the annual inspection. The
certification shall include requirements that the device is programmed remotely
by an authorized representative and is password protected.
         c.   Signage must be conspicuously displayed on the inside of a
taxicab that states, "If The Meter Is Not Working, This Vehicle Cannot Operate
As A Taxi. Receipt For Fare Available Upon Request." The City may require
verification of a certified calibration for taximeters or certification for
soft taximeters without prior notice for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with this chapter.
      2.   Lettering Required: Each taxicab shall have the name of the taxicab
business on each side of the vehicle in letters at least four and one-half
inches (41/2") in height. Removable signs and peel off letters shall not be
allowed. If a phone number is provided, the number shall be the same number
that appears on the taxicab business application and rate card. All other
letters and numbers shall not be greater than three inches (3") in height.
Lettering may be allowed on a window, if approved by the City Equipment
Superintendent or designee.
      3.   Lighted Dome: Every metered taxicab shall have a lighted dome
attached permanently to the exterior roof of the taxicab with lettering that
identifies the vehicle as a taxicab visible from the front and back of the
taxicab. The lighted dome shall be a minimum size of twelve inches by one inch
by three inches (12" x 1" x 3"). In the event the City Equipment Superintendent
or designee determines that the permanent attachment of a dome to the exterior
roof is not possible, the City Equipment Superintendent or designee may approve
an alternative placement. If a phone number is provided the number shall be the
same number that appears on the taxicab business application and rate card.
   D.   Except for horsedrawn vehicles, each taxicab business shall provide a
minimum of two (2) taxicabs, and one taxicab shall be in operation at all
times. At least two (2) taxicabs shall be insured and shall have a decal at all
times.
   E.   Taxicabs that are ten (10) model years old or newer (by way of example,
during the calendar year 2016, the model must be 2006 or newer) need only be
inspected annually for color scheme, taximeter, lighted dome, and lettering.
(Ord. 14-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016;
Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018; Ord. 20-4831, 10-20-2020; Ord. 21-4862, 8-17-2021; Ord.
23-4905, 7-11-2023; Ord. 24-4932, 8-20-2024)
5-2-6: DECALS:
   A.   Each taxicab business shall file an application for a decal for each
taxicab with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City.
   B.   No person shall operate a taxicab on any street unless a decal has been
issued by the City Clerk, and no taxicab business shall allow a taxicab to be
operated on any street unless a decal has been issued by the City Clerk. The
decal shall be attached to the lower corner of the front windshield on the
passenger side. Pedicabs or horsedrawn vehicles shall display the decal on the
left rear of the taxicab.
   C.   If the City Clerk finds that the taxicab business has fully complied
with the requirements of this chapter and the City Equipment Superintendent or
designee determines that there is no information which would indicate that
issuance of the decal would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a decal for the taxicab.
   D.   The decal shall be nontransferable as between taxicabs and taxicab
businesses.
   E.   Decals will be issued by the City Clerk on the next business day at
least twenty four (24) hours after the filing of a completed application for
such decal with the City Clerk.
   F.   The taxicab business shall return the decal within two (2) business
days of when the vehicle is no longer operating as a taxicab. Additionally,
metered taxicab businesses shall remove the bubble light and lettering within
two (2) business days of when the vehicle is no longer operating as a taxicab.
Failure to comply with this provision is grounds to suspend and revoke the
taxicab business license.
   G.   If, after the issuance of a decal, the license plate for the taxicab is
changed, the taxicab business shall inform the City Clerk in writing of the new
license plate number and have the City Equipment Supervisor or designee verify
that the VIN, license plate number, and decal match. No driver shall operate a
taxicab until the City Equipment Supervisor or designee has verified that the
VIN and decal match the new license plate number. No taxicab business shall
allow a taxicab to be operated until the City Equipment Supervisor or designee
has verified that the VIN and decal match the new license plate number.
   H.   (Rep. by Ord. 15-4651, 12-15-2015)
   I.   No person shall operate a motorized vehicle or a horsedrawn vehicle
that has a decal attached to it if the decal is not valid. A decal that is not
valid includes, but is not limited to, the following situations: 1) the decal
is outdated; 2) the insurance for the taxicab as required in this chapter has
been canceled or otherwise terminated; or 3) the taxicab business has notified
the City Clerk that the vehicle is no longer part of its fleet. (Ord. 15-4608,
2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
5-2-7: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The taxicab business shall insure each driver consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The minimum limits of the insurance policy shall be determined by the
City's risk manager.
   C.   The taxicab business shall file with the City Clerk evidence of
liability insurance coverage in the form of one certificate of insurance that
lists all taxicabs insured. The certificate of insurance must be acceptable to
the City.
   D.   The insurance company must be authorized to do insurance business in
the State of Iowa and be acceptable to the City.
   E.   Insurance coverage for the driver of a network taxicab shall, at a
minimum, be for incidents involving the driver during a prearranged ride and
shall provide coverage at all times the driver is engaged in a prearranged
ride. Insurance coverage of a metered taxicab, which is not titled in the name
of the business, shall be for incidents involving the driver when the vehicle
is operated as a taxicab and shall provide coverage at all times a driver is
operating the taxicab. Insurance coverage of a metered taxicab, which is titled
in the name of the business, and horsedrawn vehicles, shall be for all
incidents.
   F.   Notwithstanding section
5-1-5 of this title, the cancellation or other termination of an insurance
policy required by this chapter shall automatically suspend the business
license. The City Clerk shall immediately issue written notification to the
taxicab business of the suspension of the license. The City Clerk will schedule
a suspension hearing before the City Manager or designee in the same manner as
in section
5-1-5 of this title. If the taxicab business obtains insurance coverage that
complies with this chapter prior to the hearing on the suspension, the City
Clerk may withdraw the suspension and cancel the hearing. Upon the City Clerk
suspending the license, the taxicab business shall return all decals to the
City Clerk. If the suspension of the business license is subsequently
withdrawn, the taxicab business must apply for new decals in accordance with
the terms of this chapter and at its expense. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd.
Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
5-2-8: RATES:
   A.   Rates must be based on time, distance, or a combination thereof.
   B.   Taxicab businesses and drivers shall provide rate information to all
passengers in at least one of the following ways:
      1.   A web based application system that minimally provides:
         a.   The total fare or fare range is clearly displayed on the
application and the passenger positively acknowledges he or she agrees to the
rate structure being charged for the ride requested before the ride is
confirmed. All other rates, charges, or fees are prohibited.
         b.   Upon completion of the prearranged ride, the driver or taxicab
business shall transmit to the passenger an electronic receipt, either by
electronic mail or text message. The receipt shall document the point of origin
and destination of the ride, the total distance and duration of the ride, the
total fare paid, and the driver's first name.
         c.   No taxicab business or driver shall charge a fare that exceeds
the amount communicated through a web based application.
      2.   A rate card that is prominently displayed to all passenger seats and
each driver shall provide a copy of said card to a passenger, when requested. A
copy of the rate card shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-
2015)
         a.   A rate based on distance includes destination rates. Except for
destination rates, all rates based on time and/or distance must utilize a
taximeter. All other rates, charges, or fees, except for a surcharge, extra
passenger fee and cleanup fee, are prohibited. Only one rate may be certified
by the calibrator at one time, and said rate must match the rate card filed in
the City Clerk's Office and verified by the City Equipment Superintendent or
designee. (Ord. 16-4665, 6-6-2016)
         b.   No driver of a metered taxicab shall operate a taxicab without
utilizing a taximeter that has been calibrated by a certified calibrator and
inspected or certified as required by the City Clerk if a soft taximeter.
         c.   Whenever the taxicab business desires to change the rate charged,
the taxicab business shall file a rate card with the City Clerk setting forth
the new rates.
            (1)   For taximeters that are not soft taximeters, the business
must have all taximeters recalibrated by a certified calibrator on a form
provided by the City and returned to the City Clerk no later than ten (10)
business days after filing the new rates with the City Clerk. The business must
have the taximeter recalibrated by a certified calibrator no sooner than the
filing date of a rate card change and no later than ten (10) business days
after said filing date. The business must have all taximeters recalibrated by a
certified calibrator before the business may again change the rate charged.
            (2)   For soft taximeters, the business must have all soft
taximeters certified as required by the City Clerk no later than ten (10)
business days after filing the new rates with the City Clerk. The business must
have the certification completed no sooner than the filing date of a rate card
change and no later than ten (10) business days after said filing date. The
business must have all soft taximeters certified before the business may again
change the rate charged. (Ord. 18-4750, 5-1-2018)
      3.   No taxicab business or driver shall charge a fare exceeding the
amount communicated to passengers through a web based application, rate card,
or taximeter. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
5-2-9: HORSEDRAWN VEHICLES:
   A.   Routes: A horsedrawn vehicle applicant must adhere to the routes
specified in the application for a license. A new or temporary route must be
filed with the City Clerk before an applicant may use such route.
   B.   Removal Of Animal Waste 1 :
      1.   All horses pulling horsedrawn vehicles shall be equipped with
adequate devices to prevent manure and other excrement from falling on the
streets of the City.
      2.   Any excrement which falls on the City streets shall be removed
immediately at the applicant's expense.
      3.   All animal waste for disposal shall be transported to sites or
facilities legally empowered to accept it for treatment or disposal.
   C.   Animal Treatment And Health:
      1.   Treatment Of Animals:
         a.   Applicants shall assure adequate rest periods, feeding schedules,
health and related animal performance and well being for each animal under the
applicant's ownership, care or control. This responsibility shall include
carriage load limits, hours of operation and daily hours of animal usage.
         b.   The feeding of an animal drawing a horsedrawn vehicle from a
feedbag or bucket along any street or alley is permitted so long as the animal
is not permitted to graze.
         c.   No animal shall be left unattended while in service.
      2.   Health Certificate:
         a.   For each animal that will be pulling a horsedrawn vehicle, the
applicant shall provide to the City Clerk a certificate of soundness, issued by
a veterinarian licensed by the State, finding each animal to be free from
infectious disease, in good health and fit for hack and carriage service under
this chapter.
         b.   After initial inspection, each animal shall be reinspected at
intervals of no more than six (6) months, and a certificate of soundness shall
be issued by a veterinarian and filed with the City Clerk in order for each
animal to remain in service.
   D.   Equipment Requirements:
      1.   Every horsedrawn vehicle shall conform to such requirements as may
be imposed by State law with respect to equipment.
      2.   Each vehicle shall be equipped with rubber tires. (Ord. 06-4243, 11-
14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007; amd. Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8-4-6H of this Code.
5-2-10: PEDICABS:
   A.   Business Licenses:
      1.   Pedicab business licenses shall be valid for one year. All business
licenses shall commence on June 1 of each year and shall expire on May 31.
      2.   Each applicant for a pedicab business license shall file an
application with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City.
      3.   If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with
the requirements of this chapter, the applicant has no outstanding judgments
arising from Municipal infraction citations, and the Police Chief or Chief's
designee has determined that there is no information which would indicate that
the issuance of the license would be detrimental to the safety, health or
welfare of residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a license to
conduct a pedicab business.
      4.   If the City Clerk subsequently finds that the pedicab business is
not in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter or if the Police
Chief or Chief's designee finds that continued operation of the pedicab
business would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of residents of
the City, the City Clerk may revoke or suspend the license to conduct a pedicab
business as provided in section
5-1-5 of this title.
      5.   No pedicab business shall allow a person to drive a pedicab unless
the driver has the authorization of the City Clerk except to train current or
prospective employees without passengers.
      6.   The license may be sold, assigned, or transferred if the buyer,
assignee, or transferee, as applicable, meets all the requirements of this
chapter an applicant must meet.
   B.   Driver Requirements:
      1.   No person shall operate a pedicab without authorization of the City
Clerk.
      2.   a.   Each person desiring to drive a pedicab shall file an
application with the City Clerk.
         b.   If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied
with the requirements of this chapter and the Police Chief or Chief's designee
has determined that there is no information which would indicate that
authorization to drive a pedicab would be detrimental to the safety, health or
welfare of residents of the City, the City Clerk shall authorize the individual
to drive a pedicab. Names of authorized drivers will be made available in the
Office of the City Clerk during regular business hours and on the City website.
         c.   Driver authorization shall be valid for a period of one year from
date of issuance.
      3.   Each driver while operating a pedicab shall prominently display in
locations directly in front of the passengers a picture identification card
that is visible to all passengers. The City shall provide the picture
identification card and shall approve the locations where it is displayed.
      4.   No driver shall smoke or use an electronic cigarette while
transporting a passenger. No driver shall allow a passenger to smoke or use e-
cigarette. "Electronic cigarette" means vapor product as defined in section
453A.1 of the Code of Iowa.
   C.   Pedicab Requirements:
      1.   Each pedicab shall be subject to an annual inspection, and no
pedicab shall pass inspection unless it complies with this chapter, the pedicab
equipment requirements of the Code of Iowa and administrative rules.
      2.   The City may require reinspection of a pedicab on belief that it is
not mechanically fit.
         a.   In the event any pedicab is determined by the City Equipment
Superintendent or designee not to be mechanically fit, the decal shall be
confiscated and returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and
determination that the pedicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new
decal will be issued and charged as established by Council resolution.
         b.   The Police Chief or designee may require reinspection of a
pedicab on belief that it is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person. In the event any pedicab is determined by the Police Chief or designee
to be in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, the decal shall be
confiscated and returned to the City Clerk. After reinspection and
determination that the pedicab meets the standards of mechanical fitness, a new
decal will be issued and charged as established by Council resolution.
      3.   The lettering requirements for pedicabs shall be set by
administrative rule.
   D.   Decals:
      1.   Each pedicab business shall file an application for a decal for each
pedicab with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City.
      2.   No person shall operate a pedicab on any street unless a decal has
been issued by the City Clerk, and no pedicab business shall allow a pedicab to
be operated on any street unless a decal has been issued by the City Clerk.
Pedicabs shall display the decal on the left rear of the pedicab.
      3.   If the City Clerk finds that the pedicab business has fully complied
with the requirements of this chapter and the City Equipment Superintendent or
designee determines that there is no information which would indicate that
issuance of the decal would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
residents of the City, the City Clerk shall issue a decal for the pedicab.
      4.   The decal shall be nontransferable as between pedicabs and pedicab
businesses.
      5.   Decals will be issued by the City Clerk on the next business day at
least twenty four (24) hours after the filing of a completed application for
such decal with the City Clerk.
      6.   The pedicab business shall return the decal within two (2) business
days of when the vehicle is no longer operating as a pedicab. Failure to comply
with this provision is grounds to suspend and revoke the pedicab business
license.
      7.   No person shall operate a pedicab that has a decal attached to it if
the decal is not valid. A decal that is not valid includes, but is not limited
to, the following situations: 1) the decal is outdated; or 2) the insurance for
the taxicab as required in this chapter has been canceled or otherwise
terminated.
   E.   Liability Insurance Requirements:
      1.   The pedicab business shall insure each driver consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The minimum limits of the insurance policy shall be determined by
the City's risk manager.
      3.   The pedicab business shall file with the City Clerk evidence of
liability insurance coverage in the form of one certificate of insurance that
lists all pedicabs insured. The certificate of insurance must be acceptable to
the City.
      4.   The insurance company must be authorized to do insurance business in
the State of Iowa and be acceptable to the City.
      5.   Insurance shall be for all incidents.
      6.   Notwithstanding section 5-1-5 of this title, the cancellation or
other termination of an insurance policy required by this chapter shall
automatically suspend the business license. The City Clerk shall immediately
issue written notification to the pedicab business of the suspension of the
license. The City Clerk will schedule a suspension hearing before the City
Manager or designee in the same manner as in section 5-1-5 of this title. If
the pedicab business obtains insurance coverage that complies with this chapter
prior to the hearing on the suspension, the City Clerk may withdraw the
suspension and cancel the hearing. Upon the City Clerk suspending the license,
the pedicab business shall return all decals to the City Clerk. If the
suspension of the business license is subsequently withdrawn, the pedicab
business must apply for new decals in accordance with the terms of this chapter
and at its expense.
   F.   Rates:
      1.   Rates shall be either:
         a.   A flat fee based on the number of passengers regardless of
distance or time; or
         b.   A fee structure approved by the City.
      2.   Pedicab businesses and drivers shall provide rate information to all
passengers by means of a rate card that is prominently displayed to all
passenger seats and each driver shall provide a copy of said card to a
passenger, when requested. A copy of the rate card shall be filed with the City
Clerk. Whenever the pedicab business desires to change the rate charged, the
pedicab business shall file a rate card with the City Clerk setting forth the
new rates.
      3.   No pedicab business or driver shall charge a fare exceeding the
amount communicated to passengers through the rate card.
(Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023; amd. Ord. 24-4932, 8-20-2024)
5-2-11: REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND AUTHORIZATIONS:
Licenses and authorizations issued under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended as provided in section
5-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
5-2-12: FEES:
Fees for licenses, decals, inspections, and authorizations shall be set by
Council resolution. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
5-2-13: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The City Manager and City Clerk, and their designees, are authorized to
establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance adopted by
the City Council. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the City Clerk and
available on the City website. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 23-4905, 7-
11-2023)
5-2-14: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
Municipal infraction. The fine for a simple misdemeanor shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), and the civil penalty for a Municipal infraction shall be as
provided in subsection
1-4-2B of this Code. (Ord. 15-4608, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 23-4905, 7-11-2023)
CHAPTER 3
MASSAGE BUSINESS INFORMATION REQUIREMENT
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: State License Required
5-3-3: Information Required
5-3-4: Placarding
5-3-5: Exceptions
5-3-6: Violation
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
   LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST (OR LMT): Means an individual who has a license
issued by the State of Iowa to perform massage therapy.
   MASSAGE THERAPY: Means the same as it does in the massage therapy licensing
provision in the State Code found at section 152C.1 of the Code of Iowa:
performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy, massotherapy, bodywork,
bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage including hydrotherapy, superficial
hot and cold applications, vibration and topical applications, or other therapy
which involves manipulation of the muscle and connective tissue of the body,
excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle tonus system for the purpose of
enhancing health, muscle relaxation, increasing range of motion, reducing
stress, relieving pain, or improving circulation. "Reflexology", as defined in
section 152C.1 of the Code of Iowa, is not massage therapy.
   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS: Means a place of business where "massage therapy"
is practiced or administered. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-2: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No massage business shall employ or contract with a person to perform massage
therapy unless the person is an LMT. No person shall perform massage therapy
unless the person is an LMT, unless exempted from chapter 152C of the Code of
Iowa. No business shall engage in or offer to engage in the practice of massage
therapy, or use the initials "L. M. T." or the words "licensed massage
therapist", "massage therapist", "masseur", "masseuse", or any other word or
title that implies or represents that a person practices massage therapy at the
business, unless the person is an LMT. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-3: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   A massage business shall immediately produce upon request by City staff
certain information on a form provided by the City entitled "Business
Information Form". The "Business Information Form" shall be available from the
City Clerk and on the City's website.
   B.   The "Business Information Form" shall include the following
information:
      1.   Name of the business;
      2.   Names of all LMTs employed or contracted by the business and their
State license numbers;
      3.   Names and addresses of all other persons who work on the business
premises whether employees or independent contractors of the business along
with a description of the work performed;
      4.   Name(s) of the business owner;
      5.   Name(s) and mailing address(es) of all individuals who have an
ownership interest in the business;
      6.   Name, email address, telephone number, and residential address of
the manager of the business who must be an Iowa resident; and
      7.   Name of the commercial tenant leasing the business premises.
   C.   To confirm the identity of the LMT on the Business Information Form, a
government issued photo identification card of the LMT shall be provided upon
request of City staff. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-4: PLACARDING:
   A.   If the "Business Information Form" containing all the required
information is not immediately produced to City staff upon request, the
business premises may be placarded. If the "Business Information Form" that is
produced is either inaccurate or incomplete, the business may be placarded.
   B.   If a business premises is placarded, no person shall enter the business
premises.
   C.   No person shall remove the placard.
   D.   The business premises shall remain placarded until the "Business
Information Form" containing the information is provided to City staff and is
complete and accurate. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-5: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   A massage therapy business that has a permit for a home occupation.
   B.   A business that employs or contracts with a person who is exempt from
chapter 152C of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 18-4766, 9-4-2018)
5-3-6: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a Municipal infraction as
provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code or a simple misdemeanor. (Ord.
18-4766, 9-4-2018)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Public Nuisance Defined; Public Nuisances Enumerated
6-1-3: Public Nuisances Prohibited; Authority To Abate
6-1-4: Abatement Remedies; Penalties
6-1-5: Vacant Building Registration And Inspections
6-1-6: Emergency Abatement Procedure
6-1-7: Violation
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABANDONED/VACANT BUILDING: Any building or portion of a building which is:
a) unoccupied and unsecured; or b) unoccupied and secured by means other than
those used in the design of the building; or c) declared a dangerous building
under the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings; or d)
unoccupied and unfit for occupancy as determined by a government agency; or e)
unoccupied and has housing and building code violations; or f) unoccupied for a
continuous period of time over one hundred eighty (180) calendar days.
   COMPOST PILE: A collection of yard waste, such as grass, leaves, trees,
brush and garden residue, and also including raw and uncooked kitchen food
wastes but specifically excluding bones, meat, fat, grease, oil, raw manure and
milk products, which collection is screened from the street view, is located in
a confined area, is no larger than twenty five (25) square feet in area, is
located more than twenty feet (20') from a habitable structure and at least
five feet (5') from a property boundary line, is located more than five feet
(5') from any wood structure, excluding fences, is not located in a natural
drainageway and is not located in the area between any building and the street
right of way and is collected for reuse as a soil amendment.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which has any or
all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a
dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants
are endangered.
   A.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
   B.   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
   C.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to
all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (11/2) times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location.
   D.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
   E.   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   F.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
   G.   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction.
   H.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of:
1) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 2) faulty construction; 3) the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; 4) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or 5) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse.
   I.   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
   J.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base.
   K.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows
thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of its
nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
   L.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
1) an attractive nuisance to children; 2) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or
immoral persons; or as to 3) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose
of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
   M.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulation, as specified
in the building code or housing code, or of any law or ordinance of this state
or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
   N.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than sixty six percent (66%) of the: 1) strength,
2) fire resisting qualities or characteristics, or 3) weather resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed
building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
   O.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
   P.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a
fire hazard.
   Q.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
   R.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after
the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city manager or designee.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: Those wastes included by definition in chapter 455B, code
of Iowa, as amended, and the rules of the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
   INOPERABLE/OBSOLETE VEHICLE 1 : Any device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and shall include, but not be limited to, motor vehicle, automobile,
truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof,
and not licensed for the current year as required by law and/or which exhibits
any one of the following characteristics:
   A.   Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken windshield or any other
broken glass.
   B.   Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door,
bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, trunk top or tailpipe.
   C.   Any vehicle lacking an engine or one or more wheels or other structural
parts which renders such vehicle totally inoperable.
   D.   Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which is a habitat for rats, mice or
snakes or any other vermin or insects.
   E.   Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which, because of its defective or
obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
   F.   Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse
gears.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Any discarded or salvaged building material or
fixture; any obsolete or inoperable machinery and/or equipment or parts
thereof; scrap iron or steel.
   NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES: Substances, solid or fluid, which are offensive,
detrimental to health, hurtful or dangerous. "Noxious substances" shall
include, but not be limited to, any dead animal or portion thereof, together
with human or animal excrement.
   OWNER: The person or persons who are the record owners of real property,
together with any person having a property interest in the property, including
legal or equitable interests.
   PROPERTY: Includes both real property, such as land or buildings, as well as
personal property, such as vehicles and appliances.
   REFUSE: Any waste that is putrescible, nonputrescible, combustible or
noncombustible, including, but not limited to, paper, garbage, material
resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving and
consumption of food, vegetable or animal matter, offal, rubbish, yard waste
such as tree trimmings or grass cuttings, ashes, incinerator residue, street
cleanings, construction debris and solid industrial waste.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person having possession or control of real or
personal property, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the
following:
   A.   Agent.
   B.   Assignee or collector of rents.
   C.   Contract seller or contract purchaser.
   D.   Holder of a deed.
   E.   Mortgagee or vendee in possession.
   F.   Receiver, executor, administrator or trustee.
   G.   Lessee and lessor.
   H.   Other person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity exercising
apparent control over a property.
   UNOCCUPIED: A building in which there is a lack of physical presence on a
regular basis for the purpose for which it was erected or a building unfit for
occupancy due to failure to meet minimum standards set out by city ordinance
for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include,
but not be limited to, motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof, whether or not licensed for
the current year. (1978 Code §24-102; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000;
Ord. 01-3963, 4-3-2001; Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-9-1 of this code for towing and impoundment of abandoned vehicles.
6-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED; PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Whatever is injurious to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property by the public or community shall be deemed a "public nuisance".
Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Accumulation Of Solid Waste And Noxious Materials 1 :
      1.   Causing, permitting or allowing any refuse, solid waste, garbage,
noxious substances, hazardous wastes, junk or salvage materials to be collected
or to remain in any place.
      2.   Causing, permitting or allowing any refuse, solid waste, garbage,
noxious substances or hazardous wastes, junk, salvage material or other
offensive substances to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon any street,
avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure, lot, whether
vacant or occupied, or upon any pond or pool of water, except for:
         a.   Solid waste deposited and stored in accordance with provisions of
title 16, chapter 3, article H of this code.
         b.   Any compost pile located or maintained in compliance with this
chapter so as to allow its proper aeration.
         c.   Junk or salvage materials properly stored in a junk or salvage
yard permitted under title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code 2 .
   B.   Diseased Or Damaged Trees Or Plant Materials 3 : Any dead, diseased or
damaged trees or plant materials which may harbor serious insect or disease
pests or disease injurious to other trees or plant materials, or any healthy
tree in such a state of deterioration that any part of such tree is likely to
fall and damage property or cause injury to persons.
   C.   Weeds: Any condition relating to weeds described as a nuisance in
chapter 3 of this title.
   D.   Ditch, Drain Or Stormwater Detention Basins 4 :
      1.   Any ditch, drain or watercourse which is now or hereafter may be
constructed so as to prevent or unduly interfere with the surface and overflow
water drainage from adjacent lands.
      2.   Any stormwater detention basin not properly maintained as determined
by the city engineer.
   E.   Stagnant Water: Stagnant water standing on any property, including any
container or material kept in such a condition that water can accumulate and
stagnate.
   F.   Vermin And Pests:
      1.   Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or breeding of
vermin.
      2.   Infestations of vermin, such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats,
starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches or flies.
   G.   Private Sewer Facilities 5 :
      1.   Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as privies,
vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools and drainfields, which
have failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing, leaking or
emanating odors.
      2.   Septic tanks, cisterns and cesspools which are abandoned or no
longer in use unless properly emptied and filled with clean fill.
      3.   Any vault, cesspool or septic tank which does not comply with the
county department of health regulations. (1978 Code §24-101; amd. 1994 Code)
   H.   Abandoned, Vacant Or Dangerous Buildings:
      1.   Vacant buildings, or vacant portions of buildings.
      2.   Abandoned buildings.
      3.   Dangerous buildings or structures. (Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000)
   I.   Hazardous Conditions:
      1.   Generally: Any hazardous thing or condition on property which may
contribute to injury of any person present on the property. Hazards shall
include, but not be limited to, open holes, open foundations, open wells,
dangerous trees or limbs, abandoned refrigerators and trapping devices.
      2.   Fire Hazards: Any thing or condition on property creating a fire
hazard, as determined by the fire marshal, or in violation of the fire code.
      3.   Health Hazards: Any thing or condition on property creating an
imminent threat to human health or in violation of any health or sanitation
law.
   J.   Noisy Conditions: Any violation of chapter 4 of this title.
   K.   Snow Removal 6 : Any violation of ice and snow removal provisions set
forth in section
16-1A-8 of this code.
   L.   Junkyard Or Salvage Operations: All junkyard or salvage operations, as
defined in title 14 of this code, except as permitted by ordinance 7 .
   M.   Obstructing Public Ways And Property:
      1.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, structures,
signs or otherwise of public streets, alleys, sidewalks and commons, except as
permitted by agreement, easement, permit or ordinance.
      2.   Any gathering of persons or vehicles upon a public street or
sidewalk or any use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk which
obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other lawful use of streets or
sidewalks, except as permitted by permit or ordinance 8 .
   N.   Depositing Mud, Dirt And Debris On Public Ways: The depositing or
allowing the depositing of any mud, dirt, gravel or other debris in violation
of title 16, chapter 1 of this code.
   O.   Inoperable/Obsolete Vehicle: The storage, parking, leaving or
permitting the storage, parking or leaving of an inoperable/obsolete vehicle
upon private property within the city for a period in excess of forty eight
(48) hours unless excepted herein. This subsection shall not apply to any
vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held
in connection with a junkyard or auto and truck oriented use operated in
accordance with the zoning laws of this code.
   P.   Unlawful Sale Or Manufacture Of Liquors 9 : Any building or place in or
upon which intoxicating liquors are unlawfully manufactured, sold or kept with
intent to sell in such a manner as to become offensive. (1978 Code §24-101;
amd. 1994 Code)
   Q.   Building Construction Sites: Building construction sites maintained in
violation of the building code. (1978 Code §24-101; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-
4098, 9-23-2003)
   R.   Graffiti Vandalism: All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism
which is visible to the public view. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997; amd. Ord. 03-
4098, 9-23-2003)
   S.   Consumption On Unlicensed Premises: Any building, place or premises
where food, beverages or entertainment is sold or provided for compensation, or
where persons are charged to enter, upon which alcoholic beverages are consumed
between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Monday through
Saturday, and between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
Sunday, when said building, place or premises has not been issued a liquor
control license or wine or beer permit. (Ord. 08-4304, 4-29-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 16, chapter 3, article H of this code.
2 2. See also subsection L of this section.
3 3. See title 10, chapter 8 of this code.
4 1. See also title 16, chapter 3, article G of this code.
5 2. See also section
  16-3D-3 of this code.
  1. See also sections
6 9-4-9 and
  10-5-5 of this code.
7 2. See also subsection A2c of this section.
8 3. See title 10, chapters 1, 2 and 3 of this code.
9 1. See title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
6-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
   A.   The creation or maintenance of a public nuisance is unlawful and
prohibited, subject to penalties set forth in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
   B.   The city manager or designee is authorized to abate public nuisances by
either the municipal infraction process or administratively. Administrative
procedures shall be established by the city manager or designee and shall be
available for public inspection in the department of housing and inspection
services or its successor. (1978 Code §24-103; amd. 1994 Code)
6-1-4: ABATEMENT REMEDIES; PENALTIES:
   A.   Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to, repair, removal,
cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining,
securing, repairing a building or structure, boarding unoccupied buildings,
barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures
and demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings.
   B.   The cost of abatement may be assessed against the property for
collection in the same manner as property taxes as provided by state law.
Abatement costs shall include the cost of removing or eliminating the public
nuisance, the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and
testing, the cost of notification, filing costs and other related
administrative costs. Inoperable/obsolete vehicles which have been impounded
may be sold in accordance with state law governing abandoned vehicles. If an
inoperable/obsolete vehicle is not sold or if the proceeds of such sale or
redemption are not sufficient for payment of the cost of abatement, storage and
sale of said inoperable/obsolete vehicle, such cost or the balance of such cost
may be assessed against the real property from which the vehicle was removed or
abated for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by
state law.
   C.   Abatement remedies and penalties are as provided in chapter 364, code
of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §24-107; amd. 1994 Code)
6-1-5: VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Vacant Building Registration:
      1.   The owner shall register a vacant or abandoned building with the
city not later than thirty (30) calendar days after any building in the city
becomes an "abandoned/vacant building" as defined in this chapter. Failure to
register an abandoned/vacant building or providing false information to the
city shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
      2.   The registration shall include the following information:
         a.   A description of the premises;
         b.   The names and addresses of the owner or owners;
         c.   The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building;
         d.   The name of the agent designated to act on the behalf of an out
of town property owner to accept legal processes and notices, and to authorize
repairs as required; and
         e.   The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant and/
or a plan and timetable to comply with applicable city codes.
   B.   Vacant Building Registration Fees: The owner of a vacant building shall
pay an annual fee reasonably related to the administrative cost of registering
and processing the vacant building owner registration form and the costs of the
city in monitoring and inspecting the vacant building site. This fee shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be paid in full prior
to the issuance of any permits or acceptance of the registration form for the
subject property.
   C.   Inspections: The owner shall allow inspections upon request and allow
annual inspections of the interior and exterior of the premises for the purpose
of enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
housing and building codes. (Ord. 00-3954, 12-19-2000)
6-1-6: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
When the city manager or designee determines that a public nuisance exists on a
property and the public nuisance constitutes an imminent and compelling danger
to health, safety or welfare of persons or property, the city manager or
designee is authorized to abate or have abated the public nuisance without
prior notice and opportunity of hearing. Administrative procedures for such
emergency abatement shall be set forth by rule and approved by the city
council. The costs of such action may be assessed against the property for
collection in the same manner as property taxes. However, prior to such
assessment, the city shall first seek abatement as a municipal infraction or
other equitable action and provide the offending party and/or property owner an
opportunity to appear and be heard. (1978 Code §24-108; amd. 1994 Code; Ord.
00-3954, 12-19-2000)
6-1-7: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
CHAPTER 2
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Notification Of Appropriate Departments
6-2-3: Cleanup Required
6-2-4: Violation
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CLEANUP: The same as set out in section 455B.381(1), code of Iowa, as
amended.
   HAZARDOUS CONDITION: The same as set out in section 455B.381(4), code of
Iowa, as amended.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined in section 455B.381(5), code
of Iowa, as amended.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: Those wastes which are included in the definition in
chapter 455B, code of Iowa, as amended, and the rules of the Iowa
administrative code, as amended.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who produces, handles, stores, uses,
transports, refines or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which
creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers and any other person
in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether
the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract
or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
   TREATMENT: A method, technique or process, including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the
substance nonhazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for
storage or to reduce it in volume. "Treatment" includes any activity or
processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of
hazardous substance to render it nonhazardous. (1978 Code §24-160; amd. 1994
Code)
6-2-2: NOTIFICATION OF APPROPRIATE DEPARTMENTS:
The first city officer or employee who arrives at the scene of an incident
involving hazardous substances, if not a peace officer, shall notify the police
department which shall notify the appropriate state department which requires
notification as provided by state law. (1978 Code §24-162; amd. 1994 Code)
6-2-3: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
   A.   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous waste or substance, so
that the hazardous substance or waste or a constituent of the hazardous waste
or substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause
the condition to be remedied by a cleanup as required by state or federal law.
   B.   If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a
reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident,
the city may, by an authorized officer, give to the responsible person
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said
notice setting deadlines for commencing and completing the cleanup and stating
that in the event the responsible person fails to comply with said deadlines,
the city may proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible
person for all reasonable expenses associated with the cleanup. (1978 Code §24-
161; amd. 1994 Code)
6-2-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
CHAPTER 3
WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Nuisances Declared; Violations
6-3-3: Natural Areas
6-3-4: Emergency Control Measures
6-3-5: Violation
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CHEMICAL CONTROL: The application of a herbicide (weed killer) in strict
accordance with the directions on the product and the regulations of the code
of Iowa and the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
   CONSERVATION AREA: An area of property that is planted with ground cover
plants of a size and texture compatible with the environment and maintained
accordingly.
   DEVELOPED LOT OR AREA: An improved or commercial lot; an improved area of
land.
   FIRE MARSHAL: The city fire marshal or designee.
   GROUND COVER: Plants with the growth and root capacity to cover and
stabilize an area of soil and to prevent erosion.
   LAND: Includes land, buildings, structures, tenements, hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interests therein, equitable as well as legal.
   NATURAL AREA: An area of land allowed to retain native plant material in a
natural prairie state.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS: Primary and secondary classes of weeds as defined by the code
of Iowa and the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
   PARKING: That part of the street, avenue or highway in the city not covered
by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; on unpaved
streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying between the lot lines
and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
   PLANT: Shall include all manner of vegetation, including, but not limited
to, grass, shrubs, trees and weeds, excluding cut firewood and compost piles.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The entire width of a platted street or alley, whether the
width is in use for travel or is undeveloped.
   SOIL EROSION CONTROL: A method of planting and cultivation, or lack of same,
designed to retain soil and to prevent soil movement caused by natural or human
causes.
   UNDEVELOPED LOT OR AREA: An unimproved lot or area of land.
   UNMOWED OR UNTENDED AREA: An area of land allowed to grow without care and
supervision, where weeds and grasses are more than ten inches (10") in height.
   WEED OFFICIAL: Person designated by the city manager to enforce this
chapter.
   WEEDS: Any plants growing uncultivated and out of context with the
surrounding plant life with a height of ten inches (10") or more or when such
plant has a seed head forming or formed. (1978 Code §34-70; amd. 1994 Code;
Ord. 06-4232, 9-5-2006; Ord. 11-4429, 5-17-2011)
6-3-2: NUISANCES DECLARED 1 ; VIOLATIONS:
The failure of a person owning, controlling or in possession of property to
observe any of the following requirements shall be subject to the penalties
provided in subsection
1-4-2D of this code: (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
   A.   Duty To Cut Noxious Weeds: Each owner and each person in the possession
or control of any land shall cut or otherwise destroy, in whatever manner
prescribed by the weed official, all noxious weeds thereon and shall keep said
lands free of such growth. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Developed And Undeveloped Lots; Weeds Removal; Grass Cutting: Each
owner and each person in possession or control of any developed or undeveloped
lot or land area shall be responsible to keep said lot or land area, along with
the parking adjacent thereto, alleys, public ways or land areas up to the
centerline of said ways free of any weeds and to keep grasses on said land
mowed so that said grass is less than ten inches (10") in height. (Ord. 11-
4429, 5-17-2011)
   C.   Obstructing Public Ways: Each owner and each person in the possession
or control of any lands shall not allow any plant growth of any sort to remain
in such a manner as to render the streets, alleys or public ways adjoining said
land unsafe for public travel or in any manner so as to impede pedestrians or
vehicular traffic upon any public place or way. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994
Code)
   D.   Interference With Weed Official: No persons shall interfere with the
weed official or any appointed assistant while engaged in the enforcement of
this chapter. (1978 Code §34-72)
   E.   Watercourses:
      1.   Where waterways or watercourses are found upon any developed or
undeveloped lot or land area, the owner or person in possession or control of
the land shall keep the flat or level part of the bank of said waterway free of
any weeds and grasses more than ten inches (10") in height.
      2.   Should such waterways or watercourses be found within the right of
way of a street or alley, the owner or person in possession or control of the
adjacent land shall be responsible to keep the flat or accessible portion of
the creek bank free of any weeds and the grasses more than ten inches (10") in
height. (Ord. 11-4429, 5-17-2011)
   F.   Fire Hazards: No owner or person in possession or control of any
developed or undeveloped lots or land areas shall allow plant growth or
accumulation of plant materials so as to constitute a fire hazard, as
determined by the fire marshal. (1978 Code §34-73; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2C of this title.
6-3-3: NATURAL AREAS:
   A.   Designation Of Natural Areas:
      1.   The weed official, upon application of the owner or person in
possession or control of any land, may designate such land or portion thereof
as a natural or conservation area. Prior to designating such area, the weed
official shall consider the following factors: grade and incline of said land,
the difficulty to control or maintain such land, whether said land is being
maintained as either a soil erosion control area or a conservation area. Any
person affected by the designation or lack thereof may appeal said
determination to the city manager or designee.
      2.   Any protected sensitive area and associated buffer designated on an
approved sensitive areas site plan or sensitive areas development plan under
the provisions of the sensitive areas ordinance (title 14, chapter 5, article I
of this code) shall be considered a natural area. (Ord. 95-3704, 12-19-1995)
   B.   Natural Or Conservation Areas: Natural or conservation areas need not
be mowed and shall be left in their natural state, except all noxious weeds
shall be removed or controlled.
   C.   Public Ways Near Conservation Areas: Sidewalks or other public ways
that lie adjacent to or extend through a natural or conservation area shall be
open and free from any obstructions to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. (1978
Code §34-74)
6-3-4: EMERGENCY CONTROL MEASURES:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever in the judgment
of the weed official, the fire marshal or the city engineer, a property
exhibits uncontrolled weed growth which creates a health, safety or fire
hazard, the weed official may undertake immediate action to abate said
condition without prior notice and opportunity for hearing. The costs of such
action may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner
as property taxes as provided by state law. However, prior to such assessment,
the city shall give written notice to the property owner, by certified mail,
and the opportunity for an administrative hearing. (1978 Code §34-76; amd. 1994
Code)
6-3-5: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
CHAPTER 4
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Specific Activities Prohibited
6-4-3: Exceptions To Provisions
6-4-4: Violation
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AMPLIFIED SOUND: To increase sound in intensity and duration by electrical,
electronic, mechanical or other nonhuman means, including an electronic device.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any loud and raucous noise, or any noise which
unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound for which the information content of the sound is
transferred to the listener such as, but not limited to, understanding of
spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or lowered or
comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or
similar place owned or controlled by the city, including any structure or park.
   REAL PROPERTY LINE: An imaginary line along the ground surface and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property
divisions.
   SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE: Radio, tape player, disc player, loudspeaker,
digital audio player, portable media player or other electric, electronic or
mechanical device that produces or reproduces sound. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-2: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall play or operate, or permit the playing or operating of,
a sound production device within a motorized vehicle that is plainly audible by
any person: 1) either across a real property line or at a distance of fifty
feet (50') or more from the vehicle; and 2) for more than thirty (30)
continuous seconds.
   B.   No person shall cause or create, or permit the causing or creating of,
a noise disturbance that is plainly audible by any person: 1) either across a
real property line or at a distance of fifty feet (50'); and 2) for more than
thirty (30) continuous seconds.
   C.   No person shall use amplified sound in City Plaza except with a permit
authorized in title 10 of this code.
   D.   No person shall use amplified sound in violation of section
8-5-5 of this code.
   E.   No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates,
containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects outdoors
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the
following morning as to create a noise disturbance across the property line of
residentially zoned property.
   F.   No person shall unload or handle garbage dumpsters or similar objects
outdoors between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. the following morning as to create a noise disturbance across the property
line of residentially zoned property.
   G.   No person shall operate construction equipment before seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. and after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless a permit therefor has been
obtained from the city engineer. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
The provisions herein shall not apply to:
   A.   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the time
of day, the existence of an emergency or the approved testing thereof.
   B.   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work, including
snow removal and maintenance of trees.
   C.   Emergency vehicles, such as firetrucks and ambulances.
   D.   Essential services, such as electrical substations and safety devices.
   E.   Construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. "Maintenance activities" shall be nonroutine
operations, temporary in nature and conducted infrequently.
   F.   Cement sawing of freshly poured concrete street, alley, sidewalk or
road surface.
   G.   Any person emitting sound pursuant to a permit under title 10 of this
code.
   H.   Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or
private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in
which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school
athletic and school entertainment events.
   I.   Events conducted by affiliated groups, as that term is defined in title
10, chapter 1 of this code or if, sponsored or funded, in whole or in part, by
a governmental entity.
   J.   Equipment used for political advertisements.
   K.   Equipment used for public health and safety purposes.
   L.   Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes or other reasonable sounding
of devices from houses of worship.
   M.   Parades, processions or other public events for which a parade or other
permit has been issued, provided the conditions of the permit are complied
with.
   N.   Car or truck horns or similar devices when used to denote danger or a
warning or possible danger. (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
6-4-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction punishable
by a penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D1 of this code or a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of sixty five
dollars ($65.00). (Ord. 14-4600, 11-18-2014)
CHAPTER 5
NUCLEAR WEAPONS FREE ZONE
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Nuclear Weapons Work Prohibited
6-5-4: Signs Posted
6-5-5: Penalties
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the city as a nuclear weapons free
zone in which work on nuclear weapons is prohibited. The people of the city
find that the presence of nuclear weapons facilities within the city is in
direct conflict with the maintenance of the community's public health, safety,
morals, economic well being and general welfare. (1978 Code §24-142)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   COMPONENT OF A NUCLEAR WEAPON: Any device, radioactive or nonradioactive,
designed to be installed in and contribute to the operation of a nuclear
weapon.
   NUCLEAR WEAPON: Any device, the purpose of which is use as a weapon, a
weapon prototype or a weapon test device, the intended detonation of which
results from the energy released by fission and/or fusion reactions involving
atomic nuclei. "Nuclear weapon" also includes the weapon's guidance,
transportation, propulsion, triggering and detonation systems.
   PERSON: A natural person, as well as a corporation, institution or other
entity. (1978 Code §24-143)
6-5-3: NUCLEAR WEAPONS WORK PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly engage in work within the city, the purpose of which
is the development, production, deployment, launching, maintenance or storage
of nuclear weapons or components of nuclear weapons. (1978 Code §24-144)
6-5-4: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate city officials shall post signs on major entrances to the city
stating "Nuclear Weapons Free Zone" in a manner that conforms with standards
set forth in the federal highway administration's "Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices For Streets And Highways", as amended. (1978 Code §24-146; amd.
1994 Code)
6-5-5: PENALTIES 1 :
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor
or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1994 Code)
   B.   Residents of the city shall also have the right to enforce this chapter
by appropriate private civil actions for declaratory or injunctive relief.
Reasonable attorney fees shall be awarded to a prevailing plaintiff in such
litigation. (1978 Code §24-145)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-4-9 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
6-6-1: Open Burning Prohibited
6-6-2: Exceptions
6-6-3: Penalties
6-6-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, allow or
maintain any open fire. (1978 Code §24-170)
6-6-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Open burning of the following types may be permitted, in compliance
with fire department guidelines, with a valid open burning permit from the fire
department:
      1.   Ceremonial Or Controlled Bonfires: Ceremonial or controlled bonfires
may be permitted.
      2.   Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, may be permitted for the duration of the disaster in cases where an
officially declared emergency exists.
      3.   Prescribed Agricultural Burns: The open burning of fields may be
permitted if necessary for the maintenance of native prairie grass. "Fields",
for the purposes of this chapter, means an open land area more than fifty feet
(50') from a building or wooded areas.
      4.   Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction
and training of public, institutional or industrial employees in the methods of
firefighting.
      5.   Flare Stacks: Open burning or flaring of waste gas may be permitted.
   B.   Open burning for campfires and outdoor cooking is permitted without any
burning permit if performed in an approved container constructed of steel,
brick or masonry. (1978 Code §24-171; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Open burning in portable, outdoor fireplaces is permitted. (Ord. 02-
4034, 8-20-2002)
6-6-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 7
SMOKING IN FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 03-4085, 6-10-2003)
CHAPTER 8
PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PUBLIC BUSES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Prohibited Acts
6-8-3: Driver Responsibility
6-8-4: Violation; Penalty
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle operated by the city of Iowa City
to provide public transportation service within the city, shall be a "bus".
(Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996; amd. Ord. 25-4942, 1-7-2025)
6-8-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No passenger on any bus shall do any of the following acts:
   A.   Smoke or possess any lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette, or
use smokeless tobacco, an electronic cigarette or vape device. "Smokeless
tobacco" is defined as any product that contains cut, ground, powdered, or leaf
tobacco and is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal cavity, including,
but not limited to, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, dissolvable
tobacco products and snus. "Electronic cigarette" means vapor product as
defined in section 453A.1 of the code of Iowa.
   B.   Possess open containers of alcoholic beverage or consume alcoholic
beverage.
   C.   Destroy, deface, soil or remove any part of any bus.
   D.   Spit, urinate, or defecate in or upon or from any part of any bus.
   E.   Throw, deposit or place any paper, bottles, cans or any other solid
waste in or upon any bus except in a designated trash receptacle.
   F.   Throw any object of any kind within any bus.
   G.   Throw any object of any kind out any door, window or opening of any
bus.
   H.   Play or operate any electronic sound amplification device, including
but not limited to a mobile phone, unless the sound therefrom can only be heard
through an earphone or is totally inaudible to all passengers.
   I.   Bring any pet or animal onto a bus. Service animals trained to assist
persons with disabilities are exempted from this subsection.
   J.   Stand or remain in front of any demarcation line on the forward end of
the floor of any bus while the same is in motion or after being asked to step
back behind the line by the driver.
   K.   Interfere with the driver's operation of a bus.
   L.   Engage in harassment, bullying, fighting or violent behavior, make loud
and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to an occupant or operator
of the bus, or direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which
the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
   M.   Fail to comply with administrative rules established by the
transportation director. The transportation director is authorized to establish
administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance or policy adopted by
the city council. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the city clerk and
available on the city website. (Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996; amd. Ord. 25-4942, 1-
7-2025)
6-8-3: DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY:
The driver or personnel supervising the operation of a bus shall advise a
passenger who is violating any of the foregoing subsections that the prohibited
conduct must cease, and that the passenger may be required to leave the bus if
the prohibited conduct does not stop. If the passenger does not comply with the
driver's direction, the driver shall immediately contact a supervisor and/or
the Iowa City police to report the prohibited conduct. A supervisor or a police
officer who finds that the passenger has engaged in prohibited conduct may
remove the passenger from the bus. (Ord. 96-3729, 4-23-1996)
6-8-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be a violation of this code to engage in conduct prohibited by this
chapter. Such violation may be prosecuted as a simple misdemeanor or as a
municipal infraction, as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
96-3729, 4-23-1996)
CHAPTER 9
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
6-9-1: Definitions
6-9-2: Declaration Of Public Nuisance; Regulation
6-9-3: Notification To Abate Nuisance
6-9-4: Violation
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   DEFACE: To alter the appearance of something by removing, distorting, adding
to, or covering all or a part of it.
   GRAFFITI VANDALISM: Defacing public or private real property by painting,
drawing, writing, etching, or carving by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife,
or any similar method.
   REAL PROPERTY: Land and whatever is constructed or growing upon or affixed
to land, including fences and walls. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997)
6-9-2: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE; REGULATION:
All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism which is visible to the public
view is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to city
abatement procedures if not removed within seven (7) calendar days from the
date of written notice from the city. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997)
6-9-3: NOTIFICATION TO ABATE NUISANCE:
The owner of any real property located within the city which is defaced by
graffiti vandalism shall be notified of such graffiti vandalism by the city
prior to any city abatement procedures. Such notice shall be in written form
and shall direct the property owner to remove or eradicate the graffiti
vandalism from the real property within seven (7) calendar days from the date
of such notice. The notice shall be sent by first class mail and shall contain:
   A.   A description of the real property upon which the graffiti vandalism
occurred and a description of the nature of the vandalism;
   B.   A demand that the owner remove or eradicate the graffiti vandalism from
the real property within seven (7) calendar days from the date of such notice;
and
   C.   A statement that warns that the owner's failure or refusal to remove or
eradicate the graffiti vandalism may result in the city's commencement of
abatement procedures, and if the cost of such abatement is not paid to the city
within thirty (30) calendar days after a notice of assessment is mailed to the
property owner, such costs may be assessed against the property in the same
manner as a property tax as provided by state law. (Ord. 97-3801, 7-29-1997)
6-9-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKE FREE PLACES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Smoke Free Places Itemized
6-10-2: Electronic Cigarettes
6-10-3: Violation; Penalty
6-10-1: SMOKE FREE PLACES ITEMIZED:
It is illegal to smoke in a smoke free place. Pursuant to HF 2212, section 5,
to be codified at section 142D.5 of the Iowa Code, the City declares the
following areas to be smoke free places:
   A.   Iowa City Municipal Airport. (Ord. 08-4314, 9-9-2008)
   B.   Municipal parking ramps except in privately owned vehicles that are not
located in the Chauncey Swan Parking Ramp during the farmers' market as
provided in this section.
   C.   City Plaza except the public alleys. "City Plaza" is defined in section
10-5-2 of this Code.
   D.   The area between the public library and Linn Street including the
sidewalk, as illustrated on the diagram below, and the area within ten feet
(10') of a sidewalk cafe that is not in City Plaza. "Sidewalk cafe" is defined
in section
10-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-2010)
   E.   All City parks except when in a privately owned vehicle. (Ord. 17-4729,
10-17-2017)
   F.   Farmers' market beginning thirty (30) minutes prior to the opening of
the farmers' market. "Farmers' market" is defined in section
10-11-1 of this Code.
   G.   The area within fifty feet (50') of any outdoor stage or location where
musicians are performing during any outdoor entertainment venues where members
of the general public assemble to witness entertainment events, such as, but
not limited to, Arts Fest and Jazz Fest. (Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 17-
4729, 10-17-2017)
   H.   The streets and adjacent sidewalks along the parade route of the
University of Iowa homecoming parade from five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. on Friday evening of the homecoming parade. (Ord. 08-4314,
9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2536.png]
 
(Ord. 10-4393, 6-1-2010)
6-10-2: ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES:
It is illegal to use an electronic cigarette in any smoke free place listed in
section
6-10-1 of this chapter or in any place where chapter 142D of the Iowa Code
prohibits smoking a tobacco product. "Electronic cigarette" means vapor product
as defined in section 453A.1 of the code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-4634, 7-15-2015)
6-10-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 10-4410, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 15-4634, 7-15-
2015)
TITLE 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Fire Code Adopted
7-1-2: Amendments To Fire Code
7-1-3: Fees For Inspections
7-1-4: Penalties For Violation
7-1-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
   That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Iowa City, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, 2024 edition, including errata and Appendix Chapters
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, N and O as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Iowa City, in
the State of Iowa regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and
use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as
herein provided, providing for the issuance of permits and each, and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on
file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, prescribed in the following sections of this
chapter.
(Ord. 19-4778, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4904, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25-4949, 4-1-2025)
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
That the following sections are hereby revised:
   Section 101.1 Insert: Iowa City, Iowa
   Section 103.1 Insert: Iowa City Fire Department
   Section 104.1.1 Add a new section to read as follows: The Fire Code Official
and members of the fire prevention bureau shall have the powers of a peace
officer in performing their duties under this Code.
   Section 104.1.2 Add a new section to read as follows: The Fire Chief may
appoint and designate such members of the Fire Department as fire/police
investigators upon being certified by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. Fire/
police investigators shall have the powers of a peace officer in performing
their duties under this Code, including full powers of arrest to effectuate
their duties of enforcing city ordinances and state statutes. Notwithstanding
his/her status as a peace officer, a fire/police investigator shall be subject
to the rules and regulations of the Iowa City Fire Department for all purposes
and shall perform such functions as the Fire Chief shall assign.
   Section 104.12 Add a new section to read as follows: The Fire Code Official
is authorized to order an operation or use stopped, or the evacuation of any
premises, building, or vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a fire, life
safety or health hazard.
   Section 105.2 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Application for an operational permit shall be submitted with all required
information not less than 14 days prior to the event requiring a permit.
   Section 105.5 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The Fire Code Official at their discretion shall send plans for operational
permits requests to an outside agency for review. The Fire Code Official shall
choose the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated
with the plan review directly to the outside agency. The permit shall not be
issued until the review fees have been paid.
   Section 105.6 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The Fire Code Official at their discretion may send plans for operational
permits requests to an outside agency for review. The Fire Code Official shall
designate the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated
with the plan review directly to the outside agency. The permit shall not be
issued until all fees have been paid.
   Section 112. Delete in its entirety and insert in lieu thereof: See Title
17, Chapter 12 of this Code.
   Section 113.4 Delete the section and replace with: Persons who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or
of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction, as prescribed in Title 1,
Chapter 4 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   Section 114.4. Delete the section and replace with: Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition and shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction,
as prescribed in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
   Section 202 Add a new definition to read as follows: Crowd Manager. Crowd
Manager is responsible for safe crowd movement during daily activities and
special events, means of egress, assisting venue occupants, and overseeing
emergency response and evacuation plans.
   Section 202 Add a new definition to read as follows: Emergency
Communications Center. The Johnson County Joint Emergency Communications
Center. (JCJECC)
   Section 202 Add a sentence to the end of Fire Lane definition to read as
follows: See City Code 9-1-1 for additional rules and regulations.
   Section 307 See also 6-6 of this Code.
   Section 307.1.2 Add a new section to read as follows: Hours of operation.
Outdoor burning allowed by code is permitted between the hours of 7:00 AM and
11:00 PM or as permitted and approved by the fire code official.
   Section 308.3 Add number 4: Outdoor assembly spaces are allowed to be
provided with natural gas fueled fire pit appliances complying with the
applicable adopted codes and manufacturer's listing.
   Section 401.9 Add a new section to read as follows: Building evacuation.
Upon activation of the building fire alarm system or upon notification by other
means of detecting and reporting unwanted fire, all building occupants shall
promptly evacuate the building. Building employees and tenants shall implement
the appropriate emergency plan and procedures.
      Exception: When the emergency evacuation plan, as approved by the fire
code official, does not require the immediate total evacuation of the building.
   Table 405.3 Fire and Evacuation Drill Frequency and Participation. Amend
Table 405.3 by adding a footnote d to Group E Occupancy as follows: d. Group E
occupancies shall conduct fire and evacuation drills in accordance with State
of Iowa requirements.
   Section 505.1. Delete Section 505.1 in its entirety and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
   505.1 New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that
is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address
numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not
spelled out. Numbers shall be sized as specified in Table 505.1. Measurements
to determine the minimum number size shall be measured from the approved
address location to the center line of the street for which the premises is
addressed. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot
be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be
used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
   Table 505.1
   Minimum Address Sizea,b,c,d
 
Distance from the centerline of Minimum Height (in) Minimum Stroke Width (in)
the Public Way (ft)
Less than 100                   4                   1/2
100 199                         6                   3/4
200 299                         8                   1
For each additional 100         Increase 2          Increase ½
 
   a)   Exterior suite identification, minimum height shall be 4 inches and
stroke width shall be ½ inch.
   b)   Interior suite identification, minimum height shall be 3 inches and
stroke width shall be ¼ inch.
   c)   Measurements to determine the minimum number or letter size shall be
measured from the approved address location to the center line of the street
for which the premise is addressed.
   d)   Minimum height and minimum stroke may be increased by the Fire Code
Official.
   Section 505.3 Add a new section to read as follows: Addresses for Buildings
under Construction. Upon permit issuance, all new commercial and residential
buildings under construction shall have plainly visible addresses from the
street. Additional address signage may be required at the discretion of the
code official.
   Section 506.1 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
An approved key box shall be installed in an approved location on all new
construction.
   Section 507.3 Delete the section and replace with: Fire flow. Fire flow
requirements for buildings or portions of buildings shall be determined by
"Appendix B" of this code.
   Section 507.5.1 Delete exceptions 1 & 2.
   Section 507.5.1.1 Delete the section and replace with: Fire Sprinkler System
& Standpipe System Support. A fire hydrant shall be located no more than 100
feet from a fire sprinkler or standpipe system connection on hard surface,
located on the same side of the fire department access road, easily accessible
by fire apparatus, and meeting the approval of the Fire Code Official.
   Exception: The location of the fire hydrant may be modified by approval of
the Fire Code Official.
   Section 507.5.7 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Hydrant
Installation
   Section 507.5.7.1 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire hydrant outlet
direction: All fire hydrants shall be positioned so that the four and one-half
(4 ½) inch connection is facing the street or driveway accessible to fire
department apparatus or as specified and required by the local water
jurisdiction.
   Section 507.5.7.2 Fire hydrants threads: All new fire hydrants within the
limits of the city of Iowa City shall have National Standard Threads (NST) on
the two and one-half (2 ½) inch connections and the four and one-half (4 ½)
inch connection will have a Storz connection as specified and required by the
local water jurisdiction.
   Section 507.5.7.3 Flow: The minimum flow requirements for a water main
serving a fire hydrant is the rate of water flow, at a residual pressure of
twenty pounds per square inch (20psi) and for a specified duration, as
specified in appendix B of this code or as specified and required by the local
water jurisdiction.
   Section 507.5.7.4 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire hydrant height:
Fire hydrants shall be installed a minimum of sixteen (16) inches from the
nominal ground level to the center of the lowest water outlet or as specified
and required by the local water jurisdiction.
   Section 510.1 Delete exception 1 & 4.
   Section 604.8. Add a new section to read as follows: Elevator equipment
signage. New and existing buildings with an elevator shall have an approved,
visible sign located next to the elevator key box stating the location of the
elevator equipment room and elevator power shut-off.
   Section 604.6.1 Delete section and replace with: Elevator key location. Keys
for the elevator car doors and fire-fighter service keys shall be kept in an
approved elevator key box in an approved location by the Fire Code Official for
immediate use by the fire department.
   Section 606.4 Delete the last sentence and replace with: Movement of new and
existing cooking appliances with caster(s) under a Type 1 hood shall be limited
by an approved floor mounted restraining device and flexible gas connector
installed in accordance with the connector and appliance manufacturer's
instructions.
   Section 606.5 Add a new section to read as follows: Required separation. All
deep-fat fryers shall be installed with at least 16- inch space between the
fryer and surface flames from adjacent cooking equipment. Where a steel or
tempered glass baffle plate is installed at a minimum 8-inch height between the
fryer and surface flames to the adjacent appliance, the requirement for a 16-
inch space shall not apply.
   Section 606.6 Add a new section to read as follows: Kitchen Hood Exhaust Fan
Requirement. New and existing Type I hood kitchen hood exhaust/up blast fans
shall be installed with listed hinges, weatherproof electrical cable, a hold
open retainer for servicing and cleaning and grease containment.
   Section 803.16 Add a new section to read as follows: Maintenance. The
interior finish of buildings shall be maintained in accordance with the
conditions of original approval. Any change to the interior finish that is
regulated by the provisions of this code or the building code shall be made in
accordance with all applicable requirements.
   Section 807.5.2.1 Delete exception 2.
   Section 807.5.5.1 Delete exception 2.
   Section 901.2 (a) Add a new section to read as follows: Water based fire
protection systems. Working plans submitted to the fire department for water-
based fire protection systems shall be stamped and approved by a qualified
person to be in compliance with applicable NFPA standards and the Iowa City
Fire Code. Any changes to the working plans shall be approved by a qualified
person. A qualified person shall have a minimum National Institute for
Certification in Engineering Technologies [NICET] Level III certification for
Automatic Sprinkler System Layout OR be a licensed engineer with experience in
life safety system design. Other qualifications may be approved by the Fire
Code Official.
   Section 901.2 (b) Add a new section to read as follows: Fire alarm systems.
Working plans submitted to the fire department by a qualified person for fire
alarm systems shall be stamped and approved by a qualified person to be in
compliance with applicable NFPA standards and the Iowa City Fire Code. Any
changes to the working plans shall be approved by a qualified person. A
qualified person shall have a minimum National Institute for Certification in
Engineering Technologies [NICET] Level III certification for Fire Alarm Systems
OR be a licensed engineer with experience in life safety system design. Other
qualifications may be approved by the Fire Code official.
   Section 901.4.7.3. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as
follows: The fire pump room or automatic sprinkler riser room shall have a
supervised room temperature sensor.
   Section 901.4.7.4. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as
follows: Emergency lighting shall be provided in the fire pump room or
automatic sprinkler riser room.
   Section 901.6.3.2 Add a new section to read as follows: Inspection record
submission. Contractors who perform installation, inspection, testing, and/or
maintenance services on fire and life safety systems are required to
electronically submit all installation and compliant & non-compliant inspection
reports to the Fire Department via a method approved by the Fire Code Official
within 30 calendar days of the installation/inspection date. Reports submitted
after 30 calendar days may incur late fees.
   Section 901.7 Add a section to the end of the section to read as follows: A
person assigned to fire watch must walk through the building at least once
every 30 minutes checking for fire or smoke. A fire watch must be continued
until the fire alarm system and/ or fire protection system has been restored to
normal operating condition or by approval of the Fire Code Official, the
building has been evacuated and secured. A competent adult familiar with the
building must conduct the fire watch. If a fire is discovered, 911 shall be
called immediately and the building evacuated.
   Section 903.3.5 Delete the section and replace with: Water supplies for
automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards
referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected
against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the
International Plumbing Code. The backflow preventor shall include a detector
(water meter) unless the Fire Code Official approves an exception in
consultation with the water supply utility. For connections to public
waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection
systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure
fluctuation based on information from the water supply authority and as
approved by the Fire Code Official.
   Section 903.3.5.1 Delete this section and replace with: A single domestic
and automatic fire sprinkler system water supply. If the city water provider
requires a single domestic and automatic fire sprinkler system supply, then the
water supply shall be split outside of the building and shall have a shutoff
provided for the domestic service after the split outside of the building. The
total domestic demand is required to be added to the fire sprinkler demand.
   Section 903.3.5.2 Delete this section and replace with: Water supply safety
margin. The fire sprinkler system hydraulically calculated demand per NFPA 13
or NFPA 13R including required hose stream allowances, and domestic water
demand if required by section 903.3.5.1, must be a minimum 10%, but not less
than 5 psi below the water supply flow test curve, the flow test must have been
conducted within 90 days of fire sprinkler plan submittal to the city and third
party reviewer (if applicable) or as deemed current and approved by the local
water jurisdiction. The base of riser psi at the time of acceptance test shall
also be 10% but not less than 5 psi above the most demanding hydraulically
calculated pressure.
   Section 903.4.1 Delete exception number 5 without substitution.   
   Section 903.4.3 Delete the section and replace with: Alarms. An approved
weatherproof horn/strobe device shall be mounted directly above the fire
department connection between seven (7) and ten (10) feet in height above
grade. The water-flow alarm device shall be activated by water flow equivalent
to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the
system. Approved and supervised audible visual notification appliances shall be
installed on each level of the interior of the building as required by the Fire
Code Official and NFPA 72. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of
the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
   Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family
dwellings.
   Section 903.5.1 Add a new section to read as follows: Inspector's test
valve. An inspector's test valve is required at the most remote location in
each fire sprinkler system or tenant/floor control valve space, for use at the
acceptance test and to remove air from the system after maintenance work is
done on the system.
   Section 903.5.2 Add a new section to read as follows: Forward Flow Testing.
Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided with an external outlet to
perform forward flow testing as required by NFPA 25. Control valve shall be
supervised. The outlet shall be signed as testing and have male threads.
   Section 903.6 Add a new section to read as follows: Zones. Automatic
sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA
13R and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and waterflow device for each
normally occupied floor. Except by approval of the Fire Code Official, all
control and drain valves shall be located in the sprinkler riser room or in the
stairwell of a multi-story building provided with standpipes, mounted no higher
than 6 feet from floor.
   Section 903.7 Add a new section to read as follows: Drains. As required by
the Fire Code Official, all drains and test piping serving automatic sprinkler
systems and standpipes shall be pipped to the exterior of the building.
   Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family
dwellings.
   Section 904.14.6 Add a new section to read as follows: System Annunciation.
Commercial cooking automatic fire extinguishing systems installed in buildings
that do not have a fire alarm system, shall be connected to an approved audible
and visible emergency notification device to warn of system discharge. The
horn/strobe and signage shall be installed in a location approved by the Fire
Code Official, typically in the kitchen.
   Section 904.16 Add a new section to read as follows: Ventilation Operation.
The ventilation system shall shut down the make-up air to the hood and continue
to exhaust upon activation of the hood fire extinguishing system.
   Section 905.1.1 Add a new section to read as follows: Delete all references
to Class II standpipe systems and replace with Class III standpipe systems.
   Section 905.3.8 Add a new section to read as follows: Additional Standpipe
Systems: Additional standpipe systems may be added to new buildings or
structures as deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official.
   Section 905.4 Requirement #1 Delete the section and replace with: In every
required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each
story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at
intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the Fire
Code Official.
   Section 906.1 Item 1. Delete exceptions 1, 2 & 3.
   Section 906.1 Delete exception.
   Section 906.3 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
The minimum rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class A,
Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 2-A, 10-B C.
   Section 907.1.4 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire alarm control
panels and Fire alarm annunciator panels. Installation of fire alarm control
panels and fire alarm annunciator panels shall be installed in accordance with
section 907.1.4.1 through 907.1.4.5.
   Section 907.1.4.1 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Alarm Panel
Height: Installation of fire alarm panels shall not exceed 6 feet in height
measured from the floor to the top of the panel. Exception: Panel height may be
altered by the Fire Code Official.
   Section 907.1.4.2 Add a new section to read as follows: Number of Fire Alarm
Control Panels in Buildings: Only one listed fire alarm control panel shall be
allowed per building and shall lock in the alarm until the system is reset and
shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible - alarm silencing switch.
This control panel shall only receive alarm signals from fire protection
equipment.
   Section 907.1.4.3 Add a new section to read as follows: Combination Fire/
Security Alarm System Panels. A listed combination fire/security alarm system
panel that meets all the requirements of this code and amendments may be
permitted by approval of the fire code official. The fire/security panel shall
be capable of providing a signal that can differentiate between the fire and
security alarm.
   Section 907.1.4.4 Add a new section to read as follows: Password/PIN
Protection Prohibited: Fire alarm control panels and/or fire alarm annunciator
panels that require a password/PIN to silence an alarm/supervisory/trouble
signal and/or to reset an alarm/supervisory/trouble signal shall be prohibited.
   Section 907.1.4.5 Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Alarm
Annunciator Panels: The Fire Code Official can require the addition of fire
alarm annunciator panels based on the size of building and access to the
building. These panels shall meet the requirements of Sections 907.1.4 and
907.2.
   Section 907.2 Delete the section and replace with: Where required - new
buildings and structures. An approved and addressable manual, automatic, or
manual and automatic fire alarm system installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and
structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide
occupant notification in accordance with 907.5 unless other requirements are
provided by another section of this code. Not fewer than one manual fire alarm
box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal
for fire alarm system employing automatic fire detectors or water-flow devices.
Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to
sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.
   Exceptions:
   1)   The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems
dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.
   2)   The manual fire alarm box is required for Group R-2 occupancies to
provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a
sprinkler system impairment event. The manual fire alarm box shall not be
located in an area that is accessible to the public.
   3)   Multi-tenant buildings required to have a manual/automatic fire alarms
system shall install one manual pull station per tenant space.
   4)   Visual notification appliances are not required within self-storage
units.
   Section 907.2.1.3 Add a new section to read as follows: Group A Occupancies.
In Group A occupancies, the activation of the fire alarm or fire sprinkler
system, shall automatically shut down or stop music, sound systems, conflicting
or confusing sounds and visual distractions and initiate illumination of all
the means of exit egress components.
   Section 907.2.9.1 Delete exception 2 without substitution.
   Section 907.2.11.2 Modify by adding a fourth location requirement as
follows:
   4.   Supervised smoke detectors shall be installed in all common corridors
and at the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4,
and I-1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within fifteen
(15) feet of the end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is
located for each thirty (30) feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by
the code.
   Section 907.2.13.2 Delete the section without substitution.
   Section 907.4.2 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Where in the opinion of the Fire Code Official manual fire alarm boxes may be
used to cause false fire alarms, the Fire Code Official is authorized to modify
the requirements for manual fire alarm boxes.
   Section 907.6.3 Delete this section and replace with: Initiating device
identification. The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating
device with an alphanumeric address description showing location, type of
device, and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble, and
supervisory, as appropriate. Alphanumeric descriptions and locations shall be
reported to the emergency communications center upon activation of an alarm
condition as specified by the fire code official.
   Exception:
   1.   Special initiation devices that do not support individual device
identification.
   Section 907.6.4 Modify by deleting the exception and inserting in lieu
thereof: Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area
permitted by NFPA 13 and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and waterflow
device for each normally occupied floor.
   Section 907.6.4.3 Add a section to read as follows: Zone and address
location labeling. Fire alarm and/or annunciator panels shall have all zones
and address points plainly and permanently labeled as to their location on the
outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building, if no
display is present.
   Section 907.6.6 Delete the section and replace with: Monitoring. Fire alarms
required by this chapter, the International Building Code, or the Fire Code
Official, an approved UL listed Central Station service in accordance with NFPA
72 shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide for the immediate and automatic
notification to the emergency communications center. Each initiating device
shall report an address point and an alpha/numeric descriptor showing location,
type of device and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and
supervisory status, as appropriate. Alpha/numeric descriptor shall be required
to be reported to the emergency communications center upon activation of alarm
conditions as specified by the fire code official.
   Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for:
      1.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section
907.2.11.
      2.   Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings
      4.   Fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings
   Section 907.7.4 Add a new section to read as follows: Device/Zone Map. An
easily readable fire alarm device and/ or zone map of the building shall be
permanently mounted in or near the fire alarm control panel and documentation
cabinet showing the location of all initiating devices when required by the
fire code official.
   Section 907.11 Add a new section to read as follows: Approved hold open
devices. When installed in buildings that have a fire alarm system and/or
sprinkler system, all approved hold open devices shall release upon activation
of a fire alarm and/or sprinkler water-flow activation.
   Section 912.4.1 Delete the section and replace with: Locking fire department
connection caps. Locking fire department connection caps approved by the Fire
Department are required for all new construction that have a water-based fire
protection system and existing structures that have a water-based fire
protection system shall be required immediately after conducting the five-year
obstruction and maintenance testing, or if one or more of the fire department
caps are missing.
   Section 912.8 Add a section to read as follows: Fire Department Connection
Height. The fire department connection shall be located not less than 18 inches
from the bottom of the cap(s) and not more than 3 feet from the top of the cap
(s) above the level of the adjacent grade or access level. Deviation from this
height may be granted by the Fire Code Official for just cause.
   Section 912.9 Add a section to read as follows: Size. Minimum fire
department connection (FDC) size shall be 2 ½" National Standard Thread Siamese
connection.
   Section 913.6 Add a section to read as follows: All fire pumps shall be
provided with a control device to maintain supply suction pressure greater than
20 psi. Suction pressure sustaining devices may include a discharge side
suction pressure sustaining valve, a pump drive control system responsive to
suction pressure (i.e. a VFD with pressure transducer), or a tank with
associated fill circuit. Devices must be fire rated and installed per NFPA and
utility standards. This section is retroactive and applicable to existing fire
pumps. Plans to update existing systems or exceptions to the requirement will
be at the discretion of the Fire Code Official in consultation with the water
supply utility.
   Section 1023.4 Modify 1023.4 by adding a fourth unnumbered paragraph as
follows:
   Fire door assemblies that provide access to a non-pressurized interior exit
of R-2 occupancies shall also be automatic closing by actuation of a smoke
detector.
   Section 1030.2 Add a second exception as follows:
      Exception: The main entrance/exit of A-2 occupancies shall be of a width
that accommodates not less than two-thirds of the total occupant load.
   Section 1031.2 Modify 1031.2 by deleting the exceptions and inserting in
lieu thereof the following:
      EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   The emergency escape and rescue opening is permitted to open onto a
balcony within an atrium in accordance with the requirements of Section 404
provided the balcony provides access to an exit and the dwelling unit or
sleeping room has a means of egress that is not open to the atrium.
      2.   All group R-2 occupancies other than hotels, motels and buildings
regulated by Section 403 must be provided with emergency escape & rescue
openings, regardless of what Tables 1006.3.4(1) and 1006.3.4(2) allow
      3.   Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements
or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that opens
directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior exit balcony that
opens to a public way.
      4.   Sleeping rooms in fire stations where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
903.3.1.1.
   Section 1103.11 Add a new section to read as follows: Existing fire alarm
systems monitoring requirements. Existing fire alarms systems that are
currently not monitored by an approved UL listed Central Station shall become
monitored within 1 year from receiving notice in accordance with section
907.6.6.
   Section 1103.12 Add a new section to read as follows: Existing sprinkler
systems monitoring requirements. Existing sprinkler systems shall have all
valves controlling the sprinkler system and water flow electrically supervised
and monitored by an approved UL listed Central Station in accordance with
sections 903.4 and 903.4.1 within 1 year from receiving notice.
   Section 5003.5 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Signs shall also comply with the requirements of the Iowa Right to Know law.
   Section 5704.2.9 Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as
follows: For aboveground storage tanks of 276 gallons capacity or more, the
minimum distance between such aboveground tanks and any Residential Zone
boundary must be at least 100 feet. If the aboveground tank is located in an
approved vault, the minimum separation distance from a Residential Zone
boundary may be reduced to no less than 50 feet.
   Section 5704.2.11.1 Add a #4 to the end of the section to read as follows:
      4.   A minimum distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between
underground tanks and any Residential Zone boundary.
   Section 5704.2.13.2.4 Add a section to read as follows: Existing above-
ground tank hazards. Existing above-ground tank installations, even if
previously approved, that are determined to constitute a hazard by the fire
code official, shall not be continued in service. Unsafe tanks shall be removed
as required by the fire code official and in accordance with this code.
   That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2024
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
   Section 5704.2.9.6.1. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-
ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the entire City of Iowa
City, Iowa.
      Exception: Zones CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P and/or as approved by the
Fire Code Official.
   Section 5706.2.4.4. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-
ground tanks is prohibited in the entire City of Iowa City, Iowa.
      Exception: Zones CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P and/or as approved by the
Fire Chief.
   Section 6104.2. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in the
entire City of Iowa City, Iowa.
      Exception: Zones CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P and/or as approved by the
Fire Chief.
(Ord. 19-4778, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4904, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25-4949, 4-1-2025)
7-1-3: FEES FOR INSPECTIONS:
Fees for inspections and other services related to enforcement of this code
shall be established by the City Council by resolution and paid to the Fire
Department. (Ord. 04-4118, 4-20-2004)
7-1-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of IFC 107.6, "Overcrowding", as adopted in this title, shall be
punishable as Municipal infractions punishable by a civil penalty of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense and one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense. All other violations of this
chapter shall be a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-2D of this Code. (Ord. 09-4372, 12-1-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
CHAPTER 2
CONTRACTS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Authority
7-2-2: Contracts With Governmental Units
7-2-3: Contracts May Vary
7-2-4: Duties And Rights Of Fire Department Personnel
7-2-5: Immunity And Nonliability Of City
7-2-6: Priority To Local Calls
7-2-1: AUTHORITY:
The city council may, by resolution, approve contracts between the city and any
person outside the corporate limits of the city whose premises are located on
suitably surfaced roads, as determined by the fire chief, whereby the
firefighting equipment and firefighters may respond to calls for firefighting
or other emergency assistance outside the corporate limits on the property
which is the subject of the contract. The city council may fix, by resolution,
the charges, period of contract, terms, conditions and deposits, and such
matters may vary according to the amount and value of the property involved and
its distance and accessibility from the city. (1978 Code §12-1; amd. 1994 Code)
7-2-2: CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENTAL UNITS:
The city council may, by resolution, approve contracts between the city and any
township, village, town or other governmental unit outside the corporate limits
of the city, whereby the firefighting equipment and firefighters may respond to
calls for firefighting or other emergency assistance for such residents and for
such property located within the limits of such governmental units as may be
located upon suitably surfaced highways as determined by the fire chief. The
city council may, by resolution, fix the charges, period of contract, terms and
conditions and deposits required, and such matters may vary according to the
amount and value of the property involved, the area, population, accessibility
of the governmental unit involved, the distance from the city and any other
factors which are deemed pertinent. Such contracts may provide for reciprocal
agreements to furnish emergency firefighting equipment or not, as the city
council may deem advisable. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-3: CONTRACTS MAY VARY:
The city council may contract, as provided in sections
7-2-1 and
7-2-2 of this chapter, as it sees fit, and the contract may vary from other
such contracts already made. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require the city council to enter into any contracts whatsoever or, having
entered into certain contracts, to approve others on equal terms. (1978 Code
§12-1)
7-2-4: DUTIES AND RIGHTS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
All officers and members of the fire department of the city are hereby
required, as part of their regular duties, to do any and all necessary acts for
the performance of such contracts, and in the course of so doing and acting,
all such officers and members shall be considered to be within the jurisdiction
of the city and shall enjoy all of the privileges accorded under the laws of
the state relating to pensions, retirement, disability and immunity in exactly
the same fashion as if they were performing their duties within the corporate
limits of the city. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-5: IMMUNITY AND NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
   A.   Immunity: In the performance of such contracts, the city shall have the
same governmental immunity as when operating within its corporate limits, and
should the laws of the state be hereafter changed in such fashion as to render
this unlawful or impossible, then all such contracts may be canceled by the
city council.
   B.   Nonliability: Every contract made by the city council under the
authority of this chapter shall contain provisions insuring that nothing in
such contract shall render the city liable for or on account of any damage done
by reason of failure of performance, failure to answer calls or any other
cause. If no such provision is inserted in such contract, it shall be deemed to
be a part thereof by operation of law. This chapter shall be construed as an
absolute limitation on the authority of the city council to enter into
contracts under sections
7-2-1 and
7-2-2 of this chapter. (1978 Code §12-1)
7-2-6: PRIORITY TO LOCAL CALLS:
The mayor, fire chief or person in charge of the city's fire department shall
have the right to give priority to calls for fire department protection or
emergency assistance within the corporate limits of the city over contract
calls from without the corporate limits and may hold some persons and equipment
in reserve for the purpose of answering calls within the corporate limits of
the city. (1978 Code §12-1)
CHAPTER 3
FALSE FIRE ALARMS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Exclusions
7-3-3: Definitions
7-3-4: False Fire Alarms Prohibited
7-3-5: Fee Schedule
7-3-6: Unintentional False Fire Alarm Fees (Rep. by Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-7: Notice Of False Fire Alarm Fee
7-3-8: Penalties
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations and
assess fees and penalties applicable to fire alarms, alarm users, and owners as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-2: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to false fire alarm responses resulting from the
activation of single station smoke detectors within single-family residences or
duplexes or to entities with whom the city has a fire protection agreement.
(Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
   ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
within the city or any person using such system.
   CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
   DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE: Person empowered by the owner or alarm user to respond
on their behalf.
   EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER: The primary contact point between the Iowa
City fire department and the community it serves.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Fire chief or designated representative.
   FALSE FIRE ALARM: The activation of a fire alarm system not by fire or
hazard, but through careless use, technical failure, equipment malfunction,
improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm
system or of his or her employees or agents. False fire alarm does not include
alarm failures caused by water, gas, electrical, telephone or other utilities
not under the control of the alarm user, or the wilful act of a person other
than the alarm owner or his or her employees or agents.
   FEE: The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city of Iowa City,
authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a
false alarm or fire alarm malfunction.
   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a fire or activated
extinguishing equipment requiring urgent attention and to which fire department
personnel are expected to respond.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT: The publicly supported fire department of the city, or any
authorized representatives.
   FISCAL YEAR: The year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of next calendar
year.
   OWNER: Any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is
installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy, or manage the
premises.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind and the personnel therein employed or
contracted.
   PREMISES: Any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures
which serve as dwelling units, single-family or multi-family, or any other area
within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any
purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998; amd.
Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-4: FALSE FIRE ALARMS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall maintain a fire alarm system that produces a false
alarm to which fire department personnel are expected to respond.
   B.   Within thirty (30) minutes of the fire department's response to a
location due to a false fire alarm, an owner shall personally report to the
place of business or residence to reset the alarm. However, an owner is not
required to personally report if the alarm user, a designated employee, a
service provider, and/or the owner's agent reports within thirty (30) minutes
of the fire department's response to a location.
   C.   A violation of this section will subject the person to an assessment of
fees as provided in this chapter and/or to the penalty provisions contained in
section 7-3-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-5: FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   False alarm and failure to report fees shall be set by resolution. All
fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date that the fee is
assessed.
   B.   As an alternative to the imposition of fees for false alarms based upon
technical failure, equipment malfunction, or improper installation, the fire
chief or designated representative may waive such fees if the owner returns to
the fire chief or designated representative a statement of repair deemed
satisfactory by the enforcement officer. In addition, the fire chief or
designated representative may waive such fees if the owner and/or alarm user
agrees to upgrade the existing alarm system in such a manner which, in the
determination of the fire chief or designated representative, will
significantly reduce or eliminate further false fire alarms. The alarm owner
and/or alarm user shall submit appropriate documentation and specifications of
such alarm system upgrades to the fire chief or designated representative for
review. If such alarm system upgrades are approved by the fire chief or
designated representative, imposition of the fees for false alarms based on
technical failure, equipment malfunction, or improper installation may be held
in abeyance for up to ninety (90) calendar days to allow for the installation
and upgrade of the fire alarm system. Notice of approval or disapproval of the
fire chief or designated representative shall be given in writing and served on
the owner and/or user by regular mail. Failure of the alarm system owner and/or
user to complete such upgrades within the specified ninety (90) calendar days
may result in the imposition of the specified false fire alarm fee as provided
herein. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-6: UNINTENTIONAL FALSE FIRE ALARM FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
7-3-7: NOTICE OF FALSE FIRE ALARM FEE:
Whenever the fire chief or his designated representative determines that there
has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be
given of such violation and of the assessed fee for such violation as follows:
   A.   Such notice shall include a sufficiently detailed description of the
violation, a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued, and the
amount of the fee assessed. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
   B.   The notice shall provide that all fees shall be paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
   C.   The notice shall further inform the alarm owner and/or user that the
failure to pay the assessed fee or make the alarm system repair or upgrade will
result in the filing of a municipal infraction citation or simple misdemeanor
citation against such alarm owner and/or user. (Ord. 98-3847, 8-25-1998)
7-3-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 08-4297, 2-5-2008)
CHAPTER 4
CONFINED SPACE RESCUE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Fees
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CONFINED SPACE: A space that: a) is large enough and so configured that an
employee can bodily enter and perform assigned work; and b) has limited or
restricted means for entry or exit, such as tanks, vessels, silos, storage
bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits; and c) is not designed for continuous employee
occupancy.
   CONFINED SPACE RESCUE: The personnel designed to rescue employees from
permit required confined spaces.
   PERMIT REQUIRED CONFINED SPACE: A confined space that has one or more of the
following characteristics: a) contains or has a potential to contain a
hazardous atmosphere; b) contains a material that has the potential for
engulfing an entrant; c) has an internal configuration such that an entrant
could be trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly converging walls or by a floor
which slopes downward and tapers to a smaller cross section; or d) contains any
other recognized serious safety or health hazard. (Ord. 98-3845, 8-25-1998)
7-4-2: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees and assess costs on
affected businesses and governmental units within the corporate limits of the
city, and those with contractual agreements with the city as provided in
sections
7-2-1 and
7-2-2 of this title, which require the specialized services of the fire
department's confined space rescue team for permit required confined space
rescue or recovery operations. (Ord. 98-3845, 8-25-1998)
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND TRANSPORTATION RELATED INCIDENTS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Fees
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any item or chemical which is a risk to public safety or
the environment, and is regulated as such under the hazardous materials
regulations (49 CFR 100-180), the international maritime dangerous goods code,
the dangerous goods regulations of the International Air Transport Association,
the technical instructions of the International Civil Aviation Organization, or
the U.S. air force joint manual, "Preparing Hazardous Materials For Military
Air Shipments", all as amended. Such materials shall include, but are not
limited to: chemicals which are carcinogens, toxic agents, irritants,
corrosives, sensitizers; agents which act on the hematopoietic system; agents
which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes; chemicals which are
combustible, explosive, flammable, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive or
water reactive; and chemicals which in the course of normal handling, use, or
storage may produce or release dusts, gases, fumes, vapors, mists or smoke
which may have any of the previously mentioned characteristics.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT: Any incident involving the presence of
hazardous materials, as defined herein, whether the chemical or substance is in
usable or waste condition.
   TRANSPORTATION RELATED INCIDENT: Any response related to a means of
conveyance or travel of passengers or goods. (Ord. 10-4380, 1-25-2010)
7-5-2: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees and assess costs against
involved parties related to the response to any hazardous materials incident or
transportation related incident. In the case of hazardous materials incidents,
the costs will be assessed against the party who brought the hazardous
materials to the scene, regardless of which party caused the need for emergency
response. In the case of transportation related incidents, costs will be
assessed against the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle requiring
emergency response. (Ord. 10-4380, 1-25-2010)
TITLE 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Proclamations; Curfew; Evacuation
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute such force by three (3) or more persons acting together
without authority of law.
   B.   Any natural disaster or humanmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   C.   Any act of war, hostile missile or bomb directed at or near the city.
   CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city during the
hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially
designated to perform duties with reference to said civil emergency. (1994
Code)
8-1-2: PROCLAMATIONS; CURFEW; EVACUATION:
   A.   Proclamation By Mayor: When, in the judgment of the mayor, a "civil
emergency", as defined herein, is deemed to exist, the mayor shall forthwith
proclaim, in writing, the existence of same.
   B.   Imposition Of Curfew: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
mayor, the mayor may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole as the mayor deems advisable and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as the mayor deems necessary
in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
   C.   Mandatory Evacuation: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
mayor, the mayor may mandate that all or any part of the city of Iowa City be
evacuated as the mayor deems advisable and applicable for the preservation of
life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery.
   D.   Extraordinary Measures: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
mayor, the mayor may order that any other extraordinary measures be taken for
the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery.
   E.   Violation Of Order: The violation of a curfew order, evacuation order
or other order regarding extraordinary measures issued by the mayor hereunder
or any directive or order issued pursuant thereto by any peace officer shall be
unlawful and shall be punishable as a simple misdemeanor as provided by
subsection
1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 08-4306, 6-11-2008)
CHAPTER 2
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: False Alarms
8-2-3: Penalties
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which agents of the
police department are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall
include, but is not limited to, intrusion or burglar alarms of the audible or
direct line radio or electronic type.
   ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained.
   FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system not by breaking and entering,
but by careless use, technical failure, equipment malfunction, improper
installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of
his or her employees or agents. False alarm does not include alarm failures
caused by water, gas, electrical, telephone or other utilities not under the
control of the alarm user, or the wilful act of a person other than the alarm
owner, lessee, or his or her employees or agents.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind and the personnel therein employed or
contracted. (Ord. 15-4646, 10-20-2015)
8-2-2: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   No alarm user shall have or maintain an alarm system that produces a
false alarm.
   B.   An alarm user shall be charged a fee for having or maintaining a false
alarm. The fee shall be adopted by resolution of city council. The fee shall be
paid within thirty (30) days of the date that the fee is assessed. (Ord. 15-
4646, 10-20-2015)
8-2-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 15-4646, 10-20-2015)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ANIMAL REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL SERVICES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Responsibility Of Owners
8-4-3: Licensing And Vaccination Requirements
8-4-4: Rabies And Disease Control
8-4-5: Nuisances
8-4-6: Prohibitions And Requirements
8-4-7: Dangerous Animals
8-4-8: Impoundment And Redemption Of Animals
8-4-9: Animal Neglect And Cruelty
8-4-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-4-11: Irresponsible Owner
8-4-12: Permit Required
8-4-13: Community Cats
8-4-14: Fees
8-4-15: Administrative Rules
8-4-16: Penalties
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABANDON: Failure to provide adequate care on-site for a period of seventeen
(17) hours or failure to provide control over and shelter, food and water for
an animal without having made satisfactory arrangements for care, custody and
physical control of such animal.
   ADEQUATE FOOD: Providing, at suitable intervals of not more than twenty four
(24) hours, unless the dietary requirements of the animal so require, a
quantity and quality of wholesome foodstuff, suitable for the physical
condition and age of the animal, served in a clean receptacle or container,
sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition for such animal.
   ADEQUATE INDOOR SHELTER: A properly ventilated and illuminated facility,
sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animal from
extremes of temperature and sufficient to provide for the animal's health and
comfort.
   ADEQUATE OUTDOOR SHELTER: A structurally sound and weatherproof shelter made
up of three (3) solid sides, a roof and a floor off the ground, which provides
adequate protection from exposure to weather conditions and is placed in an
area free of debris, feces and standing water. An adequate outdoor shelter must
meet the requirements of adequate space. An animal crate is not an adequate
outdoor shelter.
   ADEQUATE SANITATION: Cleaning or sanitizing of enclosures and housing
facilities to remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt so as to
minimize health hazards, flies or odors.
   ADEQUATE SPACE: Primary enclosures and housing facilities constructed and
maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal to make
normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement to
maintain physical condition. The minimum confinement area set forth in section
 8-4-6 of this chapter is an adequate space. Inadequate space may be indicated
by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or abnormal
behavior patterns.
   ADEQUATE VETERINARY CARE: Prompt and reasonable care provided to a sick,
diseased or injured animal by a licensed veterinarian, euthanized in a manner
deemed appropriate by the City, or turned over to the City with approval of the
Chief of Police, or designee.
   ADEQUATE WATER: Reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable
water, provided in a sanitary manner.
   ANIMAL: Any living creature, domestic or wild, except a human being.
   ANIMAL ACTS OR EXHIBITIONS: Any act, exhibit, or display containing one or
more live animals which are exposed to public view for entertainment or
advertisement regardless of whether there is a fee or consideration. Permit is
required.
   ANIMAL CRATE: A plastic or metal cage used for the temporary and short term
containment of animals inside a building, vehicle, or other enclosed space.
   ANIMAL PERFORMANCE: Any place or performance where one or more animals are
used in the production of any motion picture, television, radio, internet,
digital, or theatrical performance, whether for entertainment, instruction, or
advertising. Permit is required.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER: City employee whose duties and responsibilities are
to enforce this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER: The pound owned and operated by the City of Iowa City. The
animal shelter is a pound as defined in chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   ANIMAL SHELTER STAFF: A City employee who works at the animal shelter,
including animal services officers.
   ANIMAL SHOW: Any place where animals are being exhibited and/or judged.
Permit is required.
   BREEDER: Any person who causes the breeding of a male or female dog or cat,
or makes or allows a dog or cat to be available for breeding, or a person who
offers to sell a puppy or kitten that is a direct offspring of their adult dog
or cat. Permit is required.
   CAT GROUP: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where six (6)
or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained by the
owner for no consideration. Permit is required.
   CAT KENNEL: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where six
(6) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for
consideration. Permit is required.
   CIRCUS: An event or performance which charges members of the public an
admission fee to watch trained lions, tigers, elephants, or other animals
perform under the whip or command of a ringmaster, trainer, or handler.
   DEFILEMENT: To foul, dirty, pollute or make filthy, either by the animal's
body or wastes or by the animal carrying or dragging any foul material.
   DOG GROUP: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises where four
(4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained by the
owner for no consideration. Permit is required.
   DOG KENNEL: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where four
(4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for
consideration. Permit is required.
   EDUCATIONAL ANIMAL ACT OR EXHIBITION: Any act, exhibit, or display
containing one or more live animals which are exposed to public view for
education or instruction for no fee or consideration. Permit is required.
   FENCE: A physical barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion, entry or
exit, made of posts and wire, boards, stone, brick, or similar material.
Invisible fencing systems using underground wire or electronic collar devices
are not considered fencing for the purposes of this chapter.
   GROOMER: Any person who cuts the hair of, trims the toenails of, brushes the
hair of, and/or bathes dogs or cats for consideration or any commercial
establishment that engages in cutting the hair of, trimming the nails of,
brushing the hair of and/or bathing dogs or cats. Permit is required.
   GUARD/ATTACK DOG: A dog trained to attack persons upon the command of its
master or custodian or upon the actions of an individual, with the exception of
a dog owned by a law enforcement agency.
   LEASH: A rope, line, thong, chain or other similar restraint, not more than
ten feet (10') in length, of sufficient strength to hold the animal in check. A
restraint that is designed to extend beyond ten feet (10') and retract is a
leash if: a) it cannot be extended more than twenty five feet (25') and b) it
may be manually locked such that it does not extend more than ten feet (10').
   LICENSE: A permit issued by the City to possess an animal as required by
this chapter.
   LIVESTOCK: An animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, or
porcine species; ostriches, rheas, emus; farm deer, as defined in section
481A.1, Code of Iowa, as amended; or poultry.
   MAJOR PET SHOP: Any commercial establishment where animals, including dogs
and cats, are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale. Permit is required.
   MICROCHIP: An encapsulated biocompatible computer chip, programmed with a
unique identification number, injected under the skin of an animal to provide
permanent identification.
   MINOR PET SHOP: Any commercial establishment where animals, except for dogs
and cats, are bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for sale. Permit is required.
   MOLEST: Includes not only biting and scratching a human or other animal, but
also any annoyance, interference with or meddling with any such human or
animal.
   OWNER: In addition to its ordinary meaning, includes any person who owns,
keeps, maintains, possesses, fosters, or harbors an animal or who knowingly
permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by that person.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association, partnership
or any other legal entity.
   PIGEON OR DOVE LOFT: Any cage, loft, or enclosure where five (5) or more
pigeons or doves are kept or maintained.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: All buildings and other property owned by a private
person, including buildings, yards and service and parking areas.
   PROHIBITED ANIMALS: The following genus/species of animals are hereby
declared to be prohibited and a permit is required in order for said animal to
be within the City:
   A.   Canidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., wolves, wolf-dog hybrids
which are at least 50 percent wolf, coyotes, coyote-dog hybrids which are at
least 50 percent coyote, foxes, jackals), but excluding Canis familiaris, the
domestic dog.
   B.   Felidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., lions, tigers, jaguars,
leopards, cougars, lynx, ocelots, bobcats, jungle cats), but excluding Felis
domestica, the domestic cat.
   C.   Procyonidae within the order Carnivora (e.g., coatis, pandas, raccoons,
procynonids).
   D.   Ursidae of the order Carnivora (e.g., black bears, brown bears, grizzly
bears, polar bears).
   E.   Chiroptera (e.g., bats).
   F.   Cetacea (e.g., whales, dolphins, porpoises).
   G.   Pinnipedia (e.g., seals, sea lions, walrus).
   H.   Sirenia (e.g., sea cows, manatees).
   I.   Primates, including all families (e.g., Cebidae, Cercopithecidae,
Callithricedae, Lemuridae, Lorisidae, Tarsiidae, Colobinae, Hylobatidae,
Pongidae; [e.g., monkeys, baboons, marmosets, tamarins, capuchin, chimpanzees,
orangutan, gorillas, apes]).
   J.   Formicidae within the order Hymenoptera (e.g., fire ants).
   K.   Apidae; specifically Africanized strains of the Apis Mellifera honey
bee.
   L.   Proboscidea, Hyracoidea, Tubulidentata (e.g., elephants, hyraxes,
aardvarks).
   M.   Edentata, Pholidota (e.g., anteaters, sloths, armadillos).
   N.   Marsupialia (e.g., kangaroos, wallabies, koala).
   O.   Crocodylidae of the order Squamata (e.g., crocodiles, alligators,
caimans, gavials).
   P.   Helodermatidae of the order Squamata (e.g., gila monsters, beaded
lizards).
   Q.   Lizards of the species komodoensis, salvadorii, salvator, niloticus,
albigularis, and indicus.
   R.   Crotalidae, Viperidae, Elapidae, Opisthoglyphous Colubridae, and all
other orders which include poisonous or venomous reptiles (e.g., rattlesnakes,
vipers, corals, copperheads, cottonmouths, moccasins, sea snakes, puff adders,
malagasy hognoses).
   S.   Eunectes of the order Squamata (e.g., green anaconda).
   T.   Python sebae, Python reticulatus, Python molorus, Morelia amethystina
of the order Squamata.
   U.   Venomous spiders of the families Teridiiae and Loxoscelidae
respectively, and scorpions of the order Scorpiones, excluding Pandinus
imperator (emperor scorpion).
   V.   Sugar gliders.
   W.   Camelus dromedaries (camels).
   X.   Ratite (e.g., ostrich, moa, kiwi).
   Y.   Emus.
   Z.   All wild animals indigenous to the State of Iowa, as defined in chapter
481A, Code of Iowa, as amended.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Buildings, right-of-way or other public property owned or
dedicated to the use of the City and other governmental entities.
   RESCUE: The action as that term is used in chapter 717B of the Iowa Code, as
amended, that allows a local authority to take temporary possession of a
threatened animal.
   RESTRICTED ANIMALS: The following genus/species of animals are hereby
declared to be restricted:
   A.   Iguana, lizards of the order of Chamaeleontidae, and lizards of the
genus Varanus, but excluding the species komodoensis, salvadorii, salvator,
niloticus, albigularis, and indicus.
   B.   Rheas and peafowls (also subject to zoning requirements).
   C.   Other small livestock type animals (also subject to zoning
requirements).
   RODEO: A contest, exhibition or competition which charges members of the
public an admission fee to watch the skill of contestants or entrants in
horseridership where lassoing is performed involving cattle, horses, bulls,
goats, pigs, and wild bovine and/or where contestants ride wild bulls or wild
horses for public entertainment. Permit is required.
   VETERINARIAN: A person duly licensed by the State of Iowa to practice
veterinary medicine.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL: An establishment regularly maintained and operated by a
veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries to
animals and which may board animals. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS:
The owner of an animal shall be responsible for obtaining licenses, permits,
and vaccinations, and for the care and control of any such animal as defined in
this chapter. The owner shall be prima facie responsible for any violation of
this chapter by any animal owned by said owner. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-3: LICENSING AND VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret over the age of four (4) months
shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies virus.
   B.   Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret over the age of four (4) months
shall apply for a license.
   C.   1.   At the time of making application for a license, the owner shall
furnish to the City a veterinarian's certificate showing that the dog, cat, or
ferret for which the license is sought has been vaccinated against rabies
virus.
      2.   Upon payment of the license fee, the City shall issue to the owner a
license.
   D.   The owner of a dog, cat, or ferret under the age of four (4) months may
apply for a juvenile tag that shall automatically expire at four (4) months
from the date of birth of the animal.
   E.   Every animal shall wear the license tag provided whenever such animal
is off the property of its owner or not within a motor vehicle.
   F.   When the ownership of an animal is transferred, the new owner shall,
within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of change of ownership, make
application for a new license as provided in this section regardless of whether
or not the animal was previously licensed.
   G.   The licensing provisions of this chapter do not apply if the owner
brings the animal into the City for less than thirty (30) continuous days.
(Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-4: RABIES AND DISEASE CONTROL:
   A.   Isolation And Quarantine Of Suspect Animals:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the City animal services personnel
authorized to impound animals in the City to cause to be placed in isolation
and under quarantine for observation for a minimum period of ten (10) calendar
days any animal that animal services personnel suspect of being infected with
rabies or other diseases communicable to humans and also any animal that is
known to have bitten or caused a skin abrasion upon any human in the City.
      2.   Such isolation and quarantine shall be either at the animal shelter
or in a veterinary hospital, except if such animal is properly licensed and is
currently vaccinated against rabies, the animal may be placed in the custody of
the owner on the owner's premises during the isolation and quarantine period if
the owner resides in the City. When isolation and quarantine is authorized on
the owner's premises, it will be at the discretion of and under the direct
supervision of the City.
      3.   The expense of isolation and quarantine at a veterinary hospital
will be borne by the owner. If the animal is placed in isolation and under
quarantine in an animal shelter authorized by the City, a fee shall be charged
to the owner. Every owner or person having possession, custody or control of an
animal known to be rabid or which has been bitten by an animal infected with
rabies shall immediately report such fact to the City and shall have such
animal placed in isolation and quarantine as directed by the City for such
period as may be designated and at the expense of the owner.
   B.   Reports Required:
      1.   Physicians: It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical
practitioner in the City to make written report to the City of the names and
addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such
other information as will assist in the prevention of rabies.
      2.   Veterinarians: It shall be the duty of every veterinarian in the
City to report to the City any diagnosis of animal rabies.
      3.   Owners: An owner of any animal or any person having knowledge of
such animal biting or causing a skin abrasion upon any human in the City shall
promptly report such fact to the City.
   C.   Emergency Proclamation: Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the
public from the dangers of rabies, the City Council may issue a proclamation
ordering every owner of an animal to confine the same securely on the owner's
premises at all times for such period of time as is deemed necessary.
   D.   Duty To Report: Any person having knowledge of the presence of any
disease among animals capable of being communicated to humans shall immediately
report such knowledge to the County Health Officer. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-5: NUISANCES:
The following acts and circumstances are hereby declared to be public
nuisances:
   A.   Accumulation Of Wastes: The keeping of an animal on private property in
such number or in such manner that allows for the accumulation of animal waste
so as to become detrimental to the public health and/or the animal's health.
   B.   Noisy Animals: No person shall cause or allow any animal under their
care, charge, custody, or control to emit any noise which annoys, disturbs,
offends, or unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property of the neighborhood or general public. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to a commercial establishment which is permitted
pursuant to the Zoning Code.
   C.   Animals Damaging Property: Allowing an animal to cause any damage or
defilement to public or private property.
   D.   Harassment By Animals: Allowing an animal to molest any human or animal
on public or private property when the human or animal is lawfully on the
property.
   E.   Animals Injuring Or Killing Other Animals: Allowing an animal to molest
or kill wildlife, birds, animals or domestic animals on public or private
property. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-6: PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Prohibited Animals: No person shall keep or maintain an animal declared
to be prohibited under this chapter. Notwithstanding this provision:
      1.   Indigenous wildlife rehabilitators who possess required Iowa State
Department of National Resources, or its successor, permits may maintain
prohibited wildlife for rehabilitation purposes.
      2.   A prohibited animal which is properly and appropriately restrained
may be transported to a veterinarian for emergency medical care or treatment
and may remain within the confines of the veterinary clinic or hospital as long
as the animal is receiving medical treatment.
   B.   Restricted Animals: No person shall keep or maintain an animal declared
to be a restricted animal under this chapter without a valid permit issued by
the Division of Animal Control of the City or its successor. Notwithstanding
this provision:
      1.   Indigenous wildlife rehabilitators who possess required Iowa State
Department of National Resources, or its successor, permits may maintain
restricted wildlife for rehabilitation purposes.
      2.   A restricted animal which is properly and appropriately restrained
may be transported to a veterinarian for emergency medical care or treatment
and may remain within the confines of the veterinary clinic or hospital as long
as the animal is receiving medical treatment.
   C.   Pigeon And Dove Lofts: Pigeon lofts and dove lofts are prohibited
within the City. Notwithstanding this provision, any person who owns or
operates a pigeon and/or dove loft within the City prior to July 1, 1997, may
continue to operate such pigeon and/or dove loft subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   As of July 1, 1997, pigeon and dove lofts shall not house more than
forty (40) pigeons and/or doves at any one time.
      2.   As of July 1, 2000, pigeon and dove lofts shall not house more than
thirty (30) pigeons and/or doves at any one time.
      3.   The exemption for persons who own or operate pigeon and dove lofts
within the City as of July 1, 1997, shall not be transferable to another person
or another property.
   D.   Animals At Large Prohibited:
      1.   No animal shall be found at large within the City at any time. An
animal shall not be deemed at large if:
         a.   It is tethered or on the enclosed fenced premises owned, leased,
occupied, or controlled by the owner; or
         b.   It is tethered or on the enclosed fenced premises owned, leased,
occupied, or controlled by another person with the knowledge and consent of
that person; or
         c.   It is a dog in a City dog park and has been issued a use permit;
or
         d.   It is under the control of a person competent to restrain the
animal and:
            (1)   Is on a leash; or
            (2)   Enclosed within a building or structure; or
            (3)   Properly restrained within a motor vehicle as provided
herein.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, any animal shall
be deemed at large at any time when the animal is attacking humans, other
animals, or destroying property or is on any public property, except when under
restraint as set forth above. In addition, any female animal in estrus shall be
deemed at large at any time, except:
         a.   When housed in a building or structure completely enclosed; or
         b.   When housed in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel licensed
or registered with the State; or
         c.   When on the premises owned, leased, occupied or controlled by the
owner, provided the area in which such animal is located is completely enclosed
by a fence or other structure having a height of at least sixty inches (60");
or
         d.   When under the control of a person competent to restrain the
animal by leash.
   E.   On Private Property: No animal shall be taken, allowed or permitted on
private property not owned by the owner of the animal without the permission of
the person owning such property or the person in possession or control thereof.
   F.   In Food Establishments: No animal shall be allowed, taken or permitted
on or in any building, store, restaurant, tavern, sidewalk cafe, or outdoor
service area where food or food products are sold, prepared or dispensed to
humans other than the owners thereof, except for service animals as defined
under the Americans With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
   G.   Outdoor Confinement Area: No owner shall fail to provide an outdoor
confinement area of less than the following:
 
1. For 1 dog under 50 pounds                                60 square feet
2. For 1 dog over 50 pounds or 2 dogs under 50 pounds       80 square feet
3. For 2 dogs over 50 pounds each or 3 dogs under 50 pounds 96 square feet
4. For 3 dogs over 50 pounds each or 4 dogs under 50 pounds 140 square feet
5. 4 or more dogs over 50 pounds each                       192 square feet
 
Note: A permit is required to maintain four (4) or more dogs over the age of
four (4) months. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-2019)
Outdoor confinement area means an outdoor space securely enclosed, such as by
chain link fencing material, that is the primary space the dog lives, eats, and
sleeps every day including overnight.
   H.   Solid Waste Removal: Any person who shall walk an animal on public or
private property shall provide for the disposal of the solid waste material
excreted by the animal by immediate removal of the waste, except for animals
properly trained and certified to assist persons with disabilities while such
animals are acting in such capacity.
   I.   Warning Notice: Pet shops displaying, selling, or transferring turtles,
tortoises or iguanas must display in public view a notice of warning regarding
the transmission of salmonella.
   J.   Tethering: Tethering means fastening an animal to a fixed object so as
to limit its range of movement using a rope, chain, or similar device.
      1.   a. No person shall allow an animal to be tethered and unattended
with a rope, chain, or similar device that is less than ten feet (10') in
length. An animal is unattended if the animal is more than fifty feet (50')
from the person and the animal is not in the person's line of sight.
         b.   No person shall allow an animal to be tethered and unattended for
more than thirty (30) minutes continuously in any given 3-hour period. An
animal is unattended if the animal is more than fifty feet (50') from the
person and the animal is not in the person's line of sight.
      2.   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary:
         a.   No person shall allow any of the following animals to be
tethered: dangerous animal or animal in estrus.
         b.   No person shall allow an animal to be tethered using a collar
made of metal or chain, excluding the buckle, or using a collar, even if made
of cloth, designed to continue to tighten, such as a slip lead or noose, when
pulled tightly.
         c.   No person shall allow an animal to have access to a public
sidewalk or street while tethered.
         d.   No person shall allow an animal to be tethered to a utility pole,
parking meter, building, structure, fence, sign, tree, bush, bench, newspaper
or advertising rack or other object on public property.
         e.   No person shall allow an animal to be tethered in an unsafe
location. An unsafe location includes, but is not limited to, near a fence
whereby the animal could asphyxiate itself if it jumped over the fence or on a
deck whereby the animal could asphyxiate itself if it jumped off of the deck.
         f.   No person shall allow an animal to be tethered in a manner that
allows it to become entangled with another tethered animal.
   K.   Animal Acts; Exhibitions; Performances: Animal acts or exhibitions, and
animal performances in which prohibited animals are used are prohibited.
Additionally, any public showing, carnival, fair, parade, petting zoo, ride,
race, film shoot or other undertaking in which prohibited animals are required
to perform tricks, fight or participate as accompaniments for the entertainment
or amusement of an audience in exchange for a fee or consideration is
prohibited. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Definitions:
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Means:
      1.   An animal that has killed a human being;
      2.   An animal that has taken aggressive action that caused a serious
injury (as defined in Iowa Code section 702.18) to a human;
      3.   An animal that has killed another domestic animal;
      4.   An animal that has engaged in exhibitions of fighting;
      5.   An animal that has a propensity to attack or bite humans or animals
that has been shown to exist through one or more attacks or attempted attacks
and where such propensity is known to the owner or ought to reasonably be known
to the owner thereof; or
      6.   An animal judicially or administratively determined to be a
dangerous animal, or similar designation, by another jurisdiction with a
substantially similar definition.
An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if the Chief of Police or designee
determine that the animal acted under the following circumstances:
      1.   A dog engaged in law enforcement work that is engaged in official
law enforcement activities at the time of the attack, or bite;
      2.   An animal that attacks or bites a person who at the time of the
attack or bite, is engaged in a criminal act against the person or property of
another;
      3.   An animal that attacks or bites another animal in order to protect a
human being, domestic animal or livestock; or
      4.   An animal that was unreasonably or deliberately provoked by the
person or animal that was harmed.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No person shall own, keep, harbor, foster, or maintain any dangerous
animal except as specifically provided for herein.
      2.   No person shall allow a dangerous animal to be in or upon any
premises or vehicle owned, leased, occupied, or controlled by the person,
except as provided herein.
      3.   No person shall bring any dangerous animal into the City of Iowa
City without approval of the Chief of Police, or designee.
      4.   No person shall tether a dangerous animal.
      5.   No person shall allow a dangerous animal in a City dog park.
   C.   Impounding And Costs:
      1.   If animal services personnel have probable cause that an animal is a
dangerous animal, the animal may be immediately impounded if found in violation
of this chapter.
      2.   If an animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal, the
animal may be immediately impounded if found in violation of this chapter. An
animal is determined to be a dangerous animal if: a) the City Manager, or
designee, determines the animal to be dangerous following a hearing as provided
herein; b) the District Court finds the animal to be a dangerous animal; or c)
the animal has been judicially or administratively determined to be a dangerous
animal, or similar designation, by another jurisdiction with a substantially
similar definition of dangerous animal.
      3.   Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, fosters, maintains or controls
an animal involved in such impoundment shall pay all expenses, including
shelter, food, veterinary care, boarding and all other expenses necessitated by
the impoundment and containment of the animal, during its impoundment.
   D.   Spay/Neuter And Microchip/Tag:
      1.   The owner of a dangerous animal shall have the animal surgically
sterilized at the owner's expense by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30)
days after being determined to be a dangerous animal as provided herein. The
owner shall provide written verification of the surgical procedure to the
animal shelter within twenty four (24) hours of the procedure being completed.
      2.   The owner of a dangerous animal shall have the animal implanted with
a microchip identification at the owner's expense by a trained microchip
technician within five (5) days after being determined to be a dangerous animal
as provided herein. The owner shall provide written verification of the
implanting and provide the microchip number to the animal shelter within twenty
four (24) hours after the procedure is completed.
      3.   The owner of a dangerous animal shall place on the animal's collar a
City-issued tag that identifies the animal as such within five (5) days after
being determined to be a dangerous animal as provided herein and shall maintain
the tag on the collar at all times.
   E.   Administrative Hearing/Terms And Conditions/Grounds For Destruction:
      1.   If an animal is alleged to be a dangerous animal by the Chief of
Police or designee, an administrative hearing on the disposition of such animal
may be held. Pending such hearing, the animal shall be impounded in the City
shelter, or in lieu of impound, the Chief of Police or designee may permit the
animal to be confined, at the owner's expense, in a City approved dog kennel or
veterinary facility within the City or at the owner's residence, provided the
owner:
         a.   Shall not remove the animal from the kennel, veterinary facility
or residence without the prior written approval of the Chief of Police or
designee; and
         b.   Shall make the animal available for observation and inspection by
Chief of Police, or designee, and authorized representatives.
      2.   The hearing shall be before the City Manager, or designee, shall be
public, and shall be scheduled after at least ten (10) calendar days' written
notice to the owner of said hearing. The owner may waive the notice and agree
to an earlier scheduled hearing. The hearing will be informal, and the owner
will have the opportunity to offer any written or oral information relevant to
the hearing, including witnesses. The standard of proof is preponderance of
evidence.
      3.   If, following the hearing, the City Manager or designee determines
that the animal is a dangerous animal, the City Manager or designee may require
reasonable terms and conditions for the training, handling or maintenance of
the animal to abate the condition which gave rise to the hearing. In lieu of a
hearing, the Chief of Police or designee may agree on reasonable terms and
conditions. Terms and conditions may include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Selection of locations within the owner's property where the
animal shall be maintained.
         b.   Requirements as to size, construction or design of an enclosure
where the animal may be kept.
         c.   Completion of obedience training from a trainer or training
program approved by the City.
         d.   Types and method of restraint, or muzzling, or both.
         e.   Requirements for the owner to carry liability insurance.
      4.   If the Chief of Police, or designee, determines that the owner has
violated the terms and conditions required by the City Manager or agreed to by
the Chief of Police or designee, the Chief of Police, or designee, may schedule
an administrative hearing on the consequences of said violation with notice to
the owner and opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The only issues at
the hearing will be whether the terms and conditions have been violated, and if
so, the consequences of the violation. The question of whether the animal is a
dangerous animal will not be at issue as the City Manager, or designee, has
previously made that determination.
      5.   If the City Manager or designee determines: a) that the animal is a
dangerous animal; b) that the owner has failed to restrain such animal
reasonably; and c) that it is in the public interest to destroy such animal,
the animal shall be destroyed in a manner deemed appropriate to the City after
five (5) calendar days unless the determination is appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-8: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Authority To Impound: Any animal found in violation of the provisions
of this chapter may be impounded by the City.
   B.   Notice Of Impoundment: Not later than two (2) calendar days after the
impoundment of any animal, the owner, if known, shall be notified, of such
impoundment.
   C.   Redemption Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter may
reclaim such animal upon proof of current license and rabies inoculation,
payment of the redemption fee and payment of all costs and charges incurred by
the City or the agency authorized by the City to impound such animal, including
costs of maintenance of said animal.
      2.   If an animal four (4) months of age or older and unlicensed is
impounded, the person to whom the animal is released shall apply for a license
for such animal and shall be required to first show proof of current rabies
vaccination or obtain a rabies vaccination receipt in order to obtain the
release of the animal. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
      3.   All dogs, cats, and ferrets impounded by the animal shelter which do
not have traceable identification shall have a microchip identification
implanted permanently into the animal prior to redemption. (Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-
2019)
   D.   Period Of Impoundment; Notice: The City shall keep all animals
impounded pursuant to this chapter for a period of seven (7) calendar days
after the owner has been notified, in writing, of possible disposition, which
notice shall be given to the animal owner by personal delivery, electronic
mail, or by U.S. mail. U.S. mail is deemed completed four (4) days after the
notice is deposited in the mail and postmarked for delivery. Electronic mail is
deemed completed twenty four (24) hours after it is sent. After such time
period has expired and the owner has failed to claim and redeem any such
impounded animal, such animal shall become the property of the City. This
provision does not apply to stray animals for which the owner is unknown.
   E.   Written Record: The City personnel or veterinarian authorized to
impound animals, upon receiving any animal pursuant to this chapter, shall make
a written record of receiving such animal. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-9: ANIMAL NEGLECT AND CRUELTY:
   A.   1. Prohibition Against Animal Cruelty: No person shall abandon, abuse,
torture, torment, mutilate, overwork, overload, beat, starve, dehydrate,
suffocate, kill or cause the death of any animal, or take any other action
which causes unjustified pain, distress, or suffering.
      2.   Prohibition Against Animal Neglect:
         a.   No person shall fail to provide any animal with adequate care,
food, water, exercise, sanitation, space, outdoor confinement area, indoor
shelter, outdoor shelter, or veterinary care.
         b.   No person shall leave an animal in an unattended motor vehicle or
trailer as provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
confine an animal or allow such animal to be confined in a vehicle or trailer
under such conditions or for such periods of time as may endanger the health or
well-being of the animal or as may cause unjustified pain, distress, or
suffering due to extreme temperature.
      3.   Threatened Animals: Threatened animal means an animal that has been
subjected to animal cruelty or animal neglect as provided herein.
   B.   1. A law enforcement or animal services officer, after consulting with
a veterinarian licensed by the State may rescue a threatened animal as provided
in this section. The officer may enter onto private property to rescue
threatened animal if the officer obtains a search warrant issued by a court or
enters onto the premises in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of
Iowa and the United States, including article I, section 8, of the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
      2.   If an animal is rescued pursuant to this section, the City shall
provide for the maintenance of the threatened animal at the City shelter. The
City may also contract with an animal care provider for the maintenance of the
threatened animal. The City shall post a notice in a conspicuous place at the
location where the animal was rescued. The notice shall state that the animal
has been rescued by the City pursuant to this section and section 717B.5, Code
of Iowa, as amended. The City shall pay the animal care provider for the
animal's maintenance regardless of proceeds received from the sale of the
animal or any reimbursement ordered by a court pursuant to section 717B.4, Code
of Iowa, as amended.
      3.   The animal shall be subject to disposition as required by a court
pursuant to section 717B.4, Code of Iowa, as amended.
   C.   The disposition of a threatened animal rescued by the City shall occur
as provided in section 717B.4, Code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-
2018)
8-4-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
No person shall:
   A.   Expose or permit to be exposed any poisoned meat or other poisoned
substances on public or private property where the same may be removed, handled
or consumed by an animal.
   B.   Trap or attempt to trap any animal with other than a nonkill live trap
deemed acceptable to the City. Excepted from this prohibition are instant kill
traps for the purpose of small rodent pest control.
   C.   Offer to give any live animal as a gift or prize for any contest or
other competition, or as a business inducement or promotion. This provision
does not apply to animal shelter staff.
   D.   Leave an animal unattended inside the animal shelter or on the premises
of the animal shelter without express permission of animal shelter staff, a
Community Service Officer, or a police officer.
   E.   No person shall take any animal from the custody of animal shelter
staff, Community Service Officer, or peace officer or resist, oppose, obstruct
or impede any said City employee or officer in the discharge of their duties.
   F.   No person, except the owner of an animal or authorized agent, shall
willfully open any door or gate on any private or public premises for the
purpose of enticing or enabling any such animal to leave such private or public
premises, nor shall any person willfully molest, tease, provoke or mistreat an
animal.
   G.   No person shall transport any animal or leave any animal unattended in
the back of a motor vehicle in a space intended for any load, including, but
not limited to, the cargo bed of a truck or the trunk of an automobile, except
an animal may be transported or left unattended in the cargo bed of a truck if:
1) the space is fully enclosed (such as a topper); or 2) the animal is secured
by an animal crate in a manner which will prevent the animal from either being
thrown from the motor vehicle or falling or jumping from the motor vehicle.
This shall not apply to the transportation of livestock.
   H.   Prohibition: No person shall place, permit to be placed, or maintain on
the ground, or within five feet (5') of the ground surface, any grain, fodder,
salt licks, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay or other edible materials (including
feed for birds), which may reasonably be expected to result in deer feeding.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Such materials that are screened or protected in a manner that
prevent deer from feeding on them.
      2.   Living fruit trees and other live vegetation.
      3.   Spills of seed materials intended for planting or birds if the
spills are incidental and such materials are not intentionally made available
to deer.
      4.   Feeding done with written consent of the City for the purpose of
killing deer pursuant to the City's deer management plan.
(Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 20-4829, 9-15-2020)
8-4-11: IRRESPONSIBLE OWNER:
   A.   Irresponsible owner means an owner who has been adjudged by the court
to have violated this chapter four (4) or more times within a twelve-month
period.
   B.   For a period of twelve (12) months, an irresponsible owner shall not
reside with or maintain any animal and shall not allow any animal owned by the
irresponsible owner to be maintained within the City.
   C.   An irresponsible owner who maintains any animal at any premises owned,
leased, or controlled by the irresponsible owner in violation of this chapter
shall immediately surrender the animal to the Chief of Police or designee. If
the irresponsible owner does not immediately surrender the animal, a Municipal
infraction citation may be filed for violation of this provision requesting a
court order that the animal become the property of the City. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-
4-2018)
8-4-12: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall keep, maintain, conduct or operate any
activity that requires a permit issued by the Police Chief or designee as set
forth herein without a permit.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   Each application for a permit hereunder shall be in writing upon a
form to be furnished by the City.
      2.   All permits issued shall automatically expire one year from the date
of issue, unless revoked or suspended.
      3.   A permittee wishing to renew a permit shall apply for and secure a
renewal of the permit in the manner provided for in this chapter no later than
thirty (30) days after the expiration of any permit.
      4.   All permits issued to commercial establishments, animal acts or
exhibitions, and rodeos shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place.
      5.   All applicants shall be furnished with permit rules at the time the
application is made.
   C.   Inspection: Upon the filing of an application for a permit or renewal
thereof, the Police Chief, or designee, may make such investigation and
inspection of the animal, and the premises where the animal will be kept, as it
deems proper within the law. The City shall then issue a permit to an applicant
unless the Police Chief or designee finds:
      1.   The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application
and the conduct or operation of the business, activity, or event for which the
permit is requested will violate any law or ordinance of this City, or any law
of the State; or
      2.   The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application
and the conduct or operation of the business, activity, or event for which the
permit is requested will constitute a danger to the health, peace or safety of
the community; or
      3.   The applicant has failed to provide any animal in his or her
possession, care, or control with adequate food, drink, shelter, or protection;
or
      4.   The premises and establishment where the animal is to be kept is not
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; or
      5.   The applicant has failed to protect any animal in his or her
possession, care, or control from needless suffering, torment, cruelty, abuse,
or neglect; or
      6.   The applicant has had a permit revoked within one year prior to the
date of the application; or
      7.   The applicant has been convicted of or has had judgment entered for
the violation of chapter 717A or 717B, Code of Iowa, as amended, or any
provision of this chapter; or
      8.   The applicant has previously violated terms and conditions of a
permit; or
      9.   Doing so would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
the residents of the City or an animal.
   D.   Revoked; Suspended: Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked
or suspended if, after due investigation and after the permittee has been given
the opportunity to give a written and oral statement and present evidence, the
Police Chief or designee finds:
      1.   The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application
and the conduct or operation of the commercial establishment for which the
permit was issued violates any law or ordinance of the City, or any law of the
State; or
      2.   The keeping of the animal at the place set forth in the application
and the conduct or operation of the commercial establishment for which the
permit is requested will constitute a danger to the health, peace or safety of
the community; or
      3.   The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to provide any animal
in their possession, care, or control with proper and sufficient food, drink,
shelter, or protection; or
      4.   The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to maintain the
premises or caging areas in a clean and sanitary condition; or
      5.   The permittee, agent, or employee has failed to protect any animal
in their possession, care, or control from needless suffering, torment,
cruelty, abuse, or neglect; or
      6.   The permittee has had a permit revoked within one year prior to the
date of application; or
      7.   The permittee has been convicted of or has had judgment entered for
any offense involving the violation of chapter 717A or 717B, Code of Iowa, as
amended, or any provision of this chapter; or
      8.   The applicant has previously violated terms and conditions of a
permit; or
      9.   Doing so would be detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of
the residents of the City or an animal.
   E.   Reserved.
   F.   Urban Chicken Permits:
      1.   No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens without an urban
chicken permit, or other permit, issued by the City.
      2.   "Chicken" means a member of the subspecies of Gallus gallus
domesticus, a domesticated chicken.
      3.   In order to obtain an urban chicken permit, an applicant must submit
a completed application on a form provided by the City accompanied by the
permit fee.
      4.   Within thirty (30) days of submission of the application, the Police
Chief, or designee, shall issue the urban chicken permit if the applicant meets
the requirements of this provision and the policy adopted by City Council
resolution or deny the application. If the application is denied, the Police
Chief, or designee, shall state the reasons in writing.
      5.   The urban chicken permit shall be valid for three (3) years and may
not be sold, transferred or assigned.
      6.   The Police Chief, or designee, may revoke an urban chicken permit as
provided in the policy adopted by Council resolution.
      7.   Appeals of the decision to deny or revoke an urban chicken permit
are to the City Manager, or designee, and must be filed within ten (10) days of
the decision.
      8.   Subsections A through D of this section and section
8-4-15 of this chapter do not apply to this subsection.
      9.   Additional requirements, including permit fees, shall be adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
      10.   Violation of this subsection or the terms of the urban chicken
permit are punishable by a Municipal infraction with a civil penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for first violation, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for second violation, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for third
and subsequent violations. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018)
8-4-13: COMMUNITY CATS:
   A.   A cat meeting the following requirements shall be allowed to roam
freely and shall be known as a "community cat" if all the following conditions
are met:
      1.   No person owns the cat;
      2.   The cat has been assessed by a veterinarian and deemed healthy;
      3.   The cat has been spayed or neutered;
      4.   The cat has been vaccinated against rabies, feline rhinotracheitis,
calcivirus, and panleukopenia; and
      5.   After determining that the requirements of paragraphs 1-4 have been
met, the cat has been ear-tipped by the veterinarian making the health
assessment.
   B.   A community cat that creates a nuisance may be captured and impounded.
For purposes of this section, "nuisance" means those acts described in Section
5 herein or as anything which interferes with the enjoyment of life or property
as determined by the Chief of Police or designee.
   C.    A community cat shall be returned to the area where it was captured
unless the property owner requests that the cat not be returned. After its
return, reasonable attempts shall be made to revaccinate a community cat, in
accordance with directions of a veterinarian.
   D.   The City shall have no liability for the disposition of any community
cat. (Ord. 19-4803, 8-20-2019)
8-4-14: FEES:
Animal fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-
2018; amd. Ord. 19-4803, 8-20-2019)
8-4-15: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to establish administrative rules
not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the City Clerk, available
at the animal shelter, and posted on the City website. (Ord. 18-4767, 9-4-2018;
amd. Ord. 19-4803, 8-20-2019)
8-4-16: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. The
fine amount for certain violations charged as a simple misdemeanor are
scheduled and set forth in section
3-4-9  of this Code. (Ord. 19-4782, 3-12-2019; amd. Ord. 19-4803, 8-20-2019)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Disorderly Conduct
8-5-2: Aggressive Solicitation (Rep. by Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
8-5-3: Offenses Involving Public Officers
8-5-4: Damaging, Defacing Property
8-5-5: Keeping Disorderly House
8-5-6: Indecent Exposure
8-5-7: False Alarms
8-5-8: Engine Braking
8-5-9: Amateur Fighting And Boxing
8-5-10: Sitting And Lying On Sidewalks
8-5-11: Standing, Loitering And Obstructing Persons
8-5-12: Fireworks
8-5-13: Public Urination And Defecation
8-5-14: Storage Of Property
8-5-15: Electrical Outlets
8-5-16: Downtown Map
8-5-17: Violation Of Individual Rights - Hate Crime
8-5-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct:
      1.   Makes unreasonable noise in public with the purpose of causing, or
recklessly creating a risk of causing, a breach of the peace.
      2.   Makes unreasonable noise in the vicinity of any residence with an
intentional or reckless disregard for causing distress to the occupants
thereof. (1978 Code §24-47)
      3.   Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons, provided, that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
      4.   Acts in a threatening or violent manner toward another whereby:
         a.   Any person is placed in fear of safety of the person's life, limb
or health;
         b.   The property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed
or damaged; or
         c.   The lawful pursuits of another are substantially curtailed.
      5.   Uses inflammatory language in public which the person using the
language knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke an imminent
violent reaction by another.
      6.   Places their own person in or on any public way so as to halt or
impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear any
public way when ordered to do so.
      7.   Commits a trespass upon public or private property with a malicious
intent.
      8.   Wilfully and knowingly acts in such a way as to disrupt any lawful
assemblage or gathering of people.
      9.   No person shall request or solicit an exchange or transfer of
anything from any person inside a sidewalk cafe without permission of an
employee of the business operating the cafe. No person shall be cited under
this subsection unless the person engages in such prohibited conduct after
having been notified by a peace officer that the conduct violates the City
ordinance. Any violation of this subsection shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00).
   B.   This section shall not apply to any peace officer acting within the
scope of the officer's duties.  (1978 Code §24-47; amd. 1994 Code) (Ord. 09-
4342, 6-16-2009; amd. Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017; Ord. 19-4811, 11-4-2019)
8-5-2: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
8-5-3: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC OFFICERS
   A.   Impersonating An Officer: It shall be unlawful for any person other
than a duly appointed and acting officer or representative of the city to wear
or display any insignia tending to designate the wearer as being an officer or
representative of the city. (1978 Code §24-3)
   B.   Refusing To Assist Officers: Any peace officer making an arrest may
summon as many persons as necessary to aid in making the arrest, and all
persons refusing to obey such summons shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
(1978 Code §29-1; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Obstructing Officers: No person shall rescue or take any person from
the custody of any peace officer or prevent the arrest of any such person or
resist, oppose, obstruct or impede any member of the police force in the
discharge of the officer's duties. (1978 Code §29-2; amd. 1994 Code)
8-5-4: DAMAGING, DEFACING PROPERTY:
No person shall damage or deface in any manner any property belonging to
another, whether public or private, without the consent of the owner of such
property. (1978 Code §24-1)
8-5-5: KEEPING DISORDERLY HOUSE:
   A.   Simple Misdemeanor: No person shall permit or suffer to continue,
without taking legal steps to prevent the same, any quarreling, fighting,
disorderly conduct, or any other conduct or condition that threatens injury to
persons or damage to property. No person shall permit or suffer to continue,
without taking legal steps to prevent the same, loud, raucous, disagreeable
noises made with an intentional or reckless disregard for causing a disturbance
of the neighborhood, or a disturbance to the general public, upon any premises
owned by the person or in the person's possession. For the purposes of this
section, "a disturbance to the general public" includes the disturbance of
persons beyond the subject premises and/or to the disturbance of persons upon
public places, including peace officers.
      1.   A person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as follows:
         a.   For a first offense, a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
         b.   For a second offense, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         c.   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of eight hundred fifty-
five dollars ($855.00).
   B.   Authority To Restore Order And Disperse; Failure To Disperse: Upon
issuance of a criminal complaint for a violation of this section, any peace
officer of the city shall have authority to restore order upon the subject
premises, up to and including ordering the dispersal of person(s) from the
subject premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an
order shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Any violation of this
subsection shall be a simple misdemeanor.
   C.   Civil Sanction: Quarreling, fighting, disorderly conduct, or any other
conduct or condition that threatens injury to persons or damage to property, or
loud, raucous, disagreeable noises made with an intentional or reckless
disregard for causing a disturbance of the neighborhood, or a disturbance to
the general public, upon any premises owned by the person or in the person's
possession is prohibited. For the purposes of this section, "a disturbance to
the general public" includes the disturbance of persons beyond the subject
premises and/or to the disturbance of persons upon public places, including
peace officers. Any violation of this subsection by a property owner or tenant
is a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
second and subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 12-4496, 9-18-2012; amd. Ord. 19-4811, 11-4-2019; Ord. 23-4909, 9-5-2023)
8-5-6: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to allow or permit the exposure of
the genitals, buttocks, female breasts or pubes of such person to another not
the person's spouse or partner or to commit a sex act in the presence or view
of another person except a spouse or partner, if:
      1.   The person does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desire of either
of them; and
      2.   The person knows or reasonably should know that the act is offensive
to the viewer.
   B.   "Sex act" means any act, actual or simulated, which involves contact
with human or animal genitalia or the anus. This would include, but not be
limited to, such acts as masturbation or sexual intercourse. (Ord. 12-4468, 3-
20-2012)
   C.   The penalty for violation of this section is punishable by a penalty as
set in Iowa Code section 903.1(1)(a), as amended. (Ord. 15-4620, 5-19-2015)
8-5-7: FALSE ALARMS 1 :
No person except peace officers shall sound any police whistle or make any
sound similar to such whistle, nor, without reasonable cause therefor, call for
the services of any peace officer. (1978 Code §29-4; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-2-2 of this title.
8-5-8: ENGINE BRAKING:
   A.   No person shall use an engine brake while operating a motor vehicle
except in an emergency situation. "Engine brake" means the use or operation of
any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or
deceleration of any motor vehicle which results in the unreasonably loud,
raucous, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle. "Emergency situation"
means one in which there is imminent danger to property, persons and/or
animals.
   B.   Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a fine as provided in the schedule of fees set out in title 3,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 06-4209, 4-18-2006)
8-5-9: AMATEUR FIGHTING AND BOXING:
   A.   No person, individual, association, corporation, partnership or club
holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which authorizes on the
premises consumption, nor his or her agents or employees shall allow an amateur
fighting or boxing match to occur on said premises, unless said match is
sanctioned by USA Boxing.
   B.   No person shall participate in an amateur fighting or boxing match in
an establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer permit, which
authorizes on the premises consumption, unless said match is sanctioned by USA
Boxing.
   C.   No person shall promote, advertise, or organize an amateur fighting or
boxing match in an establishment holding a liquor control license, wine or beer
permit, which authorizes on the premises consumption, unless said match is
sanctioned by USA Boxing.
   D.   "Amateur fighting and boxing match" means a boxing, wrestling, mixed
martial arts fighting, extreme fighting, ultimate fighting or shoot fighting
match, contest, event or exhibition for which the contestants are not paid or
awarded a prize for their participation.
   E.   Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and imprisonment not in
excess of thirty (30) days or a municipal infraction punishable by a civil
penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for first offense and one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for second and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 07-4270,
7-24-2007; amd. Ord. 23-4896, 2-7-2023)
8-5-10: SITTING AND LYING ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk in
the downtown or in zone 1 of City Plaza or on a blanket, chair, stool, or any
other object placed on a public sidewalk in the downtown or in zone 1 of City
Plaza. No person shall sit or lie on or in an elevated planter or public
amenity located on the public right of way in the downtown or on a blanket,
chair, stool, or any other object placed on or in an elevated planter or public
amenity. For purposes of this section, "right of way in the downtown" includes
Black Hawk Mini Park. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd. Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013;
Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
      1.   This prohibition shall not apply to: (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
         a.   A person attending, viewing, or participating in any of the
following events: Friday night concert series, Arts Fest, Jazz Fest, University
Of Iowa homecoming parade, University Of Iowa River Run, Old Capitol Criterium
Bicycle Race or any parade, public assembly, festival, performance or similar
event cosponsored or permitted by the city of Iowa City, where crowds of people
gather. This exception shall not apply to the prohibition against sitting or
lying in an elevated planter. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd. Ord. 13-4554, 9-
17-2013)
         b.   A person sitting or lying down due to a medical emergency.
         c.   A person with disabilities using a wheelchair or similar device
designed for a person with disabilities.
         d.   A person sitting at a sidewalk cafe. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
         e.   A person sitting on a bench. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
         f.   A person who has a temporary use of sidewalk permit, a mobile
vending permit, or other permit issued by the city. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
         g.   A person lying on a bench between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
         h.   A person sitting on the border of an elevated planter that is
greater than twelve inches (12") in height. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
   B.   Citation: No person shall be cited under this section unless the person
engages in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer that the
conduct violates the City ordinance. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008)
   C.   Definitions:
   DOWNTOWN: The Central Business District, the near southside commercial area,
and the northside marketplace area as illustrated on the map in section
 8-5-16 of this chapter. "Zone 1 of City Plaza" means "Zone 1" as that term is
defined in section
 10-5-2 of this Code.
   PUBLIC AMENITY: Bench, table, trash receptacle, public art, bike rack, water
spigot, kiosk, posting pillar, and pergola. (Ord. 08-4301, 4-14-2008; amd. Ord.
13-4554, 9-17-2013; Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
   D.   Violation: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00). (Ord. 08-
4301, 4-14-2008)
8-5-11: STANDING, LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS:
   A.   With the exception of persons authorized to use the public right-of-way
pursuant to title 10, "Public Ways And Property", of this Code no person shall:
      1.   Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter upon any street, sidewalk, bridge,
trail or crossing so as to obstruct the street, sidewalk, bridge, trail or
crossing or hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to pass
thereon. A violation under this subsection can be proven regardless of whether
a person or vehicle is actually hindered or prevented from passing.
      2.   Congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or in front of any hall, lobby,
doorway, passage or entrance of any public building, theater, hotel, eating
house, lodging house, office building, store, shop, office or factory or other
like building so as to obstruct such place or hinder or prevent persons walking
along or into or out of such place or attempting or desiring to do so. A
violation under this subsection can be proven regardless of whether a person is
actually hindered or prevented from passing.
   B.   A violation of this section shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 09-4356, 10-6-2009)
8-5-12: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Definition: The sale and use of fireworks is subject to the definitions
enumerated in Iowa Code sections 100.19 and 727.2, as amended, which
definitions are incorporated herein by this reference.
   B.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode any
"consumer fireworks" or "display fireworks" within the corporate limits of the
City of Iowa City.
   C.   Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or for signal purposes in
athletic sports or by railroads or trucks, for signal purposes, or by a
recognized military organization, or for use in military funerals. Provided
further, this section does not apply to any substance or composition prepared
and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
   D.   Permit: Subsection B of this section shall not apply to anyone who has
applied in writing and has received written permission for the use of "consumer
fireworks" or "display fireworks" from the Fire Marshal of the City of Iowa
City when the fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator, and
consistent with the issued permit.
   E.   Violation: A violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. 17-4712, 6-20-2017)
8-5-13: PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon
any street, alley, public place or in any place open to public view, provided
this subsection shall not apply to restrooms or public facilities designated
for such purpose. (Ord. 12-4468, 3-20-2012)
8-5-14: STORAGE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Definitions:
   DOWNTOWN: The Central Business District, the near southside commercial area,
and the northside marketplace area as illustrated on the map in section
8-5-16 of this chapter. For purposes of this section, "right-of-way in the
downtown" includes Black Hawk Mini Park.
   PUBLIC AMENITY: Bench, table, trash receptacle, public art, bike rack, water
spigot, kiosk, posting pillar, and pergola.
   SHOPPING CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels, or a similar device,
provided by the operator of a commercial establishment for the use of customers
for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. A shopping cart sold
typically by a commercial establishment to a retail customer, designed for that
customer's personal use, and being used by that customer to transport goods
temporarily is not a shopping cart for the purposes of this section.
   STORE OR STORED: To place, store, park, display, locate or set an item on
the right-of-way in the downtown. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 13-4563,
12-3-2013; Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
   B.   Tree Rings/Planters/Public Amenity: No person shall store an item of
personal property on a tree ring, on or in an elevated planter, or on or in a
public amenity in the downtown. This provision shall not apply to property on a
bench that is stored for less than two (2) hours in any twenty four (24) hour
period and that does not have a footprint greater than four (4) square feet.
Moving the unlawfully stored item to another location on public right-of-way or
onto another bench does not toll the two (2) hour limitation.
   C.   Right-Of-Way: No person shall store an item of personal property on the
right-of-way in the downtown. This provision shall not apply to:
      1.   A person who has a permit issued by the City.
      2.   An item that is stored for less than two (2) hours in any twenty
four (24) hour period, that does not have a footprint greater than four (4)
square feet, that does not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic, and that does
not restrict access to a public amenity. Moving the unlawfully stored item to
another location on public right-of-way or onto a bench does not toll the two
(2) hour limitation.
      3.   An item that is designed and being used to transport a child, such
as a stroller or a bicycle trailer.
      4.   An item that is being used to transport a child, such as a wagon.
      5.   A wheelchair or similar device designed for a person with
disabilities that is being used by a person who needs such a device.
      6.   A bicycle parked in a bicycle rack.
   D.   Shopping Carts: Shopping carts are prohibited on the right-of- way in
the downtown unless the area of the bottom of the basket, or both baskets
combined if the cart has two (2) baskets, is less than three hundred (300)
square inches.
   E.   Unattended Personal Property:
      1.   Unattended personal property located on the right-of-way in the
downtown, including on a bench, may be seized. Personal property is unattended
if the property owner, or a person whom the owner has authorized to care for
the property, is not within twenty feet (20') of the property.
      2.   This provision shall not apply to the property of persons who
accompany children using the playground equipment located south of the public
library or to a bicycle parked in a bicycle rack.
      3.   Except as provided herein, if property is seized, a written notice
shall be left at the location of the unattended property that will provide the
owner the opportunity to reclaim the property. The reclaim procedure shall be
adopted by resolution of the City Council. No property shall be destroyed until
the owner has been accorded notice that the property has been seized and the
opportunity to reclaim the property pursuant to the reclaim procedure.
      4.   Property, whether attended or unattended, may be seized without
notice provided to the owner if it presents an immediate threat to public
health or safety, is evidence of a crime, or is contraband. Such property may
be destroyed without notice and opportunity for the owner to reclaim if the
property presents an immediate threat to public health or safety.
   F.   Verbal Notification: No person shall be cited under this section unless
the person engages in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer
that the conduct violates the City ordinance.
   G.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00) or a
Municipal infraction. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
8-5-15: ELECTRICAL OUTLETS:
   A.   Except by written permission, no person shall use an electrical outlet
located on the right-of-way in the downtown. "Downtown" means the Central
Business District, the near southside commercial area, and the northside
marketplace area as illustrated on the map in section 8-5-16 of this chapter.
For purposes of this section, "right-of-way in the downtown" includes Black
Hawk Mini Park. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
   B.   No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages
in conduct after having been notified by a peace officer that the conduct
violates the City ordinance.
   C.   Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple misdemeanor
and punished by a fine of sixty five dollars ($65.00) or a Municipal
infraction. (Ord. 13-4554, 9-17-2013)
8-5-16: DOWNTOWN MAP:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2538.png]
 
(Ord. 17-4692, 2-7-2017)
8-5-17: VIOLATION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS - HATE CRIME:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to commit a hate crime. "Hate crime"
means one of the following public offenses when committed against a person or a
person's property because of the victim's actual or perceived race, color,
creed, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
age, disability, or marital status or the person's association with a person or
group with one or more of these actual or perceived characteristics:
      1.   Harassment under Iowa Code section 708.7.
      2.   Trespass, as defined in Iowa Code section 716.7(2)(a).
   B.   A violation of this section is punishable as follows:
      1.   First offense: A fine of at least three hundred dollars ($300.00)
and not to exceed eight hundred fifty-five dollars ($855.00), and imprisonment
of at least three (3) days and not to exceed seven (7) days.
      2.   Subsequent offenses: A fine of eight hundred fifty-five dollars
($855.00) and thirty (30) days imprisonment.
   C.   Nothing herein shall be construed to allow a court, in the absence of a
stipulation by the parties, to admit evidence of speech, beliefs, association,
group membership, or expressive conduct unless that evidence is relevant and
admissible under the Iowa Rules of Evidence. Nothing herein is intended to
affect the existing rules of evidence. (Ord. 19-4795, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-
4827, 7- 21-2020)
CHAPTER 6
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Sale To And/Or Possession Of Tobacco Products And Cigarettes; Underage
Persons
8-6-2: Juvenile Curfew
8-6-1: SALE TO AND/OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND CIGARETTES; UNDERAGE
PERSONS:
   A.   State Law Incorporated By Reference: Subject to the following
additional subsections, this section shall incorporate by reference the
definitions, restrictions, requirements and limitations contained in chapter
453A, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced chapters of the code of Iowa, as
amended, are hereby made a part of this section as if set forth herein. (1994
Code)
   B.   Employee Education; Cigarette Sales: (Rep. by Ord. 06-4218, 6-27-2006)
   C.   Enforcement Of Provisions 1 :
      1.   Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection C shall be construed to preclude the city
from complying with civil penalty, suspension and revocation procedures
specifically set forth in the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §24-8; amd.
1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-4-9 of this code.
8-6-2: JUVENILE CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
   EMERGENCY ERRAND: Means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury or loss of
life.
   KNOWINGLY: Knowledge which a responsible adult should reasonably be expected
to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible adult's
custody. This is an objective standard. It shall, therefore, be no defense that
an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities
or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
   MINOR: Any unemancipated person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   NONSECURED CUSTODY: Custody in an unlocked multipurpose area, such as a
lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside or used as
a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically secured
during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically accompanied
by a peace officer or a person employed by the facility where the person
arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to providing
nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate juvenile
facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person's parents or
other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for
longer than six (6) hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets,
alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such parts of
buildings and other premises whether publicly or privately owned which are used
by the general public or to which the general public is invited commercially
for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is permitted
without specific invitation; or to which the general public has access. For
purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a
public place when in the areas defined above.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent, guardian or other adult specifically authorized
by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or control of a
minor.
   UNEMANCIPATED: Unmarried and/or still under the custody or control of a
responsible adult. "Emancipated" is as defined in Iowa Code section 252.16(4),
as amended.
   B.   Curfew Established: A curfew applicable to minors is established and
shall be enforced as follows:
      1.   Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor thirteen (13)
years of age or younger shall be in any public place between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
      2.   Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor fourteen (14)
years of age through fifteen (15) years of age shall be in any public place
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
      3.   Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor sixteen (16)
years of age through seventeen (17) years of age shall be in any public place
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to five o'clock (5:00)
A.M.
   C.   Exceptions: The following are exceptions to the curfew:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
      2.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or
on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible
for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
      3.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
         a.   Minor's place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in
which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one
hour before or one hour after the work shift;
         b.   Minor's place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour before or one hour after the religious activity;
         c.   Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour before or one hour after the activity;
         d.   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour before or one
hour after the activity;
         e.   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit in or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious
or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the first amendment
of the U.S. constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour before or one
hour after the activity.
      4.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult.
      5.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the city
beginning, ending or passing through the city when such travel is by direct
route.
      6.   The minor's business, trade or occupation, in which the minor is
permitted by law to be engaged, requires the presence of the minor in the
public place.
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian
having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by ineffective control
to allow the minor to be in violation of this section. This requirement is
intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent or guardian up to a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It
shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent or guardian was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
   E.   Enforcement Procedures:
      1.   Determination Of Age: In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's
license, a peace officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his or
her best judgment in determining age.
      2.   Grounds For Taking Into Custody; Conditions Of Custody: Grounds for
taking a minor into custody for a curfew violation are that the person refuses
to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating this section;
refuses to provide proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or
constitutes an immediate threat to the person's own safety or to the safety of
the public. A law enforcement officer who takes a minor into custody for a
curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter care
facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not place bodily
restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists
or threatens physical violence when being taken into, or while in, custody, or
presents a risk of injury to the minor or others. A minor shall not be placed
in detention for a curfew violation.
      3.   Notification Of Responsible Adult: After a minor is taken into
custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the
minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible
for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at
such time as the court may direct.
      4.   Minor Without Adult Supervision: If a peace officer determines that
a minor does not have adult supervision because the peace officer cannot locate
the minor's parent, guardian or other person legally responsible for the care
of the minor, within a reasonable time, the peace officer shall attempt to
place the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares
for the child or another adult person who is known to the child. In the event
no such person can be promptly located, the peace officer shall place the minor
in shelter care as specified in Iowa Code sections 232.20 and 232.21.
   F.   Violation: A violation of this section shall be a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   G.   Annual City Council Review: The city council shall be provided with and
review enforcement data, including demographic, frequency and location data,
associated with all citations issued under this section on an annual basis.
(Ord. 09-4376, 12-14-2009)
CHAPTER 7
WEAPONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Discharge Of Firearms
8-7-2: Concealed Weapons
8-7-3: Toy Guns And Slingshots
8-7-4: Bows, Arrows And Crossbows
8-7-1: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS 1 :
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city
limits. This prohibition shall not apply to emergency protection of persons and
property on any individual's own premises. Further, this section shall not
apply nor be construed to prevent any United States, state, county or city
peace officer from discharging any firearm in the execution of the officer's
duties. This section shall further not apply to individuals discharging
firearms with the written consent of the city for the purpose of killing deer
pursuant to a city approved deer management plan. (1978 Code §24-64; amd. Ord.
98-3864, 12-15-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-7-7B of this code.
8-7-2: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
No person shall wear any pistol, revolver, slingshot, cross knuckles, knuckles
of lead, brass or other metal or any bowie knife, razor, billy, dirk, dirk
knife or dagger or any knife resembling a dirk knife, bowie knife or other
dangerous weapons under the person's clothes or concealed about or upon the
person, provided this section shall not be construed to prevent any United
States, state, county or city officer or member of the city government from
carrying any such weapons as may be necessary in the proper discharge of said
officer's or member's official duties. (1978 Code §24-66)
8-7-3: TOY GUNS AND SLINGSHOTS:
   A.   Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
or cause to be discharged any air rifle, toy pistol, toy gun or other toy arms
or slingshot, loaded with leaden or other dangerous missiles, at any time or
under any circumstances within the city limits. (1978 Code §24-65)
   B.   Carrying Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or
carry any toy pistol, toy gun or other toy arms or slingshot out of or by which
any leaden or other dangerous missiles may be discharged.
   C.   Persons Under Eighteen Years Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any
parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of any person
under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase for or give to any such person or
knowingly to permit any such underaged person to have any toy pistol, toy gun
or other toy arms or slingshot out of which any leaden or other dangerous
missiles may be discharged. (1978 Code §24-65; amd. 1994 Code)
8-7-4: BOWS, ARROWS AND CROSSBOWS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any
bow or crossbow which propels an arrow or other dangerous missile capable of
inflicting serious bodily injury or death at any time or under any
circumstances within the city limits. However, this section shall not apply to
any person discharging an arrow from a bow or crossbow at an inanimate target
on public or private property provided the person has the permission of the
property owner and the person exercises due care and caution to avoid striking
people or animals or to any person approved to discharge an arrow from a bow
for the purpose of killing deer pursuant to the City's deer management plan.
(Ord. 97-3815, 12-9-1997; amd. Ord. 20-4828, 9-1-2020)
CHAPTER 8
COMMUNITY POLICE REVIEW BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 25-4966, 9-2-2025)
CHAPTER 9
UNBIASED POLICING
SECTION:
8-9-1: Policy Statement
8-9-2: Definitions
8-9-3: Prohibitions And Procedures
8-9-4: Complaints And Compliance
8-9-5: Data
8-9-6: Training
8-9-7: Penalty
8-9-1: POLICY STATEMENT:
The City of Iowa City and the Iowa City Police Department shall be committed to
the unbiased, equitable treatment of all. Department employees (“employees”)
shall treat all in a fair, impartial and objective manner, in accordance with
law, and without consideration of their individual demographics as defined in
this Chapter. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
8-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
 
                Differential treatment in the performance of law enforcement duties or
BIASED          delivery of police services towards a person or classes of persons when one or
POLICING:       more individual demographics was a motivating factor in the action taken. If a
                person’s individual demographics played a part in the employee’s decision,
                then that personal characteristic was a motivating factor of the action taken.
                Persons, irrespective of individual demographics, are treated in the same
                manner under the same or similar circumstances. Reasonable concessions and
FAIR AND        accommodations may be made, when dealing with individuals with physical,
IMPARTIAL       developmental or mental disabilities, injury, illness, deafness, blindness,
TREATMENT:      substance abuse disorders or similar conditions, individuals whose primary
                language is a language other than English, individuals of various cultural
                backgrounds, and individuals of youthful age, or when information about a
                person legally necessitates different treatment.
                Personal characteristics to include, but not limited to: race, creed, color,
                ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, religion, age, gender, sex, gender
INDIVIDUAL      identity/ expression, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, disability,
DEMOGRAPHICS:   immigration status, familial status, marital status, housing status,
                occupation, language fluency, cultural group, political status, or source of
                income, or any other identifiable characteristics.
                Actions and activities that contribute to the overall well-being and safety of
POLICE          the public. These tasks include but are not limited to: crime prevention and
SERVICES:       investigation, preventive patrol, traffic control, traffic accidents, medical
                emergencies and lifesaving services, assistance at fire scenes, public
                information and education.
                That form of biased policing where a motivating factor of the action taken is
                based on an individual’s race, color, ethnicity, religion or national origin
                rather than on the individual’s behavior or on information of the type and
RACIAL          kind customarily and reasonably relied upon in identifying the individual as
PROFILING:      having engaged in prohibited activity. Racial profiling includes but is not
                limited to vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle stops where race, color,
                ethnicity, religion or national origin was a motivating factor for the stop or
                enforcement action taken during the stop.
SPECIFIC        A reasonably detailed physical description of the personal identifying
SUBJECT         characteristics of a potential suspect or victim, including but not limited to
DESCRIPTION-    age, sex, ethnicity, race, or English language proficiency. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-
BASED           15-2020)
IDENTIFICATION:
 
8-9-3: PROHIBITIONS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Fair And Impartial Treatment.
      1.   Biased policing is prohibited both in enforcement of the law and the
delivery of police services by any employee.
      2.   Racial Profiling is prohibited both in enforcement of the law and
the delivery of police services by any employee. Discriminatory pretextual
stops are prohibited under state and federal law and are also prohibited by
this chapter.
      3.   Employees shall exercise their authority and act to accord fair and
impartial treatment to all persons.
      4.   Employees shall not consider individual demographics when performing
law enforcement duties or delivering police services except when such
characteristics are part of a specific subject description-based
identification.
      5.   Employees shall not use any terms, language or remarks that are
derogatory, tend to belittle, show contempt for or defame any individual
demographic, except when necessary to include such terms, language or remarks
used by another for the preparation of official reports or testimony.
      6.   Employees must be able to articulate reasonable suspicion or
probable cause supporting any police action.
      7.   Employees shall not take any law-enforcement action based on
information from members of the public or other employees that they know, or
reasonably should know, under all circumstances present is the product of, or
motivated by, bias based on individual demographics unless the circumstances
indicate that harm is imminent or a crime has been committed.
   B.   Department Policies and Procedures Accessible to the Public. The
Department’s General Orders shall be made available to the public through
publication on the City’s website and hard copies shall be available upon
request in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 22. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
8-9-4: COMPLAINTS AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Employees who witness or who are aware of instances of biased policing
or racial profiling shall report the incident to a supervisor and shall provide
all information known to them before the end of the shift during which they
make the observation or become aware of the incident or as soon thereafter as
practicable under the circumstances. Where appropriate, employees are
encouraged to intervene at the time the biased policing or racial profiling
incident occurs and, in any event, shall report such biased policing or racial
profiling to a supervisor as soon as practicable under the circumstances. Where
unreasonable use of force occurs, officers have a duty to immediately
physically intervene, when in a position to do so, to prevent the use of
unreasonable force.
   B.   Any employee who opposes any practice occurring in violation of this
Chapter shall not be discriminated against in any manner for opposing such
practice, testifying, assisting or participating in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing arising out of this Chapter.
   C.   Supervisors shall ensure the working environment is free of bias and
free of racial profiling. This oversight responsibility may include periodic
inspections of body and in-car audio/video systems, traffic stop data, reports
and field inspections during police interactions with members of the public.
Supervisors shall:
      1.   Take the appropriate action when a violation of this Chapter occurs.
      2.   Ensure that there is no retaliation for individuals reporting such
violations.
   D.   Any person claiming to be aggrieved or to have witnessed biased
policing or racial profiling may file a complaint. No person shall be
discouraged, intimidated, or coerced from filing such a complaint, nor shall
any person be discriminated or retaliated against because he or she has filed a
complaint of this nature.
      1.   While the Iowa City Human Rights Commission will not have
jurisdiction to investigate or adjudicate alleged violations of this chapter,
the commission staff shall educate the public about the complaint process and
shall assist individuals in filing a biased policing or racial profiling
complaint with the Iowa Civil Rights Commission (ICRC). The ICRC has
jurisdiction over racial profiling complaints against law enforcement as such
complaints allege discrimination in public accommodations by a local government
unit that offers services to the public based on the individual demographics
prohibited by the Iowa Civil Rights Act. Iowa Code Sec. 216.7; see also, Iowa
Code Sec. 216.2(13) as now adopted or hereinafter amended. The remedies
afforded by the Iowa Civil Rights Act are not exclusive and do not foreclose a
person from asserting any remedies he or she may have based on the Federal or
Iowa Constitutions, Federal or Iowa Codes, or common law.
      2.   All complaints of biased policing or racial profiling brought to the
City shall be filed directly with the Police Department or the Iowa City
Community Police Review Board. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
8-9-5: DATA:
The Iowa City Police Department shall collect, analyze and publicly report data
related to policing activity. Such data shall include information on calls for
service, related contacts with members of the public, and outcomes of such
contacts. Race, ethnicity, gender, age and other available demographic or
personal characteristic information should be analyzed in aggregate in order to
ascertain trends in disproportionality. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
8-9-6: TRAINING:
At least annually all sworn officers shall receive and participate in training
and guidance in regard to unbiased policing and prohibited racial profiling
while conducting law enforcement activities and police services, which training
shall include de-escalation, cultural diversity, cultural competency, and
implicit bias and may include, but is not limited to: training on subjects
related to police ethics, police interactions with members of the public,
active by-stander intervention, standards of conduct, conducting motor vehicle
stops, and related topics suitable for preventing incidents of biased policing
and racial profiling. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
8-9-7: PENALTY:
Racial profiling and biased policing are violations of this Chapter. Any
penalty for violation of this Chapter related to any employee not acting in
conformity therewith shall be limited to that provided under state or federal
law, which violation may include serving as cause for discipline up to and
including termination from employment as consistent with federal and state law
requirements including Iowa Code Chapters 400, 80F and 20 as applicable. The
limitation related to violations of this Chapter related to employee violations
is not intended to expand or limit any other remedy or cause of action
available under state or federal law, nor to expand or restrict the time for
seeking such remedy or cause of action and shall not be construed as doing so,
nor as conferring jurisdiction on the Iowa City Human Rights Commission but,
pursuant to Section
8-9-4 hereof, Commission staff shall assist individuals who desire to file any
complaint with the Iowa Civil Rights Commission for investigation and
resolution. The declaration of the prohibitions set forth in this Chapter shall
not create any new or separate legal rights or claims by or on behalf of any
third party and shall not be construed as a waiver, modification, or alteration
of any available defense or governmental immunity of the city under federal or
state law. (Ord. 20-4841, 12-15-2020)
TITLE 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Authority Of Police And Fire Department Officials; Obedience Required
9-1-3: Traffic Control
9-1-4: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
9-1-5: Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Violations
9-1-6: Application Of Provisions
9-1-7: Nonmotorized Vehicles
9-1-8: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
9-1-9: Accidents
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABANDONED BICYCLE: A bicycle is abandoned if it is left unattended at the
same location on public property or attached to public property for more than
seven (7) consecutive days, whether parked legally or illegally.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any of the following:
      (1)   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than twenty-four hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more
wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      (2)   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than twenty-four hours.
      (3)   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or
has been placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person
in control of the property for more than twenty-four hours.
      (4)   A vehicle that has been legally impounded and has not been
reclaimed for a period of ten days. However, the vehicle may be declared
abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process as
provided int this title.
      (5)   Any vehicle parked on the highway or street determined by the
police department to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      (6)   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to section 321J.4B of
the Iowa Code by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for
carrying out the impoundment order.
   ALLEY: A public way intended to provide secondary access to abutting
properties.
   ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed to carry a large volume of traffic and
whose principal function is to provide through traffic.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, police
vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles owned by the United States, the
state or any subdivision of the state or any municipality of this state and
privately owned ambulances and fire rescue or disaster vehicles as are
designated or authorized by the director of transportation under authority of
the code of Iowa, as amended.
   AUTOMOBILE OR CAR: A motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying nine (9)
passengers or less, excluding motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   BICYCLE: Every device propelled solely by hand or foot pedals, having at
least one saddle or seat for use of a rider, and having two (2) or three (3)
wheels.
   CAR: See definition of Automobile Or Car.
   CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Iowa City.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city or designee.
   COMBINATION OF VEHICLES: A group consisting of two (2) or more motor
vehicles or a group consisting of a motor vehicle and one or more trailers,
semitrailers or vehicles which are coupled or fastened together for the purpose
of being moved on the highways as a unit.
   COMMERCIAL DISTRICT(S) OR BUSINESS DISTRICT(S): The mixed use zone (MU), the
commercial office zone (CO-1), the neighborhood commercial zone (CN-1), the
highway commercial zone (CH-1), the intensive commercial zone (CI-1), the
community commercial zone (CC-2), the central business service zone (CB-2), the
central business support zone (CB-5), and the central business zone (CB-10), as
defined in title 14 of this Code and as shown on the City's zoning map.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle designated, maintained or used primarily for
the commercial transportation of property. The vehicle shall display signs of
at least seventy two (72) square inches on both the left and right sides of the
vehicle. The signs shall identify the name of the commercial entity in letters
at least two inches (2") in height and clearly legible from a distance of ten
feet (10'). Vehicles so marked may park in zones identified for commercial
loading and unloading for the purpose of loading or unloading commercial goods
and property or for the purpose of providing required services to commercial
enterprises.
   CROSSWALK: That portion of a street or highway ordinarily included within
the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at
intersections or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB EXTENSION: Sidewalk segments that extend into the roadway at an
intersection or mid block crossing. A traffic calming measure also known as
bump outs, bulb outs or neckdowns.
   DENVER BOOT: A mechanical device consisting of metal clamps or jaws and
screws and a padlocking device which, when attached to the wheel of a motor
vehicle, prevents the vehicle from being driven. This includes devices other
than the patented "denver boot" which can be used by attachment to the wheel of
a motor vehicle to prevent the vehicle from being moved.
   DEPARTMENT: The Police Department, Public Works Department, Transportation
Services Department or Finance Department of the City of Iowa City.
   DRIVER: Every person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
upon a street or highway.
   ELECTRIC ASSIST BICYCLE: A bicycle equipped with a motor that: a) provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty eight (28) miles per
hour; or b) that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle and that is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty
(20) miles per hour. An electric assist bicycle is not a bicycle, motorized
bicycle or motor bicycle as defined herein.
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE: A self-balancing, nontandem two
(2) wheeled device powered by an electric propulsion system that averages seven
hundred fifty watts (750 W) and is designed to transport one person, with a
maximum speed on a paved level surface of less than twenty (20) miles per hour.
The maximum speed shall be calculated based on operation of the device by a
person who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds when the device is powered
solely by the electric propulsion system. For purposes of this chapter,
"electric personal assistive mobility device" does not include an "assistive
device" as defined in section 216E.1 of the Iowa Code.
   ELECTRIC SCOOTER: A wheeled device with handlebars that has a floorboard
designed to be stood upon by one person while riding that is not longer than
five feet (5') and no wider than eighteen inches (18") with an electric
propulsion system and a maximum speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour on a
flat, paved surface. It may also be designed to be powered by human propulsion.
   ELECTRIC SKATEBOARD: A wheeled device that has a floorboard designed to be
stood upon by one person while riding that is not longer than five feet (5')
and no wider than eighteen inches (18") with an electric propulsion system and
a maximum speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour on a flat, paved surface. It
may also be designed to be powered by human propulsion.
   FARM TRACTORS: Every motor vehicle designated and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, moving machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FIRE LANES: Any public or private street, alley, driveway, roadway, or
easement of access that is to be maintained free from obstruction so as to
provide ready access for City firefighting vehicles, personnel, and/or
equipment.
   FRONTAGE: The frontage upon which a building is located abutting a street or
highway shall be deemed "frontage occupied by the building", and use of the
phrase "frontage on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or
more" shall mean the total frontage on both sides of the highway for such
distance.
   IMPOUND OR IMPOUNDMENT: The act of taking physical and/or legal custody of a
vehicle by authorizing the vehicle to be held at a storage lot designated by
the City until the City authorizes release of the vehicle or by authorizing
that the vehicle be immobilized by attachment of a "denver boot".
   INOPERABLE BICYCLE: A bicycle is inoperable if it is left on public property
and has a missing, broken, or disassembled component necessary for operation,
whether parked legally or illegally. A bicycle that is missing only a seat is
not inoperable.
   INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
   LOADING ZONE: A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials and designated as such by an
official traffic sign.
   MEDIAN OR MEDIAN STRIP: That portion of the street right of way between
traffic lanes and not part of the improved roadway or set aside for vehicular
traffic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle mechanically self-propelled excluding electric
personal assistive mobility devices.
   MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of a
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, including a motor scooter but excluding a tractor and a motorized
bicycle.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOTOR BICYCLE OR MOPED: A two (2) wheeled vehicle
having a saddle or seat for use of a rider, with an engine having a
displacement no greater than fifty (50) cubic centimeters and not capable of
operating at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour on level
ground unassisted by human power.
   NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES: Roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, coasters,
and other such similar wheeled or coasting devices, including unicycles, but
excluding bicycles, wheelchairs, baby strollers, baby carriages, and small
wagons.
   OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or if a vehicle is
the subject of a security agreement or lease with an immediate right of
possession vested in the debtor or lessee, then the debtor or lessee shall be
deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
   PARK: To stop a vehicle or bicycle and leave it standing for a time, whether
occupied or not.
   PARKING: That portion of a right of way between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent sidewalk or, if there is no
sidewalk, the area within six feet (6') of the lateral line of the roadway.
   PARKING LOT: A facility owned or leased by the city and open to the general
public for off street parking of motor vehicles.
   PARKING TICKET: A notice of fine for a parking violation as authorized by
the code of Iowa, as amended.
   PARKING ZONE: That portion of the street between the curb lines or lateral
lines of a roadway ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and the adjacent
property lines, which portion is designated for parking; also including areas
in which parking is not otherwise prohibited in this title.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: Either of the following: a) a space reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers and
designated as such by an official traffic sign, or b) a section of a traveled
lane of a roadway immediately adjacent to an official traffic sign designating
it as such. Valet parking zones shall be treated as passenger loading zones.
   PEACE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations, including those designated
as peace officers in the code of Iowa, as amended.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on public property on foot or a person
using a pedestrian conveyance.
   PEDESTRIAN CONVEYANCE: Any human-powered device by which a pedestrian may
move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move another person,
including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller, skateboard, scooter, or
other similar device. "Pedestrian conveyance" also includes an electric
personal assistive mobility device and any other device used to move a person
sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether the device is powered
by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor produces less than seven
hundred fifty (750) watts. "Pedestrian conveyance" does not include a bicycle.
   PERSON: Every natural person, company, firm, partnership, association,
entity or corporation. Where the term "person" is used in connection with the
registration of a motor vehicle, it shall include any corporation, association,
partnership, company, firm, entity or other aggregation of individual persons
which owns or controls such motor vehicle as actual owner or for the purpose of
sale or lease, as agent, salesperson or otherwise.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and
available for vehicular travel by the owner and by those having express or
implied permission from the owner.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR RAILROAD SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or public official or by a railroad and intended to
give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad
train.
   RAMP CHARGES: Unpaid fees charged for parking in a parking lot owned or
operated by the city.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The territory within a city contiguous to and
including a highway, not comprising a commercial, suburban or school district,
where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage of such highway for a
distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by dwellings or by
dwellings and buildings not in use for business.
   RESIDENTIAL STREET: A street used primarily for access to residences and
residential properties.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or so marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times as set apart as a safety
zone.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street or
highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from
property occupied by a school.
   SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motorized power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle. A "semitrailer" shall be considered in this title separately
from its power unit.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines and intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT: Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for
the transportation of persons or property and incidentally operated or moved
over the highway, including, but not limited to, road construction or
maintenance machinery and ditch digging apparatus. The foregoing enumeration
shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other vehicles which
are within the general terms of this definition. However, nothing in this
section shall be construed to include portable mills or cornshellers mounted
upon a motor vehicle or semitrailer.
   STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: Any complete cessation of movement or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All parts of the City not included in the Commercial,
school or Residential Districts.
   TOW: The act of removing a vehicle by means of a wrecker or flatbed truck
from the location in which the vehicle is parked.
   TOW AWAY ZONE: An area designated by signage within which illegally parked
vehicles are subject to tow without further notice.
   TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, bicyclists, vehicles, and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE, TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN, OFFICIAL: All signs or
signals, not inconsistent with this section, placed or installed by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing,
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: A traffic control device which may be manually,
electrically or mechanically operated and by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop, to proceed and to proceed with caution.
   TRAILER: Nonmotorized vehicles designed to carry persons or property and
designed to be drawn by another vehicle. "Trailer" shall be construed to also
include "semitrailer".
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway. “Vehicle” does not include: a) devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; or b) any device moved by
human power; and c) a pedestrian conveyance.
   VEHICLE UNLOCK FEE: Fee charged by the City for assistance in unlocking a
vehicle. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997; Ord.
98-3846, 8-25-1998; Ord. 01-3992, 12-11-2001; Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006; Ord.
08-4317, 9-23-2008; Ord. 09-4344, 6-16-2009; Ord. 11-4459, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-
4464, 2-21-2012; Ord. 12-4466, 2-21-2012; Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013; Ord. 15-
4635, 8-18-2015; Ord. 19-4786, 4-2-2019; Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019; Ord. 21-4850,
3-2-2021; Ord. 24-4926, 6-4-2024)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all Street Traffic
Laws of this City and all of the State Vehicle Laws.
   B.   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws. During a fire or other emergency or
to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the Traffic Laws. (1978 Code §23-18)
   C.   Officers of the Fire Department at an emergency scene may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. (1978 Code
§23-18; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction of a peace officer. (1978 Code §23-19)
9-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or designee, to determine the
installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan
the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this City, to cooperate
with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve
traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of this City. In order to carry out the powers and duties of the
office, the City manager, or designee, is authorized to:
      1.   Place and maintain such traffic control devices as the City Manager,
or designee, may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the
traffic ordinances of this city or the state vehicle code, as amended.
      2.   Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
      3.   Designate crosswalks and safety zones as may be necessary for the
protection of pedestrians and maintain the same by appropriate devices, marks
or lines upon the roadway.
      4.   Determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and place and
maintain official traffic control devices, giving notice thereof.
      5.   Establish and maintain stop signs, yield signs and other official
traffic control devices to designate through streets, intersections or other
roadway junctions at which vehicle traffic on one or more of the roadways must
yield or must stop and yield before entering the intersection or junction.
      6.   Establish gross weight limits on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation and establish and maintain official traffic control
devices on any street or portion thereof to impose those gross weight limits.
      7.   Establish vehicle size restrictions on the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation and establish and maintain official traffic control
devices on any street or portion thereof to impose those vehicle size
restrictions.
      8.   Establish and maintain official traffic control devices within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated
may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
      9.   Determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right, left or U-turn and indicate the same by establishing and
maintaining traffic control devices at those intersections.
      10.   Prohibit, regulate or limit, on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times
or during specified hours.
      11.   Prohibit parking on either or both sides of any street adjacent to
any school property when such parking would, in the opinion of the city
manager, or designee, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
      12.   Prohibit parking upon any street if the width of the roadway does
not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of a street if the width of the
roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
      13.   Prohibit parking within zones of up to one hundred feet (100') in
length if vehicle parking within such zone would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
      14.   Establish and designate parking spaces for disabled persons in on
street parking areas and off street public parking facilities, as provided by
the code of Iowa, as amended.
      15.   Determine and designate streets upon which angle parking may be
permitted.
      16.   Issue special permits authorizing the backing of a vehicle to the
curb for loading or unloading property.
      17.   Establish or remove parking meter zones upon those streets or parts
of streets where it is determined from an engineering and traffic investigation
that the installation or removal of parking meters is necessary. The city
manager, or designee, may also establish the hours during which parking shall
be regulated by parking meter.
      18.   Establish and designate by signs the location of loading zones and
passenger loading zones and state the hours during which regulation of such
zones is applicable. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
      19.   Establish and designate by signs bus stands, taxicab stands and
stands for other common carrier vehicles. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-
1997; Ord. 06-4243, 11-14-2006, eff. 3-1-2007)
   B.   Prior to the installation or removal of any traffic control device or
marking as specified herein, the city manager, or designee, shall give written
notice of such proposal to the city council. The notice, addressed to the city
clerk, shall be given no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the
proposed action. Such proposal shall become final if the city council does not
modify or rescind the proposed action within fourteen (14) calendar days after
receipt by the city clerk.
   C.   In addition to any responsibilities or duties given to the city
manager, or designee, by this title, the city council may, upon its own motion,
authorize the installation or removal of any traffic control device or marking.
Notice of a decision to take such action shall be provided, in writing, from
the city council to the city manager, or designee, no later than fourteen (14)
calendar days prior to the intended action. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-
14-1997)
9-1-4: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   The city manager, or designee, may test traffic control devices under
actual conditions of traffic.
   B.   The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official
traffic control devices when required by an emergency. The chief of police
shall notify the city manager, or designee, of such action as soon as
practicable. (1978 Code §23-17; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
   C.   The city manager or designee may install or modify traffic control
devices in a temporary fashion to accommodate temporary traffic changes. (Ord.
99-3910, 12-7-1999)
9-1-5: OWNER PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS:
If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in violation
of the provisions of this title and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall
be deemed prima facie responsible for such violation. (1978 Code §23-20)
9-1-6: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, town,
district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this title or in the state vehicle
code, as amended.
   B.   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawn vehicle upon
a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(1978 Code §23-3)
   C.   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this title, except those provisions of this title which by their
very nature can have no application. (Ord. 94-3659, 12-13-1994)
9-1-7: NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES:
   A.   1. No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on any
street within the central downtown business district or on any arterial street
within the city. The central downtown business district is the area bounded by
and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south,
Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to the north. The following
streets are hereby designated as arterial streets for the purposes of this
chapter:
Name Of Street Portion Designated An Arterial Street
Name Of Street        Portion Designated An Arterial Street
Benton Street         From Mormon Trek Boulevard to N. Madison Street
Bowery Street         From Gilbert Street to Summit Street
Burlington Street     From U.S. Highway 6 to Muscatine Avenue
Church Street         From Dubuque Street to Governor Street
Court Street          From Muscatine Avenue to Scott Boulevard
Dodge Street          From Iowa Highway 1 to Kirkwood Avenue
Dubuque Street        From U.S. Interstate 80 to Jefferson Street
Gilbert Street        From Church Street to Kirkwood Avenue
Governor Street       From Iowa Highway 1 to Bowery Street
Grand Avenue          From Riverside Drive to S. Grand Avenue
Iowa Avenue           From U.S. Highway 6 to Madison Street
Iowa Highway 1        All portions within the city limits
Jefferson Street      From Madison Street to Muscatine Avenue
Keokuk Street         From Kirkwood Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Kimball Road          From Dubuque Street to
Kirkwood Avenue       From Gilbert Street to Lower Muscatine Road
Lower Muscatine Road  From Kirkwood Avenue to First Avenue
Madison Street        From Market Street to Burlington Street
Market Street         From Madison Street to Muscatine Avenue
Melrose Avenue        From S. Grand Avenue to the city limits
Mormon Trek Boulevard From Iowa Highway 1 to U.S. Highway 6
Muscatine Avenue      From Rochester Avenue to the city limits
Park Road             From Rocky Shore Drive to Dubuque Street
Prairie du Chien      From U.S. Interstate 80 to Iowa Highway 1
Riverside Drive       From Park Road to U.S. Highway 6
Rochester Avenue      From Market Street to the city limits
Rocky Shore Drive     From U.S. Highway 6 to Park Road
Rohret Road           From Mormon Trek Boulevard to the city limits
Scott Boulevard       From Rochester Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Sheridan Avenue       From Summit Street to Seventh Avenue
Sunset Street         From Iowa Highway 1 to Melrose Avenue
Sycamore Street       From Lower Muscatine Road to the city limits
U.S. Highway 6        All portions within the city limits
First Avenue          From Rochester Avenue to U.S. Highway 6
Seventh Avenue        From Rochester Avenue to Sheridan Avenue
 
      2.   All persons who travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on any
road, street, or alley shall:
         a.   Stay as far to the right of the road, street, or alley as
possible, except when necessary to make a left hand turn;
         b.   Operate the nonmotorized vehicle with the flow of traffic;
         c.   Operate the nonmotorized vehicle in a careful and prudent manner;
         d.   Obey all traffic laws which are applicable to drivers of motor
vehicles; and
         e.   Wear a reflective device or reflective clothing after dusk.
   B.   No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle within
any public parking ramp or parking lot except where posted as a permitted
activity.
   C.   Except in the central downtown business district, persons may travel
upon or operate nonmotorized vehicles on public sidewalks but must yield the
right of way to pedestrians and must travel upon or operate said nonmotorized
vehicles in a careful and prudent manner.
   D.   No person shall travel upon or operate a nonmotorized vehicle on a
sidewalk in the central downtown business district. The central downtown
business district is the area bounded by and including Capitol Street to the
west, Burlington Street to the south, Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson
Street to the north. (Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-1-8: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
No person traveling upon or operating any bicycle, motorcycle, electric assist
bicycle, electric scooter, electric skateboard, or nonmotorized vehicle shall
cling to or attach to any other vehicle while the vehicle is moving upon any
roadway or bikeway. (Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997; amd. Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-1-9: ACCIDENTS:
   A.   Report Of Accident Required; Inability To Report: (Rep. by Ord. 97-
3810, 10-7-1997)
   B.   Duty Of Driver Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any
vehicle which collides with any unattended vehicle shall immediately stop and
shall then and there either locate and notify the driver or owner of such
vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle or shall
leave in a conspicuous place in the struck vehicle a written notice giving the
name and address of both the driver and the owner of the vehicle and a
statement of the circumstances thereof. (1978 Code §23-50)
   C.   Clearing Up Wrecks: Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle
from a highway shall remove any glass or other substance left on the highway
after such vehicle has been removed. (1978 Code §23-140)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Manual And Specifications
9-2-2: Traffic Control Signal Legend
9-2-3: Obedience Required
9-2-4: Presumption Of Legality
9-2-5: Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Markings
9-2-6: Interference With Traffic Control Device
9-2-1: MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications
approved by the Iowa department of transportation or its successor. All devices
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or
this title shall be official traffic control devices. (1994 Code)
9-2-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different
colored lights or colored lighted arrows, whether successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for
special pedestrian signals as defined in section
9-6-3 of this title. Such colored lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of
vehicles and, where no other pedestrian signals are present, to pedestrians as
follows: (Ord. 07-4266, 6-19-2007)
   A.   Green Indication:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular steady green illuminated signal
may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
displayed.
      2.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady green illuminated arrow signal,
shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within
an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      3.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal,
pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   B.   Circular Yellow Or Yellow Arrow: When shown following the steady green
signal or green arrow, vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be
made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient
time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles.
   C.   Circular Red:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if no stop line is present, said vehicle traffic
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown. A right turn shall be permitted at an
intersection by vehicular traffic which has come to a complete stop unless a
sign is in place prohibiting such a turn. Any right turn made pursuant to this
subsection shall be made in such a manner that it does not interfere with other
vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      2.   Vehicular traffic on a one-way highway facing a steady red circular
signal may, after making a stop pursuant to this subsection, cautiously enter
the intersection and make a left turn onto an intersecting one-way highway on
which traffic travels to the left unless a sign is in place prohibiting such
turn. Any left turn made pursuant to this subsection shall be made in such a
manner that it does not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
      3.   No pedestrian facing a steady red circular signal shall enter the
roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic, but a vehicle turning right at such intersection shall yield
the right of way to a pedestrian lawfully entering such intersection.
   D.   Red With Green Arrow: Vehicular traffic facing a steady red circular
with green arrow signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic or
endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. No pedestrian facing such
signal shall enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and
without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   E.   Flashing Signals: Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used,
they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      1.   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
      2.   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signals only with caution. (1978 Code §23-34; amd.
1994 Code)
9-2-3: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions
of this title unless otherwise directed by a peace officer. (1978 Code §23-29)
9-2-4: PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY:
Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this
title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such
devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this title unless
the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. (1978 Code §23-33;
amd. 1994 Code)
9-2-5: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway,
street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or other device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official parking sign,
curb, marking or traffic control device or railroad sign or signal or which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal. No person shall place or maintain upon any highway or
street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the placement upon
private property adjacent to highways any signs giving useful directional
information of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs and subject to
the zoning laws as provided in the ordinances of the city. (1978 Code §23-35;
amd. 1994 Code)
9-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE:
No person, without lawful authority, shall attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof. (1978 Code §23-36)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
9-3-1: Driver's License And Vehicle Registration Required
9-3-2: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-3-3: Right Of Way
9-3-4: Turning Movements
9-3-5: Overtaking And Passing Vehicles
9-3-6: Speed Restrictions
9-3-7: Driver's Signals
9-3-8: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-3-9: General Driving Restrictions
9-3-10: Duty Of Driver At Railroad Grade Crossings
9-3-11: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
9-3-12: Lane Usage
9-3-1: DRIVER'S LICENSE AND VEHICLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Driver's License Required: No person shall operate a motor vehicle
unless the person has a valid driver's license, restricted license or
instruction permit as authorized by the laws of this state. (1978 Code §23-120)
   B.   Registration Required: No person shall operate, nor shall an owner
knowingly permit to be operated upon any street, any vehicle required to be
registered and titled by state law unless there shall be attached thereto and
displayed thereon, when and as required by state law, a valid registration tag
and registration plate or plates issued for the current registration year and
unless a certificate of title has been issued for such vehicle, except as
otherwise expressly permitted by state law. (1978 Code §23-99; amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-2: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Privileges Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   When responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an
actual or suspected perpetrator of a felony or when in response to an incident
dangerous to the public or when responding to but not upon returning from a
fire alarm, the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section.
      2.   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle may:
         a.   Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of
the provisions of this code.
         b.   Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for
the minimum distance necessary before an alternative otherwise lawful route is
available.
      3.   The driver of a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance
may:
         a.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
         b.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not
endanger life or property.
      4.   The exceptions authorized emergency vehicles granted under
subsections A2 and A3 of this section shall apply only when such vehicle is
making use of an audible signaling device meeting the requirements of the code
of Iowa, as amended, or a visual signaling device approved by the department of
transportation or its successor, except use of an audible or visual signaling
device shall not be required when exercising the exemption granted under
subsection A3b of this section when the vehicle is operated by a peace officer
pursuing a suspected violator of the speed restrictions imposed by or pursuant
to this code for the purpose of determining the speed of travel of such
suspected violator.
      5.   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1978
Code §23-123; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle:
      1.   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle with any lamp
or device displaying a red light or upon the approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle of a fire department displaying a blue light or when a driver
is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the drivers of
other vehicles shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb
of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a peace officer. For the purposes of this subsection,
"red light" or "blue light" means a light or lighting device that, when
illuminated, will exhibit a solid flashing or strobing red or blue light.
      2.   This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the street, nor shall this provision protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of an arbitrary exercise of such right of
way. (1978 Code §23-169; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Following Fire Apparatus; Parking Near Fires: No driver of any vehicle,
other than a driver on official business, shall follow closer than three
hundred feet (300') of any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm, nor shall any driver of any vehicle drive into or stop any vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm 1 .
(1978 Code §23-133; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway
without the consent of the fire department. (1978 Code §23-134; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  9-4-1A13 of this title.
9-3-3: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Stop And Yield At Stop Intersection: The driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the
first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before entering the
crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Before proceeding, the
driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway
which has entered the intersection or is approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection. (1978 Code §23-161)
   B.   Yield At Yield Signs: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign
shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right of way
to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which the driver is driving
and shall also yield to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute a hazard. Said driver, having so
yielded, may proceed with caution. (1978 Code §23-162)
   C.   Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle attempting to turn left across
the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction shall yield the
right of way to the vehicle or vehicles approaching from the opposite direction
going straight ahead. Such driver attempting to turn left shall then turn left
only after giving a signal as required by law and only after affording a
reasonable opportunity for the driver of the other vehicle to avoid a
collision. (1978 Code §23-166; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Entering Arterial Highway: Every driver of a vehicle or other
conveyance traveling upon any street intersecting any arterial highway shall
bring such vehicle or conveyance to a full stop at the place where such street
meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of such arterial highway,
subject, however, to the direction of any traffic control sign or signal or any
peace officer at such intersection. Said driver shall not proceed until the
driver can do so without danger of collision, and in such instances, the driver
of a vehicle on any arterial highway shall have the right of way. (1978 Code
§23-163; amd. 1994 Code)
   E.   Entering Marked Highways: All vehicles must stop before entering any
marked highway within the corporate limits of the city, as established by the
state department of transportation or its successor, which signs are posted as
provided by law. (1978 Code §23-164)
   F.   Approaching Or Entering Intersections: When two (2) vehicles are
approaching on any public street or highway so that their paths will intersect
and there is danger of collision, the driver of the vehicle to the right shall
have the right of way. (1978 Code §23-165)
   G.   Entering Street From Private Roadway: The driver of a vehicle entering
a public street from a private road or drive shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching along such public highway. (1978 Code §23-167)
   H.   Emerging From Alley Or Private Driveway: The driver of a vehicle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway and shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
and pedestrians approaching on the highway or crosswalk. (1978 Code §23-168;
amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-4: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Turning At Intersections:
      1.   Right Turns: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right
at an intersection or turn into an alley or driveway shall approach the point
of turning in the lane of traffic nearest the right hand edge or curb of the
street and, in turning, shall keep as closely as practicable to the right hand
curb or edge of the street.
      2.   Left Turns:
         a.   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection or into a driveway shall approach the point of turning in the
extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same
direction and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection as soon as practicable to complete the turn into a
lane of traffic lawfully available to the street or lane being entered.
Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the
intersection to the right of the center of the intersection.
         b.   The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-
way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline
where it enters the intersection.
         c.   A left turn from a one-way street into two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection. (1978 Code §23-200; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Turning At Restricted Turn Intersections: The driver of a motor vehicle
shall make no turn prohibited by traffic control devices at the intersection.
(1994 Code)
9-3-5: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
   A.    Overtaking: The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle,
bicycle, electric assist bicycle, electric scooter, or electric skateboard
proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle, bicycle, electric assist bicycle,
electric scooter, or electric skateboard. (1978 Code §23-151)
   B.   Duty Of Overtaken Driver: Except when overtaking and passing on the
right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the
right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of
the overtaken vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1978
Code §23-151; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Passing On Right: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon
the right of another vehicle making or about to make a left turn or when the
roadway is lined for at least two (2) lanes of traffic in that direction, and
such movement can be made in safety.
   D.   Duty To Yield: When any vehicle is traveling at less than the maximum
permissible speed in an area for reasons other than traffic conditions, upon
audible signal from following vehicles, such vehicle shall move to the right
and allow such following vehicles to overtake. (1978 Code §23-151)
   E.    Crossing Yellow Lines: No vehicle shall cross a yellow lane marker
line at any time when such line appears on the right side of the centerline or
when the centerline is composed of a double yellow line. This subsection shall
not be construed to prohibit the crossing of the centerline when making a left
turn into or from a street, alley, private road or driveway. (1978 Code §23-
152; amd. Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-3-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.       General Speed Limit Provisions:
         1.   Any person driving a motor vehicle on a highway shall drive the
same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of
the highway and of any other condition then existing. No person shall drive any
vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit the person to bring
the motor vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such
driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using such highway
will observe the law.
         2.   The following shall be the maximum allowable speed for any
vehicles, except as otherwise modified in this title:
            a.   Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district. (1978
Code §23-188)
            b.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any school district.
            c.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any residence district.
            d.   Forty five (45) miles per hour in any suburban area.
            e.   Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park 2.
            f.   Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley or other public place not
specifically mentioned in this subsection.
         3.   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation
conducted by the City Manager, or designee, the City may reduce or increase
speed restrictions set forth in this subsection where such greater or lesser
speed is reasonable and safe under the conditions presented. (1978 Code §23-
188; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
   B.    Exceptions: Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, the following maximum speed limits are hereby determined and
declared reasonable on the following streets or portions of streets, when signs
are posted giving notice thereof:
Name Of Street Maximum Speed Limit (mph) Where Limit Applies
Name Of Street             Maximum Speed Limit (mph) Where Limit Applies
                                                     From Melrose Avenue to a
Camp Cardinal Boulevard    35                        point 550 feet south of
                                                     the City limits
Camp Cardinal Boulevard    25                        From the City limits to a
                                                     point 550 feet south
                                                     From the intersection with
Court Street               35                        Lindemann Drive east to
                                                     the City limits
                                                     From a point just north of
Dubuque Street             35                        the intersection with
                                                     Kimball Road north to the
                                                     City limits
                                                     From the intersection of
Gilbert Street             30                        Burlington to a point
                                                     1,800 feet south of the
                                                     intersection of Highway 6
                                                     From a point 1,800 feet
Gilbert Street             35                        south of the intersection
                                                     with Highway 6 south to
                                                     the City limits
                                                     From a point 300 feet
                                                     southwest of the
Iowa Highway 1             50                        intersection of Naples
                                                     Road to a point 200 feet
                                                     southwest of Sunset Street
                                                     From a point 200 feet
Iowa Highway 1             45                        southwest of Sunset Street
                                                     to a point 250 feet west
                                                     of Miller Avenue
                                                     From a point 250 feet west
Iowa Highway 1             35                        of Miller Avenue to a
                                                     point 200 feet west of
                                                     Orchard Street
                                                     From a point 200 feet west
                                                     of Orchard Street to the
Iowa Highway 1             30                        intersection of U.S.
                                                     Highways 6 and 218 and
                                                     Iowa Highway 1
                                                     From a point 315 feet
                                                     north of the intersection
Iowa Highway 1             45                        of Conklin Lane to a point
                                                     670 feet north of the
                                                     intersection of Northgate
                                                     Drive
                                                     From a point 300 feet
                                                     north of the intersection
Iowa Highway 1             35                        of Prairie du Chien Road
                                                     to a point 315 feet north
                                                     of the intersection of
                                                     Conklin Lane
                                                     From a point 600 feet
Iowa Highway 1             55                        south of the City limits
                                                     to the City limits
                                                     From its intersection with
Iowa Highway 1 (Burlington 25                        U.S. Highways 218 and 6 to
Street)                                              a point 150 feet east of
                                                     Van Buren Street
                                                     From a point 260 feet east
                                                     of the Hummingbird Lane to
                                                     150 feet west of Brentwood
Lower West Branch          35                        Drive, and from a point
                                                     200 feet east of Broadmoor
                                                     Lane to the centerline of
                                                     Taft Avenue
                                                     From the intersection with
Melrose Avenue             35                        Emerald Street west to the
                                                     west City limits
                                                     From the north City limits
Mormon Trek Boulevard      35                        to a point 620 feet
                                                     southeast of Iowa Highway
                                                     1
                                                     From a point 620 feet
Mormon Trek Boulevard      45                        southeast of Iowa Highway
                                                     1 to the intersection with
                                                     Old Highway 218
                                                     From the intersection with
Naples Avenue              30                        Iowa Highway 1 north to
                                                     the end of Naples Avenue
                                                     From the City limits to
Naples Avenue              35                        the intersection with Iowa
                                                     Highway 1
                                                     From the south City limits
Old U.S. Highway 218       45                        to the northern terminus
                                                     of Old U.S. Highway 218
                                                     From the intersection with
Park Road                  25                        Rocky Shore Drive east to
                                                     the intersection with
                                                     North Dubuque Street
                                                     From a point 100 feet west
Rochester Avenue           35                        of Post Road east to the
                                                     City limits
                                                     From the intersection with
Rohret Road                35                        Mormon Trek Boulevard west
                                                     to the City limits
                                                     From the intersection with
Scott Boulevard            35                        Iowa Highway 1 south to
                                                     U.S. Highway 6
                                                     From the intersection with
Soccer Park Road           30                        Lehman Avenue to the
                                                     entrance of the soccer
                                                     park
                                                     From a point 800 feet
                                                     south of the intersection
                                                     with U.S. Highway 6 and
South Riverside Drive      30                        Iowa Highway 1 north to
                                                     the intersection with U.S.
                                                     Highway 6 and Iowa Highway
                                                     1
                                                     From the northern terminus
                                                     of Old U.S. Highway 218 to
South Riverside Drive      45                        a point 800 feet south of
                                                     the intersection with U.S.
                                                     Highway 6 and Iowa Highway
                                                     1
                                                     From the intersection with
Sycamore Street            30                        U.S. Highway 6 south to
                                                     the City limits
                                                     Between Lower West Branch
Taft Avenue                35                        Road and American Legion
                                                     Road
                                                     From the east City limits
U.S. Highway 6             45                        to a point 500 feet west
                                                     of Fairmeadows Boulevard
                                                     From a point 500 feet west
U.S. Highway 6             40                        of Fairmeadows Boulevard
                                                     west to a point 450 feet
                                                     east of Keokuk Street
                                                     From a point 450 feet east
                                                     of Keokuk Street west to a
U.S. Highway 6             35                        point 700 feet east of the
                                                     intersection of U.S.
                                                     Highways 6 and 218 and
                                                     Iowa Highway 1
                                                     From a point 700 feet east
                                                     of the intersection of
                                                     U.S. Highways 6 and 218
U.S. Highway 6             30                        and Iowa Highway 1 west
                                                     and north to a point 1,150
                                                     feet west of the
                                                     intersection with
                                                     Riverside Drive
                                                     From a point 1,150 feet
U.S. Highway 6             35                        west of the intersection
                                                     with Riverside Drive, west
                                                     to the City limits
                                                     From the intersection of
First Avenue               25                        Bradford Drive south to
                                                     the intersection of U.S.
                                                     Highway 6
 
(1978 Code §23-189; amd. Ord. 96-3748, 9-10-1996; Ord. 97-3771, 1-28-1997; Ord.
97-3772, 1-28-1997; Ord. 98-3866, 12-15-1998; Ord. 99-3876, 2-23-1999; Ord. 05-
4157, 4-19-2005; Ord. 05-4177, 9-6-2005; Ord. 05-4179, 9-6-2005; Ord. 06-4231,
9-5-2006; Ord. 08-4302, 4-14-2008; Ord. 10-4379, 1-25-2010; Ord. 10-4389, 5-10-
2010; Ord. 11-4453, 10-18-2011; Ord. 14-4581, 5-6-2014; Ord. 17-4716, 8-1-2017;
Ord. 18-4764, 8-21-2018; Ord. 21-4865, 10-19-2021; Ord. 21-4867, 11-30-2021;
Ord. 22-4889, 10-3-2022)
   C.   School Speed Zones: Upon the basis of a traffic investigation, school
speed zones on the following streets are established in which the maximum speed
limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
through five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on Monday through Friday of each week, unless
otherwise specifically noted herein, after the City Manager, or designee, has
established signs to designate the zones: (Ord. 17-4719, 8-15-2017)
Name Of Street Where Limit Applies
Name Of Street       Where Limit Applies
American Legion Road From 150 feet east of Arlington Drive to a point 400 feet
                     east of Barrington Road
Barrington Road      From American Legion Road to a point 800 feet south
Benton Street        From Estron Street to Sunset Street
Church Street        From North Van Buren Street to North Dodge Street
DeForest Street      From Ridge Street to Spruce Street
                     From 350 feet north of Church Street to a point 200 feet
                     south of Fairchild Street effective during the following
Dodge Street         periods: 7:25 A.M. to 8:10 A.M. and 2:40 P.M. to 3:25 P.M.
                     Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday and 7:25 A.M. to 8:
                     10 A.M. and 1:40 P.M. to 2:25 P.M. on Thursday when school
                     is in session
Eastwood Drive       From Brookside Drive to Willow Street
Kennedy Parkway      From Camp Cardinal Boulevard to Camp Cardinal Place
Lakeside Drive       From Lombard Street to Miami Drive
Rider Street         From Black Spring Circle to Woolf Avenue
River Street         From Blackhawk Street to Woolf Avenue
Rochester Avenue     From Ashwood Drive to First Avenue
Rohret Road          From Wild Prairie Drive to Goldenrod Drive
Seymour Avenue       From Clark Street to Oakland Avenue
Southlawn Drive      From Muscatine Avenue to Eastwood Drive
Sycamore Street      From California Avenue to a point 300 feet south of
                     Lakeside Drive
                    From Lehman Avenue to a point 600 feet north of Daniel
                     Place
Washington Street    From 400 feet east of Westminster Street to Ravencrest
                     Drive
Whiting Avenue       From Ridge Drive to Kimball Road
Willow Street        From Muscatine Avenue to Eastwood Drive
 
(1978 Code §23-189.1; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3780, 4-22-1997;
Ord. 04-4134, 8-3-2004; Ord. 06-4231, 9-5-2006; Ord. 12-4487, 7-31-2012; Ord.
13-4561, 10-15-2013; Ord. 16-4666, 6-21-2016; Ord. 17-4716, 8-1-2017; Ord. 17-
4719, 8-15-2017; Ord. 19-4801, 8-20-2019; Ord. 23-4915, 11-6-2023)
   D.   Control Of Vehicle; Reduced Speed: A person operating a motor vehicle
shall have the vehicle under control at all times and shall reduce the speed to
a reasonable and proper rate:
      1.   When approaching and passing a person walking in the traveled
portion of the public highway.
      2.   When approaching and passing an animal being led, ridden or driven
upon a public highway.
      3.   When approaching and traversing a crossing or intersection of public
highways or a bridge, sharp turn, curve or steep descent in a public highway.
      4.   When approaching and passing an emergency warning device displayed
in accordance with rules adopted under the Code of Iowa, as amended, or an
emergency vehicle displaying a revolving or flashing light.
      5.   When approaching and passing a slow moving vehicle displaying a
reflective device as provided by the Code of Iowa, as amended.
      6.   When approaching and passing through a signposted construction or
maintenance zone upon the public highway. (1978 Code §23-190; amd. 1994 Code)
9-3-7: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner provided herein where other vehicles may be affected by such movement.
   B.   The signals required under the provisions of this title may be given
either by means of the hand and arm as provided in subsection C of this section
or by a mechanical or electrical directional signal device or light of a type
approved by the State Department of Transportation or its successor and
conforming to the provisions of this title.
   C.   All signals herein required which may be given by hand and arm shall,
when so given, be given from the left side of the vehicle, and the following
manner of interpretation thereof is suggested:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3.   Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1994
Code)
   D.   A signal of intention to turn right, left or stop shall be given
continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the vehicle before turning or stopping. (1978 Code §23-132)
9-3-8: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The designation of one-way streets or alleys by the City Manager, or designee,
shall not be effective until traffic control devices marking the designation
are in place, whether such designation is temporary or permanent. The
designation may include one or more lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. (1994 Code;
amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-3-9: GENERAL DRIVING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Driving On Right Hand Side Of Roadway; Exception: Upon all streets,
except one-way streets, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right side
of the street, and the driver of a slow moving vehicle shall drive as closely
as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the street. (1978 Code §23-124;
amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   B.   Driving On Laned Roadways: A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety. (1978 Code §23-125; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   C.   Responsibility For Unattended Motor Vehicles: A person driving or in
charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit the vehicle to stand unattended upon
any perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake and turning the
front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 17-4725, 9-19-2017)
   D.   Moving Vehicle Backward On Highway: A person shall not cause a vehicle
to be moved in a backward direction on a highway unless and until the vehicle
can be backed with reasonable safety and shall yield the right-of-way to any
approaching vehicle on the highway or intersecting highway which is so close as
to constitute an immediate hazard. (1978 Code §23-127; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-
3788, 6-3-1997)
   E.   Driving On Sidewalk: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive
within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. This
subsection shall not apply to any vehicle performing maintenance or
construction in a sidewalk area. (1978 Code §23-128; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-
1997)
9-3-10: DUTY OF DRIVER AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
   A.   When a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing
and warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates, flagperson or
otherwise of the immediate approach of a train, the vehicle driver shall stop
within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest
track of railroad and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain stopped when a crossing
gate is lowered or a flagperson gives a signal of the approach or passage of a
train. (1978 Code §23-131; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
9-3-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Unlawful Riding: Passengers shall not ride on any part of any vehicle
unless it is expressly designed either for passenger use or designed for
carrying livestock, merchandise or freight. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-
1997)
   B.   Following Too Closely: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
for the speed of such vehicles, the condition of the street or highway and the
vehicles thereon. (1978 Code §23-138; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   C.   Coasting: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive with the source
of motive power disengaged from the driving wheels except when disengagement is
necessary to stop or to shift gears. (1978 Code §23-122; amd. 1994 Code; Ord.
97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   D.   Vehicles In Bicycle Lane: No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a
designated bicycle path or lane. (1978 Code §23-126; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-
3788, 6-3-1997; Ord. 22-4877, 3-22-2022)
   E.   Driving On Closed Street: No vehicle shall be driven over any street or
portion thereof which has been lawfully closed to traffic. (1978 Code §23-129;
amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   F.   Driving Through Processions: No driver of any vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
the procession is in motion, provided such procession vehicles are
conspicuously so designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections
where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or peace officers. (1978
Code §23-130; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   G.   Squealing Tires:
      1.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to cause the motor
vehicle tires to make any loud, raucous, squealing, screeching noise or other
sounds caused by excessive acceleration from a stopped position or while a
vehicle is in motion. This subsection shall not apply to any noises or sounds
caused by the tires of motor vehicles when the vehicle is engaged in an
emergency situation where it is necessary to accelerate or stop the vehicle
immediately or suddenly in order to avoid contact with another motor vehicle or
with a pedestrian as long as the emergency situation is not that of the
driver's own making.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply to authorized police, fire and
emergency vehicles. (1978 Code §23-137; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997)
   H.    Reckless Driving: Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as
to indicate a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons, including
but not limited to persons using bicycles, electric assist bicycles, electric
scooters, and electric skateboards, or property is guilty of reckless driving.
(1978 Code §23-139; amd. Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997; Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-3-12: LANE USAGE:
Melrose Avenue from University Heights to Melrose Court shall consist of two
(2) 11-foot travel lanes, one (1) 11-foot center left turn lane, and one (1) 7-
foot shoulder on each side of the traveled way, including pavement markings
identifying such lane usage, except east of the intersection with Hawkins Drive
where one right turn lane for westbound traffic will be included, Melrose
Avenue from Melrose Court to South Grand Avenue shall consist of two (2) 11-
foot travel lanes, two (2) dedicated left turn lanes for eastbound traffic
turning north onto South Grand Avenue and westbound traffic turning south onto
Melrose Court, and one (1) 7-foot shoulder on each side of the traveled way,
including pavement markings identifying such lane usage, and Melrose Avenue
from South Grand Avenue to Byington Road shall consist of two (2) one-way,
eastbound, eleven foot (11') travel lanes and one (1) 5-foot shoulder on each
side of the traveled way, including pavement markings identifying such lane
usage. (Ord. 05-4174, 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
9-4-2: Method Of Parking
9-4-3: Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic
9-4-4: General Parking Restrictions
9-4-5: Temporary Parking Restrictions
9-4-6: Parking In Alleys
9-4-7: Vehicles On Parking Area
9-4-8: Reserved Parking Spaces
9-4-9: Parking During Snow Emergencies
9-4-10: Parking For Loading And Unloading
9-4-11: Parking For Persons With Physical Disabilities
9-4-12: Removal Of Parking Tags Or Marks Prohibited
9-4-13: Fire Lanes
9-4-14: Enforcement
9-4-15: Library Parking
9-4-16: Food Trucks
9-4-1: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in any of
the following places except to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or
signal:
      1.   Within an intersection.
      2.   On a crosswalk.
      3.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet (10')
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless
otherwise indicated by signs.
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of curb lines, or if
none, then within fifteen feet (15') of the intersection of property lines at
the intersection except at alleys.
      5.   Within ten feet (10') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic contol signal located at the side of the roadway.
      6.   Adjacent to the five (5) linear feet of curb closest to a fire
hydrant. Where the street has no curb, this prohibition applies to the five (5)
linear feet of road surface closest to the fire hydrant.
      7.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      8.   On a sidewalk.
      9.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction if
standing, stopping or parking would obstruct traffic.
      10.   On a bridge, except when authorized.
      11.   No commercial vehicles used for pick up or delivery of merchandise
or goods or passengers shall be stopped or parked in a lane of traffic when a
parking space, loading zone or any other space is available at the curb or in
an alley within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any building where pick up or
delivery is to be made.
      12.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      13.   Within one block of any fire 1.
      14.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station or along the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signed.
      15.   Upon the median strip within the corporate limits of the city.
      16.   During a snow emergency, upon a street on which parking is
prohibited by a snow emergency declaration.
      17.   On the “parking”, as defined in section
9-1-1 of this title.
      18.   In front of a curb cut or ramp located on public or private
property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
      19.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
      20.   In a bike rack, unless specifically authorized by the city manager
pursuant to subsection
9-8-4B of this title.
      21.   Adjacent to a curb extension even if it is a commercial vehicle and
there is no parking space, loading zone or other space available within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of any building where pick up or delivery is to be
made.
      22.   On a designated bicycle lane except as allowed in
9-8-4 B.
      23.   On City Plaza except as allowed in
10-5-4 .
   B.   Vehicles so located are subject to being towed pursuant to chapter 9 of
this title. (1994 Code; Ord. 09-4346, 6-16-2009; Ord. 11-4440, 8-2-2011, eff.
1-1-2012; Ord. 12-4464, 2-21-2012; Ord. 22-4877, 3-22-2022; Ord. 24-4936, 9-3-
2024; Ord. 25-4954, 5-6-2025)
9-4-2: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park such
vehicle in a roadway except when parallel with the edge of the roadway, with
the right wheels to the curb and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen inches (18") of the curb or property line, except as provided in this
title when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations. (1978 Code §23-246)
   B.   Angle Parking:
      1.   No angle parking shall be permitted upon any federal aid or state
highway within the city unless the Iowa department of transportation or its
successor has determined that the roadway is sufficiently wide to permit angle
parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
      2.   No angle parking shall be permitted in the city at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused to drive upon the left side of the
street. (1994 Code)
      3.   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city
manager, or designee, for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by
such signs or markings. (1978 Code §23-265; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
      4.   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city
manager, or designee, for angle parking, no vehicle shall be backed into an
angle parking stall except as provided by the provisions of this title. (1978
Code §23-264; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-3: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
   A.   All Noncommercial Districts: In any noncommercial district, no vehicle
shall stand, stop or park upon any traveled lane of a roadway in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1978 Code §23-
236)
   B.   Commercial Districts:
      1.   Noncommercial Vehicles: In commercial districts, standing, stopping
or parking in any traveled lane of a roadway by noncommercial vehicles is
prohibited, except as allowed under subsection
9-4-10B of this chapter. (Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006)
      2.   Commercial Vehicles:
         a.   On two-way streets in commercial districts, commercial vehicles
may stop, stand or park in a traveled lane while engaging in the loading or
unloading of property, provided ten feet (10') of width of roadway exists to
the right of the centerline for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
         b.   On one-way streets in commercial districts, commercial vehicles
may stop, stand or park in a traveled lane while engaging in the loading or
unloading of property, provided ten feet (10') of width of the roadway is open
for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
      3.   Compliance Required; Time Limit: Vehicles stopped, standing or
parked in the traveled lane of a roadway shall do so in accordance with the
above provisions, but in no event shall any vehicle be parked longer than
fifteen (15) minutes. (1978 Code §23-236)
9-4-4: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Public Or Private Property: No person shall park a vehicle upon public
or private property without the consent of the owner or person in possession of
such property or the agents thereof. Any vehicle parked in violation of this
subsection may be ticketed and/or towed pursuant to the following procedure:
The police department is hereby authorized to act as an agent of any owner or
other lawful possessor of real property and to tow or cause to be towed,
pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, any motor vehicle that has been
parked or placed upon real property without the consent of the owner or person
in lawful possession of such property or the agents thereof. However, prior to
the towing of any motor vehicle, the owner, lawful possessor or the agents
thereof shall, in writing, authorize the police to act as agent therefor and
shall further agree to notify the county sheriff as required by the code of
Iowa, as amended, and shall also agree to release, defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from any damages, claim
of damages or liability resulting from such towing. The owner or lawful
possessor of such motor vehicle may reclaim such vehicle pursuant to the code
of Iowa, as amended.
   B.   One-Way Streets And Roadways:
      1.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left side of a one-
way street when such parking is prohibited by official signs.
      2.   If a street or highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon the roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle on the left side of the one-way roadway unless such
parking is permitted by official signs. (1994 Code)
   C.   Residential Districts:
      1.   Trailers, semitrailers and other nonmotorized vehicles of any type
and size shall not be parked on any street in a residential district, except as
herein provided and excepting bicycles. Such vehicles may park for the purpose
of loading or unloading or making local deliveries, but in no instance shall
such activity exceed a period of forty eight (48) hours. (1978 Code §23-252;
amd. 1994 Code)
      2.   Motor vehicles of any type that exceed seven feet (7') in height or
eight feet (8') in width or twenty feet (20') in length shall not be parked on
any street in a residential district, except as herein provided. Such vehicles
may park for the purpose of loading or unloading or making local deliveries,
but in no event shall said activity exceed a period of forty eight (48) hours.
      3.   Commercial vehicles which transport detonable materials or flammable
solids, liquids and gases shall not be parked on any street in a residential
district, except for the purpose of making local deliveries. (1978 Code §23-
252)
   D.   Adjacent To Schools: No person shall park a motor vehicle in a place
which has been designated and signed by the city manager, or designee, to
prohibit parking adjacent to a school.
   E.   Narrow Streets: No person shall park a motor vehicle on any street when
the width of the roadway is less than twenty feet (20') and when the city
manager, or designee, has posted official signs to prohibit parking on the
street. When a street does not exceed thirty feet (30') in width, parking along
one side of the street may be prohibited when the city manager, or designee,
has posted official signs to prohibit such parking.
   F.   Near Hazardous Or Congested Places: No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle in a hazardous or congested place which has been designated and
signed by the city manager, or designee, to prohibit stopping, standing or
parking. (1994 Code)
   G.   Sale Or Repairs Of Vehicles: No person shall park a vehicle upon any
roadway for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
      2.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1978 Code §23-239)
   H.   In Excess Of Forty Eight Hours: No vehicle shall be parked or remain at
the same location upon any street, alley or public ground at any time for a
period longer than forty eight (48) hours. Vehicles must be moved at least
twenty feet (20') in distance during each forty eight (48) hour time period in
order to avoid penalty under this subsection.
   I.   Parking Limited To Intended Use: Except as otherwise provided herein,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for more than
ten (10) minutes for the principal purpose of conducting commercial activity
from said vehicle, including, but not limited to, selling merchandise and food.
   J.   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the roadways,
streets, or highways available to moving traffic, unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement
of other traffic, including pedestrians and bicycles on sidewalks, shoulders,
or bicycle lanes. No person shall leave a door open on the side of a vehicle
available to moving traffic, including pedestrians and bicycles on sidewalks,
shoulders or bicycle lanes, for a period of time longer than necessary to load
or unload passengers. (Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; amd. Ord. 99-3875, 2-23-1999;
Ord. 06-4222, 7-18-2006; Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-4-5: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The department is authorized to post temporary traffic signs
prohibiting parking along the route of a parade or other approved special event
and along streets or portions thereof which are scheduled for service or repair
work, including, but not limited to, resurfacing, maintenance, repair,
cleaning, oiling or snow removal.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the street
along such posted route within the area where parking is prohibited by such
signs. Vehicles parked in violation of this provision may be towed if the signs
posted indicate "Towaway Zone".
   C.   Temporary traffic signs constructed in accordance with standards
established by the city manager, or designee, shall be placed within ten feet
(10') of the traveled portion of the roadway or curb along that side of the
street on which the parking prohibition is to be in effect. The signs may be
mounted on temporary supports, on existing street signposts, on parking meters
or in accordance with standards established by the city manager, or designee.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle so as
to block an alley, whether attended or unattended.
   B.   Alleys In Commercial Districts:
      1.   In commercial districts, the city manager, or designee, is
authorized to designate certain alleys as "No Parking Anytime" on one side of
the alley and on the other side of the same alley, "Loading Zone". When such
signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in
the middle of the alley or on the side of the alley designated "No Parking
Anytime", and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the side
of the alley designated "Loading Zone" for a period in excess of the time limit
stated on the sign. Vehicles found parked in violation of this provision may be
towed if the signs posted indicate "Towaway Zone". (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-
3765, 1-14-1997)
      2.   In alleys in the commercial district which are not so marked, it
shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period exceeding ten
(10) minutes. (Ord. 09-4345, 6-16-2009)
   C.   Alleys In Noncommercial Districts: It shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle upon or in alleys in noncommercial districts.
   D.   Emergency Access To Alleys:
      1.   If access to an alley is required to provide emergency police, fire,
medical, utility or other services, the owner or driver of a vehicle parked
therein shall immediately move the vehicle from the alley.
      2.   To assure access of emergency vehicles to alleys in the commercial
district, the driver of a vehicle standing in an alley to load or unload
pursuant to subsection B of this section shall not leave the vehicle unattended
for more than ten (10) minutes.
      3.   If a vehicle must be moved to provide emergency access and the
owner, driver or other authorized person cannot be located, the department may
cause the vehicle to be towed from the alley and impounded as provided in
chapter 9 of this title.
      4.   All vehicles which are parked in alleys pursuant to subsections A
and B of this section are subject to the provisions of this subsection. (1994
Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-4-7: VEHICLES ON PARKING AREA:
   A.   Generally: The parking of motor vehicles upon parking areas shall not
be allowed unless the city manager, or designee, on the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation, establishes parking on the area in a designated
commercial zone by installing and maintaining traffic controls.
   B.   Standards: If the city manager, or designee, establishes parking of
motor vehicles upon the parking area within a designated area, parking shall be
for the use of the general public. The following standards shall apply:
      1.   The curb adjacent to the roadway shall be cut to provide ingress and
egress for the area specified.
      2.   The parking area designated shall be paved with equivalent material
used in paving the adjacent roadway, and adequate drainage shall be provided.
      3.   In parking areas, no vehicle shall park:
         a.   Within ten feet (10') of a crosswalk.
         b.   Within five feet (5') of a driveway other than the ingress and
egress drive of the designated area.
         c.   Adjacent to the five (5) linear feet of curb closest to a fire
hydrant. Where the street has no curb, this prohibition applies to the five (5)
linear feet of road surface closest to the fire hydrant.
      4.   No vehicle shall park in such designated area so as to leave less
than five feet (5') of the sidewalk for the use of pedestrians. (1978 Code §23-
245; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 09-4346, 6-16-2009)
9-4-8: RESERVED PARKING SPACES:
   A.   Reserved Space For Funerals: Where it is necessary to hold a funeral
service in a metered zone, the funeral director may be authorized by the city
manager, or designee, to post an approved "No Parking" sign. Such signs shall
be posted by the funeral director before the service at a time equal to the
maximum allowed in the parking zone plus one-half (1/2) hour. All such signs
must be removed by the funeral director within one-half (1/2) hour after the
close of the funeral. All funeral "No Parking" signs shall be furnished by the
funeral directors and be of a design approved by the city manager, or designee.
(1978 Code §23-248; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
   B.   Reserved Space For Construction:
      1.   Permit Required; Fee:
         a.   Contractors doing construction or excavation in, by or near a
metered parking space may reserve one or more such metered spaces upon showing
that the reservation of the space is necessary to accomplish the work. The fee
for reservation of a metered parking space for each enforcement day or fraction
thereof shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of
this code.
         b.   All payments shall be made in advance of the issuance of such
permits. Hoods shall be placed on such reserved meter spaces. Meter hoods shall
bear the following message: "No Parking, Reserved Stall, Commercial Vehicles
Only. Violators Will Be Towed". When it is necessary to remove meters and posts
for construction, the contractor shall place a sign bearing the same message
adjacent to each reserved space. The contractor will be charged any costs
incurred to remove and replace such meters.
      2.   Contractor's Guarantee: A contractor who desires to reserve a meter
space agrees to maintain the meter hoods or required signage and to indemnify
and defend the city for any claims, costs or damages which result from the
reservation of such space.
      3.   Unauthorized Use Of Reserved Space:
         a.   No person shall park a vehicle in a reserved meter space without
authorization of the contractor reserving same.
         b.   Vehicles parked in a reserved space may be towed as provided by
chapter 9 of this title. (1978 Code §23-249; amd. 1994 Code)
9-4-9: PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES 1 :
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a system to declare
and notify persons of snow emergencies and enforce the provisions for same.
Without such provisions, cars remain parked on city streets, impairing
effective plowing and snow removal. Consequently, potential hazards are created
by unplowed snow and cars parking too far from the curb.
B. Parking Regulations During Snow Emergencies And Exemptions: The city manager
or designee shall declare a snow emergency when the city manager or designee
finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, freezing rain or on the basis of a
forecast by the United States weather bureau or on the basis of any other
weather service, that weather conditions will make it necessary for motor
vehicle traffic to be expedited and for parking on certain city streets to be
prohibited or restricted for snow plowing or other purposes. The following
parking regulations shall be in effect during snow emergencies:
      1.   On all streets where parking is allowed on both sides, vehicles
shall be parked on only the even street numbered side of the street on even
days of the month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      2.   On all streets where parking is allowed on both sides, vehicles
shall be parked on only the odd street numbered side of the street on odd days
of the month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      3.   On all streets where parking is allowed on only one side, vehicles
shall be parked on only the even street numbered side of the street on even
days of the month after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall be parked on only
the odd street numbered side of the street on odd days of the month after eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. No parking shall be permitted on the side of the street
where parking is prohibited.
      4.   All other posted parking regulations and prohibitions shall remain
in effect. For example, on all streets where odd-even calendar parking or other
restrictions are posted, those restrictions shall continue in force and effect
notwithstanding subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
      5.   These regulations shall not apply to metered parking spaces,
designated loading zones, and those streets located within the central business
district, which, starting at the intersection of Burlington and Gilbert
Streets, is bounded by Iowa Avenue to the north, Capitol Street to the west,
Burlington Street to the south and Gilbert Street to the east, with the
entirety of the right of way of said central business district included within
this exemption.
   C.   Effective Time Of Snow Emergency: A snow emergency shall take effect
not earlier than four (4) hours after it is declared, except if a snow
emergency is declared after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., it shall not take effect
until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, unless otherwise indicated in the
declaration. A snow emergency shall be in force for a minimum of forty eight
(48) hours after taking effect unless canceled or changed under subsection D of
this section.
   D.   Declaration And Notice:
      1.   The city manager or designee shall declare a snow emergency by
written signed notice, filed with the city clerk, stating the beginning and
ending time for the period of snow emergency, which ending time shall be a
minimum of forty eight (48) hours after taking effect. If the office of the
city clerk is closed, the city manager or designee shall file such notice
promptly when the office next is open during normal business hours.
      2.   The city manager or designee may cancel such declaration or change
the beginning or ending time. Notice as provided in subsection D1 of this
section shall be given for such cancellations or changes.
      3.   The city manager or designee shall inform the Iowa City/Cedar Rapids
area radio and television stations and the Iowa City newspapers of the snow
emergency declaration and when the snow emergency parking regulations for Iowa
City will be in effect and ask that public service announcements be made.
      4.   The public works director or designee shall post information
concerning the snow emergency declaration, when the snow emergency parking
regulations for Iowa City will be in effect and summarizing the regulations on
the city website and shall post signs on all major highways and streets
entering the city at or reasonably near the city limits, informing motorists
that a snow emergency has been declared and alternate side parking is required.
      5.   The city manager or designee may take such other actions to inform
the public of the snow emergency as appropriate.
   E.   Towing Of Improperly Parked Vehicles: Any vehicle found to be parked
where not permitted during a snow emergency will be issued a notice of parking
violation pursuant to section
9-4-14 of this chapter and towed to a place designated for the storage of
impounded vehicles pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 08-4321, 11-18-2008)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 6-1-2K and sections
  10-5-5 and
  16-1A-8 of this code.
9-4-10: PARKING FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING:
   A.   Loading Zones Designated: Loading zones and passenger loading zones
shall be established and marked by signs. (1994 Code)
   B.   Parking In Passenger Loading Zones: No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the loading or
unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during
hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are effective, and
then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. Any vehicle in a
passenger loading zone shall be attended by either a driver or valet at all
times. (1978 Code §23-288; amd. Ord. 06-4241, 11-14-2006)
   C.   Standing In Loading Zones Designated For Loading And Unloading
Property:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a place marked
as a loading zone, except to load or unload property, during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. A stop for loading or
unloading property shall not exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
         b.   A vehicle driver may stop temporarily at a loading zone to load
or unload passengers when stopping will not interfere with any vehicle waiting
to enter or about to enter the zone to load or unload property.
      2.   Commercial Vehicle Loading Zone: Only commercial vehicles which are
properly designated as such may stop, stand or park in a loading zone
designated "Commercial Vehicle Loading Zone". No person shall stop, stand or
park a commercial vehicle in any place marked as a commercial vehicle loading
zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect
except to load and unload commercial property. No stop shall exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
   D.   Public Carrier Stops And Stands:
      1.   Established: Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger and common carrier motor vehicles shall be established by the city
manager, or designee, and marked by official signs. No persons shall stop,
stand, or park within sixty feet (60') in advance of a public carrier stop
denoting a "No Parking" sign or symbol.
      2.   Stopping, Standing And Parking Of Buses And Taxicabs Regulated:
         a.   Buses:
            (1)   The driver of a bus shall not stand or park a bus on a street
any place except a designated bus stand.
            (2)   When the driver of a bus enters a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone to load or unload passengers or baggage, the right front
wheel of the bus shall be no more than eighteen inches (18") from the curb, and
the bus shall parallel the curb so as not to unduly impede other vehicular
traffic.
         b.   Taxicabs: The driver of a taxicab may temporarily stop in
accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place while
actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
      3.   Restricted Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands: No person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab
in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated
and appropriately signed, except the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop to load or unload passengers if the vehicle does not interfere
with any bus or taxicab entering such zone.
   E.   Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To Curb: Loading or unloading from a
vehicle backed to park at an angle to the curb shall be lawful only pursuant to
special permit issued for that purpose by the city manager, or designee. The
permit shall contain special terms or conditions and may be issued to the owner
of the vehicle or to the owner or lessee of the real property to which the
vehicle backs and parks.
   F.   Curbside Pick-up and Delivery: No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in a space that has been officially designated and signed for Curbside
Pick-up and Delivery for more than ten (10) minutes and except to engage in
curbside pick-up and delivery.
   G.   Enforcement: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of
this section for any owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation
of this section. Every thirty (30) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation
after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. In the case of passenger loading zones and curbside pick-up and
delivery spaces every ten (10) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation
after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be provided in the
schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1978 Code §§
9-4-11: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES:
   A.   In addition to the parking spaces designated by the city manager, or
designee, for use by persons with physical disabilities, the owner of private
property parking may also designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of
persons with physical disabilities. The private property parking owner shall
clearly and prominently mark parking spaces so designated.
   B.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any parking space
designated and signed as reserved for the use of persons with physical
disabilities unless the vehicle displays an identification device issued
pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended. A marked access aisle leading to any
parking space designated and reserved for the use of persons with physical
disabilities shall be considered part of the parking space.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 25-4950, 4-1-2025)
9-4-12: REMOVAL OF PARKING TAGS OR MARKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall remove, alter or destroy any tag or mark placed upon any
vehicle by a peace officer, but once the tag or mark has been placed, the
driver of such vehicle may remove the tag prior to driving the vehicle. (1978
Code §23-247; amd. 1994 Code)
9-4-13: FIRE LANES:
   A.   Designation: The fire chief or authorized representative shall approve,
require, and designate public and/or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for
the efficient and effective operation of fire vehicles, personnel, and
apparatus. Only those fire lanes approved by the fire chief or authorized
representative will be enforced. A fire lane shall be posted with signs at
least every forty (40) linear feet. Said fire lane shall be deemed to encompass
that area within a twenty foot (20') radius of any fire lane sign or markings
posted pursuant to this section. Posted signs will comply with the "Manual Of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and at a minimum contain the following
language: "FIRE LANE NO PARKING". Markings may include a painted yellow striped
area measuring eight feet (8') from the curb/pavement edge and extending twenty
feet (20') either side of a posted sign. Upon application to and approval by
the fire chief or authorized representative, a private property owner may be
granted a fire lane designation for such property. Installation of approved
signage on private property will be the responsibility of the permit applicant/
property owner. If an applicant/property owner is required by the city to post
a fire lane, upon request, the signs will be provided by the city at cost or
the applicant/property owner can obtain an approved sign from a vendor. When an
area is posted as a fire lane as provided herein, it shall be presumed that
said area is designated as a fire lane by or with the authority of the fire
chief.
   B.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to have an unattended vehicle
standing, stopped, or parked in or otherwise blocking or obstructing any
portion of a designated fire lane at any time. Signs and markings shall be
posted and placed to identify such fire lanes and to serve notice that
standing, stopping, and/or parking is prohibited therein. Such illegally parked
vehicles will be subject to fines and/or towing at the expense of the owner.
All designated fire lane signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible
condition at all times and replaced when necessary to ensure adequate
visibility. This maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permit
applicant/property owner.
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
   D.   Enforcement: It will be the responsibility of the police department to
enforce the provisions of this section as they apply to both public and private
properties. The Iowa City police department is hereby authorized to ticket,
tow, or cause to be towed, pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, any
vehicle that has been parked or placed upon the public or private street in
violation of the parking laws of this city and/or state. This shall serve as
appropriate notice of such authorization to the Iowa City police department
under the code of Iowa, as amended. By applying for a fire lane designation,
any applicant/private property owner and its employees and assigns hereby agree
to release, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, and
agents from any damages or liability resulting from any ticketing or towing
authorized under this section.
   E.   Presumption Of Liability: The fact that a vehicle that is illegally
parked is registered in the name of a person will be considered prima facie
proof that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of such
parking. (Ord. 98-3846, 8-25-1998)
9-4-14: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation of this chapter.
With the exception of sections
9-4-10 and
9-4-15 of this chapter, every two (2) hours that a vehicle remains in violation
after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be as provided in the
schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-
6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005)
9-4-15: LIBRARY PARKING:
   A.   Designation: The six (6) northernmost angled parking spaces on the west
side of Linn Street directly adjacent to the front of the Iowa City public
library are designated as "library parking" spaces.
   B.   Spaces: The "library parking" space to the far north is further
designated as a "library outside book drop off" space. The five (5) spaces
directly to the south of the "library outside book drop off" space are further
designated as "library patron parking" spaces.
   C.   Signage: Each space shall contain signage that includes said
designation of "library patron parking" and "library outside book drop off".
The "library patron parking" signage shall include notification that the Iowa
City public library hours are posted on the library entrance door.
   D.   Parking: During the hours posted on the library entrance door, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a "library patron parking" space
except for the sole purpose of allowing a passenger to go directly to and from
the Iowa City public library, and said stop shall not exceed twenty (20)
minutes. At no time shall a person stop, stand or park a vehicle in the
"library outside book drop off" space except for the sole purpose of allowing a
passenger to deposit a book or other item in one of the drop off boxes located
on the outside east wall of the Iowa City public library and to return directly
to said vehicle, and said stop shall not exceed five (5) minutes. For purposes
of this section, "passenger" includes the driver of the vehicle.
   E.   Violations: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of
this section for any owner or driver to permit a vehicle to remain in violation
of the "library patron parking" or "library outside book drop off" provision.
Every ten (10) minutes that a vehicle remains in violation of said provisions
after the vehicle is initially cited shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. The fees for each such parking offense shall be as provided in the
schedule of fees set out in title 3, chapter 4 of this code. Additionally, any
vehicle in violation of the "library outside book drop off" provision is
subject to being towed consistent with the provisions of section
9-9-2 of this title. (Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-
4217, 6-27-2006; Ord. 20-4826, 7-7-2020; Ord. 23-4897, 3-7-2023)
9-4-16: FOOD TRUCKS:
   A.   Definitions:
   DOWNTOWN ZONE: The areas illustrated on the map in subsection H of this
section.
   FOOD TRUCK: A motorized vehicle specially equipped to prepare and sell food
items to the general public.
   OPERATE: To offer for sale food and beverage items to the general public; it
does not mean either loading or unloading food or beverage items in bulk or
other materials.
   RESTAURANT: As that term is defined in section
10-3-1 of this code.
   TRUCK PERMIT: Written authorization by the city to operate a food truck on
public right of way as provided in this section.
   B.   Prohibited: No person may operate a food truck on public right of way
without a food truck permit as provided herein.
   C.   Permit:
      1.   An application for a food truck permit shall be filed with the city
manager or designee on a form provided by the city.
      2.   The permit shall require the permittee to pay on behalf of the city
all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability
imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of public
property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any person or
persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense
and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of
public property and the public right of way.
      3.   The permit shall require the permittee to obtain insurance in an
amount determined by the city's risk manager.
      4.   The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the application for
a permit in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the application
being filed. The city manager or designee shall grant the application and issue
a permit if the requirements set forth in the administrative rules have been
met.
      5.   The applicant may appeal the denial in the same manner as mobile
vending permits in title 10 of this code.
      6.   The city manager or designee, or city council if issued following an
appeal, may revoke a food truck permit as provided in the administrative rules.
A permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as appealing the
issuance or denial of a permit.
      7.   The administrative rules may limit the number of permits granted.
      8.   Permits shall be issued for one year.
      9.   The permittee shall not offer tobacco or alcoholic beverages for
sale.
      10.   The sale, transfer, or assignment of a permit is expressly
prohibited.
   D.   Location: No person shall operate, and no permittee shall allow a food
truck to be operated, on public right of way in the following locations:
      1.   Inside the downtown zone;
      2.   Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an entrance to a restaurant;
      3.   In a residential zone, as defined in the zoning code; or
      4.   In a loading zone.
The administrative rules may expand the areas where a food truck is prohibited
from operating.
   E.   Allowed Operation: Notwithstanding any other provision in the code, a
person may:
      1.   Operate a food truck in two (2) metered spaces if the parking meters
for both spaces are operational.
      2.   Operate for up to three (3) hours in a metered space with an
established time period of two (2) hours or less if the meter is operational.
      3.   Back a food truck into and park and operate it in an angled stall.
   F.   Fees: Fees for food truck permits shall be set by resolution of the
city council.
   G.   Rules: The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules
not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this
section. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the city clerk and
available on the city's website.
   H.   Downtown Zone:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2540.png]
 
(Ord. 15-4618, 4-21-2015)
   I.   Pilot Program: Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, the
city manager is authorized to establish a pilot program for food trucks to
operate with a permit during the late evening and early morning hours in the
downtown zone. (Ord. 17-4691, 2-7-2017)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING METER ZONES AND PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Parking Meter Zones; Parking Meter Fees
9-5-2: Purchase, Installation And Regulation Of Meters
9-5-3: Parking In Metered Zones
9-5-4: Use Of Parking Lots
9-5-5: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
9-5-6: Penalties; Parking Tickets
9-5-1: PARKING METER ZONES; PARKING METER FEES:
Parking in parking meter zones shall be regulated by parking meters for the
hours designated by the city manager, or designee, and for every day, except
Sundays and except legal holidays, designated by the city council. The fees for
such parking shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4
of this code. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-5-2: PURCHASE, INSTALLATION AND REGULATION OF METERS:
   A.   The city is hereby authorized to provide for the purchase, acquisition,
installation, operation, maintenance, regulation and use of the parking meters
provided for in this chapter and to maintain the meters in good working
condition.
   B.   Parking meters installed in the various meter zones, which zones are
established in this chapter, shall be placed upon the curb adjacent to the
individual parking places herein described. Each parking meter shall be placed
or set in such a manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking
space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use.
   C.   Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the
legal parking time established by the city manager, or designee, and, when
operating, shall indicate whether the meter is being used for legal parking,
and on expiration of the time for legal parking, such meter shall indicate
illegal or over parking. (1978 Code §23-275; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
9-5-3: PARKING IN METERED ZONES:
   A.   When a vehicle is parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter, or
in a space utilizing multispace parking meters or a pay station as provided for
in this chapter, the driver of the vehicle shall immediately deposit or cause
to be deposited the proper coin in the parking meter or at the parking pay
station for the time the parking space is to be occupied by the vehicle and put
the meter or pay station device governing the parking space in operation.
Failure to deposit the coin(s) and put the meter in operation or to deposit
such coin(s) in the pay station device governing such parking space shall
constitute a breach of this title and shall subject the driver or owner to the
penalty prescribed. Upon the deposit of such coin and placing the meter or pay
station parking device in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by the vehicle during the period of the parking time which has been prescribed
for the part of the street or parking lot in which the parking space is located
and as designated on the parking meter or pay station. If the vehicle shall
remain parked in the parking space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and
point, indicate such illegal parking, or if such parking space is governed by a
pay station and time has expired for use of the parking space governed by the
pay station, and in such event, the vehicle shall be considered as parked
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and the parking in any
such part of a street or parking space where such meter is located or which is
governed by a pay station shall be a violation of this chapter and punished as
set forth herein. (Ord. 04-4116, 4-6-2004)
   B.   Commercial vehicles may park in the parking zone to load or to unload
merchandise, without depositing coins, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes. If any vehicle is parked longer than fifteen (15) minutes, the driver
or owner of the vehicle is subject to the penalties prescribed in this title.
(1978 Code §23-276; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter
for any owner or driver to permit any vehicle to remain in any parking space
designated by any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle is parked beyond the established time period, or is
governed by any pay station device for which the time has expired for use of
the parking space. Every hour that the vehicle remains after the established
time period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 04-4116, 4-
6-2004)
   D.   Penalties for violating the provisions of this section shall be as
provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1978 Code
§23-276; amd. 1994 Code)
9-5-4: USE OF PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Fees:
      1.   Fees are hereby established for parking on city parking lots, and
those fees shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of
this code.
      2.   In each lot designated by the city council by resolution, the city
manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to install such mechanical devices
that will reasonably assure that each driver or owner of any motor vehicle
parking on such lots has paid the fee for the privilege of parking a motor
vehicle. The times during the day or night, the length of time that a vehicle
may be parked and the days in which a fee shall be charged shall be set by the
city manager or designee. The rate, hours and days for the permitted use shall
be posted at the entrance to any nonmetered lot in which a fee is to be charged
for the privilege of parking.
   B.   Method Of Parking: No driver or owner of a motor vehicle shall stop,
stand or park the vehicle in any parking lot owned or operated by the city
except in the places and in the manner designated by a meter and/or a marked
stall.
   C.   Time Limit: No driver or owner shall stop, stand or park any motor
vehicle on any parking lot owned or operated by the city for a period exceeding
twenty four (24) hours unless a special emergency exists and the driver or
owner has obtained written permission from the chief of police.
   D.   Prohibited Parking:
      1.   Vehicles Exceeding Weight: No driver or owner shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle having a gross load of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds,
including the vehicle itself, on any parking lot owned or operated by the city.
      2.   Blocking Driveways Or Aisles: It shall be unlawful for any owner or
driver of any motor vehicle to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any
parking lot owned or operated by the city so as to block or partially block a
driveway or aisle. (1978 Code §23-277)
      3.   Parking Limited To Intended Use: Except as otherwise provided
herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any parking lot owned
and operated by the city for more than ten (10) minutes for the principal
purpose of conducting commercial activity from said vehicle, including, but not
limited to, selling merchandise and food.
   E.   Unlawful Deposits: No driver or owner shall place or leave or deposit
any object other than a motor vehicle upon any parking lot owned or operated by
the city unless a special permit is obtained from the chief of police. (1978
Code §23-277)
   F.   Permit Lots And Spaces: A parking permit system for city lots, city
ramps, and parking spaces designated for permit parking is hereby established
for designation by the city manager or designee. The fee for permits shall be
as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code. The
permit holder is entitled to park in the city parking lot or parking space
designated for such purpose, and the permit shall be issued by the city manager
or designee. No driver or owner other than a permit holder shall stop, stand or
park any motor vehicle in any area in the city owned lot or parking spaces
designated by such signs or other markers for the exclusive use of permit
holders. The transportation director is authorized to establish administrative
rules for parking permits not inconsistent with any ordinance or policy adopted
by the city council. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the city clerk
and available on the city website. Permit holders must comply with the
administrative rules.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997; Ord. 06-4222, 7-18-2006; Ord. 11-
4440, 8-2-2011, eff. 1-1-2012; Ord. 13-4553, 9-17-2013; Ord. 24-4938, 9-17-
2024)
9-5-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
driver or owner to:
   A.   Parking Overtime: Cause, allow or permit any vehicle to be parked
overtime or beyond the prescribed time period.
   B.   Damage To Parking Meters Or Devices: Deface, injure, tamper with, open,
wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or
mechanical device installed under the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Use Of Slugs: Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or
mechanical device any slug, device, metallic substance or any substance, except
coins set forth in this chapter or the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of
this code. (1978 Code §23-278; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Markings: The city shall paint lines or markings designating each
parking space. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park any
vehicle across any line or marking or to park such vehicle in such a position
that the same will not be entirely within the designated area. (1978 Code §23-
277; amd. 1994 Code)
9-5-6: PENALTIES; PARKING TICKETS 1 :
   A.   Parking Violations: The penalties for violations of parking regulations
shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
Parking violations may be charged on a notice of fine (ticket), and if the
driver or owner charged admits the violation, payment of the scheduled penalty
shall be paid to the department of finance. If the driver or owner charged
desires to contest the violation, the violation may be appealed to the parking
violation review panel as provided in subsection B of this section or may be
charged and filed with the district court on a standard traffic citation
pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, as provided in subsection C of this
section.
   B.   Administrative Review: A driver or owner charged with a parking
violation may request an administrative review within twenty (20) calendar days
of the date the parking ticket was issued. The request shall be made on the
form provided by the city and shall be reviewed by a three (3) member panel
made up of the parking superintendent, a member of the police department and
one other city staff member. The panel shall consider the defenses or
mitigating circumstances set forth on the review request form and shall base
its findings and determination thereon. The panel may dismiss any notice of
fine (ticket) for good cause, and upon dismissal, the city shall refund the
fine money paid by the appealing party, less any unpaid parking fines then
owing by the driver or owner charged.
   C.   Violation Not Dismissed By Administrative Review: A driver or owner
charged with a parking violation on a notice of fine (ticket) whose violation
was reviewed but not dismissed by the administrative review panel may request
that the violation be charged on a standard traffic citation and tried in
magistrate court as a simple misdemeanor. If the driver or owner is found not
guilty or the charge is dismissed by the magistrate, the city shall refund any
fine money paid for the violation. If found guilty, the driver or owner shall
be credited with all fine money previously paid for the violation. (1994 Code)
   D.   Returned Checks: If any check or automatic bank debit for payment of
parking fees, charges, fines, or penalties is returned, for any reason, to the
city from the financial institution from which it is written, a service fee
shall be assessed identical to the service fee charged for returned checks or
automatic bank withdrawals for water service, as provided in section
3-4-3 of this code. (Ord. 09-4347, 6-16-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
   9-1-5, "Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Violations", of this title.
CHAPTER 6
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Right Of Way
9-6-2: Pedestrian's Use Of Roadways
9-6-3: Pedestrians Subject To Signals
9-6-4: Sight Impaired Pedestrians
9-6-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle must yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the
roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, except as otherwise provided in this title. (1978 Code §23-212)
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise caution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon a roadway. (1978 Code §23-218)
   C.   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to pedestrian
workers engaged in maintenance or construction work on a highway whenever the
driver is notified of the presence of such workers by a flagperson or a warning
sign. (1978 Code §23-218; amd. 1994; Ord. 24-4926, 6-4-2024)
9-6-2: PEDESTRIAN'S USE OF ROADWAYS:
   A.   Crossing At Other Than Crosswalks:
      1.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection or where a
specified overhead pedestrian crossing is available shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles upon the roadway, except the city may restrict such a
crossing by ordinance.
      2.   Where traffic control signals are in operation at a marked crosswalk
not an intersection, pedestrians shall cross only in the marked crosswalk.
(1978 Code §23-213; amd. 1994 Code)
      3.   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in any commercial zone other
than in a crosswalk. (1978 Code §23-215)
   B.   Crossing At Right Angles: Except where otherwise indicated by a
crosswalk or other official traffic control device, a pedestrian shall cross a
roadway at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite
curb. (1978 Code §23-214)
   C.   Use Of Crosswalks: Whenever practicable, pedestrians shall walk upon
the right half of crosswalks. (1978 Code §23-219; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Walking On Highways: Pedestrians walking on or along a highway where
sidewalks and/or curb improvements are not present shall walk on the left side
of such highway. (1978 Code §23-217)
   E.   Solicitation Of Rides:
      1.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection or this title shall be construed to
prevent any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway,
not ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any vehicle. (1978 Code §23-220)
9-6-3: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS:
Pedestrians traveling through intersections regulated by lighted pedestrian
crossing signals, as defined below, shall obey such signals. Pedestrians
traveling through intersections where no pedestrian crossing signals are
present shall be subject to traffic control signals as otherwise declared in
this title. At all other places, pedestrians otherwise shall be accorded the
privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
title. Pedestrian crossing signals are defined as:
   A.   Steady Walking Person: A steady walking person signal represents
"walk". A pedestrian facing this signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right of way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the steady walking
person signal indication is first shown.
   B.   Flashing Upraised Hand: A flashing upraised hand signal represents "do
not walk". A pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction
of the signal indication, but any pedestrian who has already started to cross
on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed out of the traveled
way.
   C.   Steady Upraised Hand: A steady upraised hand signal represents "do not
walk". A pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication. Any pedestrian who has already entered the roadway on a steady
walking person signal shall have completed crossing through the traveled right
of way prior to the symbol turning to a steady upraised hand. (Ord. 07-4266, 6-
19-2007)
9-6-4: SIGHT IMPAIRED PEDESTRIANS:
   A.   Use Of White Canes Restricted: For the purpose of guarding against
accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except persons wholly or partially blind, to carry or use on the
streets, highways and public places of the state any white canes or walking
sticks which are white in color or white tipped with red. (1978 Code §23-221)
   B.   Duty Of Drivers Approaching Sight Impaired Persons: A driver of a
vehicle who approaches wholly or partially blind pedestrians carrying a white
cane or walking stick or white tipped with red or being led by a guide dog
wearing a harness and walking on either side of or slightly in front of such
blind person shall immediately come to a complete stop and take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the pedestrian.
(1978 Code §23-222; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 7
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
9-7-1: Improper Equipment Prohibited
9-7-2: Obstruction Of Driver's View Or Operating Mechanism
9-7-3: Safety Belts And Harnesses
9-7-4: Vehicle Size, Weight And Load
9-7-1: IMPROPER EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause
or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or
which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such
lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in the
code of Iowa, as amended, or equipped with one or more unsafe tires. (1978 Code
§23-107)
9-7-2: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR OPERATING MECHANISM:
   A.   No person shall operate any vehicle when such vehicle is so loaded or
when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3) in
number, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or to
interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No person shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's
view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with the driver's control over the
driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   C.   No stickers, signs or posters shall be placed in or on any window of a
vehicle, except as required by the state or any governmental subdivision or
agency thereof. (1978 Code §23-136)
9-7-3: SAFETY BELTS AND HARNESSES:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: Except for motorcycles or motorized
bicycles, 1966 model year or newer vehicles subject to registration in Iowa
shall be equipped with safety belts and safety harnesses of a type and
installed in the manner required by the code of Iowa, as amended.
   B.   Use Required: The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor
vehicle subject to registration in Iowa, except a motorcycle or a motorized
bicycle, shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt or safety
harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or highway in
this city, except a child under six (6) years of age shall be secured as
required under subsection C of this section.
   C.   Child Restraint Devices:
      1.   A child under the age of three (3) years, who is being transported
in a motor vehicle subject to registration and having a gross weight of less
than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, shall be secured during transit by a child
restraint system which meets federal motor vehicle safety standards, and the
system shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
      2.   A child at least three (3) years of age but under the age of six (6)
years, who is being transported in a motor vehicle subject to registration and
having a gross weight of less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, shall be
secured during transit as required by subsection C1 of this section or as
required by subsections A and B of this section.
      3.   The vehicle driver who violates subsection C1 or C2 of this section
is guilty of a simple misdemeanor and shall not be subject to a penalty greater
than that provided by the code of Iowa, as amended.
   D.   Liability: The driver and front seat passengers and owner may each be
charged separately for improperly used or nonused equipment under this section.
(1994 Code)
9-7-4: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Signs Posted For Truck Weight Restrictions: Pursuant to section
9-1-3 of this title, traffic control devices may be established to prohibit the
operation of trucks exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds' gross weight on any
city street or portion of a city street. However, such device shall not
prohibit necessary local operation on a city street for the purpose of a pick
up or delivery.
   B.   Traffic Restricted On Certain Streets:
      1.   Authority: The city manager, or designee, may designate those
heavily traveled streets which shall be closed to any class or kind of traffic
which the city manager, or designee, finds to be incompatible with the normal
and safe movement of traffic. The streets shall be appropriately signed to give
notice of the restriction. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
      2.   Specific Streets Designated: No truck or other commercial vehicle
with a gross weight in excess of sixteen (16) tons, except those specifically
exempted herein, shall be operated on Kirkwood Avenue and Lower Muscatine Road
from the intersection of Kirkwood Avenue with Gilbert Court to the intersection
of Lower Muscatine Road with Sycamore Street; First Avenue from the
intersection with Scott Boulevard to the intersection with D Street; Court
Street from the intersection with Summit Street to the intersection with
Muscatine Avenue; or on North Summit Street or Dewey Street from the
intersection of North Summit Street with North Dodge Street to the intersection
of Dewey Street with Brown Street. (Ord. 09-4339, 5-5-2009)
      3.   Exemptions: The following vehicles shall be exempted from the above
prohibition:
         a.   Commercial vehicles making deliveries or furnishing services to
premises fronting on the prescribed street if the premises has no other means
of access for delivery or services.
         b.   School buses.
         c.   City emergency and service vehicles. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-
3765, 1-14-1997)
   C.   Flag Or Light At End Of Load: Whenever the load on any vehicle shall
extend more than four feet (4') beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof,
there shall be displayed at the end of such load, in such position as to be
clearly visible at all times from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag not less
than twelve inches (12") both in length and width, except between sunset and
sunrise there shall be displayed at the end of such load a red light plainly
visible from the rear of such vehicle under normal atmospheric conditions at
least two hundred feet (200'). (1978 Code §23-108)
CHAPTER 8
BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Operation Of Bicycles
9-8-2: Parking Bicycles
9-8-3: Lights And Reflectors Required
9-8-4: Vehicles In Bicycle Lanes And Bicycle Parking Areas
9-8-5: Unlawful License Application, Possession Or Transfer
9-8-6: Parking Violations
9-8-7: Electric Assist Bicycles
9-8-8: Penalty
9-8-1: OPERATION OF BICYCLES 1 :
   A.   Observation Of Traffic Rules:
      1.   All persons riding bicycles upon any street or sidewalk within the
City must obey all Traffic Ordinances and rules as to traffic lights and
highway and street stop signs and must be required to signal any change of
direction or course of travel in the same manner as such signals are required
under the law governing the use of motor vehicles and must not turn to the
right or left in traffic except at regular intersections of streets, alleys or
driveways. Notwithstanding any provision herein, all persons riding bicycles
upon a sidewalk must obey pedestrian traffic control devices. (1978 Code §23-
66)
      2.   All persons riding bicycles upon any street, sidewalk or bike lane
within the City shall observe all ordinances and rules as to traffic limits and
shall make full and complete stops at official stop signs.
      3.   In addition, all persons riding bicycles shall be subject to the
provisions of ordinances applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle, except as
to those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. (1978
Code §23-66)
   B.   Method Of Riding:
      1.   A bicycle rider shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular bicycle seat.
      2.   No rider of a bicycle intended for one person shall carry a second
person on any part of the bicycle, except infants may be carried when a
suitable and proper seat is provided.
      3.   No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which would prevent the rider from keeping both hands on the
handlebars. (1978 Code §23-68)
   C.   Riding On Roadways: Persons riding bicycles on the roadway shall not
ride more than two (2) abreast and, on laned roadways, shall ride within a
single lane. No bicyclist shall ride so as to impede the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic.
   D.   Careful Riding: No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any
sidewalk or roadway except in a prudent and careful manner. (1978 Code §23-69)
   E.   Riding On Sidewalk:
      1.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Central
Downtown Business District. The Central Downtown Business District is the area
bounded by and including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the
south, Gilbert Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to the north.
      2.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1978 Code §23-64)
   F.   Riding On Bikeways: No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a
bicycle lane or path in any direction except that permitted by vehicular
traffic traveling on the same side of the roadway, provided bicycles may
proceed either way along a lane or path where arrows or signs designate two-way
bicycle traffic. (1978 Code §23-70; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997;
Ord. 97-3788, 6-3-1997; Ord. 15-4635, 8-18-2015; Ord. 24-4926, 6-4-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-5-3A of this Code, bicycles in City Plaza.
9-8-2: PARKING BICYCLES:
Regardless of any other provision of this title, no person shall park a bicycle
on a street or alley in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian or motor
vehicle travel. Any bicycle within one block or three hundred feet (300') of a
bicycle rack must be parked in such a rack. Any bicycle parked on public
property in a commercial district shall not be attached to poles, parking
meters, except parking meters equipped with a bicycle rack, signs, trees, trash
receptacles, street hardware or any other permanent structure. (Ord. 96-3710,
1-23-1996)
9-8-3: LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS REQUIRED:
   A.   Reflectors: All bicycles shall be equipped with reflective surfaces
visible at three hundred feet (300') from the rear when viewed in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. Reflective materials may be
mounted on each side of each pedal. If the bicycle is not equipped with
reflective surfaces as required herein, no person shall use said bicycle from
sunset to sunrise unless the bicycle displays or driver wears a lamp on the
back part of the bicycle, and the lamp shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of at least three hundred feet (300') from the back of the bicycle.
   B.   Headlights At Night: All bicycles used from sunset to sunrise shall
display or their drivers shall wear a lamp on the front part of the bicycle,
and the lamp shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least three
hundred feet (300') from the front of the bicycle. (1978 Code §23-62) (Ord. 19-
4802, 8-20-2019)
9-8-4: VEHICLES IN BICYCLE LANES AND BICYCLE PARKING AREAS:
   A.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle path, lane or
parking area or park any motor vehicles in such a path, lane or parking area.
Motorized bicycles, motor bicycles and mopeds are prohibited from parking in
bicycle parking areas, except as otherwise allowed pursuant to subsection B of
this section. (Ord. 11-4440, 8-2-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
   B.   The city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to install signs
permitting motor vehicles to be parked in a designated bicycle lane, bicycle
path or parking area during specific times and days. When such signs are
present, motor vehicle parking shall be permitted only during those times
specifically stated on the signs. (1978 Code §23-71; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-
3765, 1-14-1997)
9-8-5: UNLAWFUL LICENSE APPLICATION, POSSESSION OR TRANSFER:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement of a material fact, either
in the application for a city bicycle license or in the transfer of same, or
who intends to procure or pass title to a bicycle which the person knows or has
reason to believe has been stolen or who receives or transfers possession which
the person knows or has reason to believe has been stolen shall be deemed
guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1978 Code §23-74; amd. 1994 Code)
9-8-6: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Impoundment Of Bicycles:
      1.   On finding a bicycle is: a) abandoned; b) inoperable; or c)
unattended at a place where the bicycle constitutes an obstruction to vehicle
or pedestrian traffic or constitutes an imminent threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the public or is in violation of an existing parking ordinance,
the police department or any officer, agent or employee of the city so
designated may remove or cause the removal of such bicycle to a place
designated by the chief of police for the storage of impounded bicycles. (Ord.
15-4635, 8-18-2015)
      2.   Upon impoundment of such bicycle, the city shall notify the last
known owner of such impoundment by first class mail. At the time of
impoundment, the city may cause to be filed a citation pursuant to state law
upon the owner or driver of such bicycle at the time of impoundment. The owner
or driver may reclaim such bicycle upon presentation of proof of ownership or
by a notarized declaration of ownership and by accepting such citation and
signing a promise to appear and payment of any accrued fees and charges. Such
fees and charges shall be set by resolution.
      3.   If impoundment requires the destruction of a chain, padlock or other
security device, agents or employees designated to enforce the parking
ordinances of the city or any peace officer are hereby authorized to destroy
such security devices. (1978 Code §23-72; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Parking Violations:
      1.   If any bicycle is found stopped, standing, parked, or abandoned in
any manner in violation of this title and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 01-3992, 12-11-2001)
      2.   In the event the City is unable to ascertain the owner, or the owner
does not claim the bicycle within three (3) calendar months from the date of
impoundment, the City shall, except as noted below, cause such bicycle to be
sold at a public auction. Notice of such disposition shall be published
pursuant to State law governing abandoned vehicles. In lieu of selling said
bicycle at public auction, the City may donate it to: a) a nonprofit
organization or entity which serves low income/disadvantaged youth or families
in Johnson County, Iowa, for use by members of the population served; b) a low
income/disadvantaged youth; or c) a homeless individual who has no other means
of transportation. (Ord. 17-4697, 3-7-2017)
      3.   Proceeds from sales and impoundment fees shall be used to defray the
costs of bicycle registration and bicycle facilities. (1978 Code §23-73)
9-8-7: ELECTRIC ASSIST BICYCLES:
The provisions of sections
9-8-1,
9-8-3, and
9-8-5 of this chapter apply to electric assist bicycles in the same manner and
to the same extent as they apply to bicycles. (Ord. 19-4786, 4-2-2019)
9-8-8: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 19-4807, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 9
TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Towing And Impoundment Of Abandoned Vehicles; Notices
9-9-2: Towing And Impoundment Of Certain Illegally Parked Vehicles
9-9-3: Vehicles Towed And Impounded Pursuant To Arrest Of Driver
9-9-4: Impoundment For Accumulated Parking Violations
9-9-5: Emergency Towing And Impoundment
9-9-6: Entry Into Vehicles To Be Towed Or Impounded Restricted
9-9-7: Impoundment Location
9-9-8: Records Kept
9-9-9: Nonapplicability To Vehicles As Evidence In Criminal Cases
9-9-10: Hearing For Objection To Towing And Impoundment
9-9-11: Redemption Of Towed And Impounded Vehicle
9-9-1: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES; NOTICES 1 :
   A.   
      1.   Towing And Impoundment Authorized: The department may tow and
impound or have towed and impounded any vehicle abandoned, provided the
department has notified the owner or person claiming rightful possession that
the vehicle will be towed and impounded if the vehicle is not removed within
seventy two (72) hours of the time a towing notice is posted. Notice shall be
deemed posted by securely attaching the notice to the driver’s side window of
the vehicle. The notice shall state the date and time the notice is attached to
the vehicle, the intent to tow the vehicle seventy two (72) hours after the
posting, the reason for the notice to tow and that all costs of removal,
notification and storage must be paid before the vehicle may be reclaimed. This
notice provision shall not be required in the case of a vehicle parked on or in
a public street or alley determined by the department to create an immediate
hazard to vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
      2.   Towing and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicle in Parking Lot:
Vehicles parked in a city owned or operated parking lot may be towed and
impounded twenty four (24) hours after the posting of notice to that effect.
This notice provision shall not be required in the case of a vehicle determined
by the department to create an immediate hazard to vehicle or pedestrian
traffic.
   B.   Notice After Impoundment And Prior To Sale:
      1.   When a vehicle has been impounded under the provisions of this title
or seized under any provision of the laws of the state, the department shall
follow the procedures determined by state law for giving notice to the owner,
lien holders of record and any other known claimant to the vehicle of the
impoundment and the proposed sale of the abandoned vehicle.
      2.   If the vehicle was found and impounded under this title, the notice
shall state that an objection may be made and a hearing held pursuant to
section
9-9-10 of this chapter. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 09-4348, 6-16-2009; Ord. 21-4850,
3-2-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 1 of this code for nuisance provisions regarding
  inoperable/obsolete vehicles.
9-9-2: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF CERTAIN ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Notwithstanding subsection
9-9-1A of this chapter, any vehicle illegally parked and left unattended as
described herein is hereby declared a public nuisance, per se, and may be towed
and impounded by or under direction of the department without prior notice:
   A.   Any vehicle which substantially blocks a public or private driveway
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property.
   B.   Any vehicle which obstructs the movement of an emergency vehicle.
   C.   Any vehicle which obstructs or interferes with the use of a fire
hydrant.
   D.   Any vehicle parked in violation of a posted parking regulation, where a
temporary or permanent traffic sign indicates "Towaway Zone".
   E.   Any vehicle parked on a street or alley in a manner which obstructs
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   F.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this title.
   G.   Any vehicle parked in the "library outside book drop off" space in
violation of section
9-4-15 of this title.
   H.   Any vehicle parked in a designated bicycle lane in violation of
subsection
9-4-1A22 of this title.
   I.   Any vehicle parked on City Plaza in violation of section
9-4-1A23 of this title. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 05-4178, 9-6-2005, eff. 9-15-
2005; Ord. 22-4877, 3-22-2022; Ord. 25-4954, 5-6-2025)
9-9-3: VEHICLES TOWED AND IMPOUNDED PURSUANT TO ARREST OF DRIVER:
A vehicle may be towed and impounded by or under the direction of the
department when the driver is arrested if:
   A.   The arrested person consents to the impoundment; or
   B.   The vehicle is not legally parked or will constitute a traffic hazard
if left at its location at the time of arrest, and the arrested person is
either unable or unwilling to move it or have it moved; or
   C.   The vehicle may be towed and impounded pursuant to a provision of this
title. (1994 Code)
9-9-4: IMPOUNDMENT FOR ACCUMULATED PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Determination Of Towing And Impoundment: If any vehicle has accumulated
a combination of parking violations, ramp charges, and/or vehicle unlock fees,
totaling fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, such vehicle may be towed and
impounded or may be impounded by use of a "Denver boot" or similar device, as
hereafter provided. (Ord. 09-4344, 6-16-2009)
   B.   Notice Of Towing And Impoundment; Hearing:
      1.   Towing and impoundment shall occur only after notice and opportunity
for an administrative hearing is offered to the last known owner or person
entitled to possession of such motor vehicle. Notice may be provided either on
the citation or through a separate mailing. No vehicle shall be towed and
impounded unless such vehicle is on a public street or in a public parking lot.
      2.   Notice shall be in writing, either on the citation or through a
separate mailing, and shall state that there is a right to request an
administrative hearing before towing and impoundment if such request is made
within ten (10) calendar days of the notice, that failure to request a hearing
within ten (10) calendar days or failure to appear at a requested hearing
waives the opportunity for hearing, and that the owner or other person entitled
to possession shall be responsible for all charges and costs incurred for
towing and impoundment of the vehicle, in addition to charges for unpaid
parking tickets. (Ord. 09-4349, 6-16-2009)
   C.   Impoundment By Use Of Denver Boot: Impoundment by use of the Denver
boot is subject to the following:
      1.   Impoundment shall not exceed twenty four (24) hours, except a peace
officer may extend or reduce such time period for safety or traffic reasons.
      2.   No vehicle shall be impounded within the traveled portion of any
street or on any portion of a street or sidewalk when the impoundment at such
place would create a hazard to the public or traffic.
      3.   On expiration of the time period contained at subsection C1 of this
section, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded. (1994 Code)
9-9-5: EMERGENCY TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
If an emergency requires the immediate removal of a vehicle lawfully parked,
the police department may authorize the vehicle to be towed and, if necessary,
impounded. The owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle may
reclaim the vehicle at any time without charge, and the party requesting
emergency removal shall pay all costs and expenses resulting from the towing
and impoundment. (1994 Code)
9-9-6: ENTRY INTO VEHICLES TO BE TOWED OR IMPOUNDED RESTRICTED:
If it is necessary to enter a locked or unlocked vehicle in order to tow or
impound the vehicle, the entry must be made in the presence of a peace officer.
(1994 Code)
9-9-7: IMPOUNDMENT LOCATION:
All vehicles towed pursuant to this title shall be impounded in the areas or
places designated by the city council. (1994 Code)
9-9-8: RECORDS KEPT:
When a vehicle is towed or impounded under the provisions of this title, the
department shall maintain a record of the vehicle, including sufficient
identifying information, the date and hour of towing, location towed from,
impoundment or towing destination, person performing the towing, reason for
towing or impoundment and the name of the peace officer authorizing the tow or
impoundment. (1994 Code)
9-9-9: NONAPPLICABILITY TO VEHICLES AS EVIDENCE IN CRIMINAL CASES:
This title shall not affect the established procedures for seizing a vehicle as
evidence in a criminal case. (1994 Code)
9-9-10: HEARING FOR OBJECTION TO TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   The owner, lien holder of record, or a person claiming rightful
possession may object and request an evidentiary hearing to a towing,
impoundment and/or to the fees and charges assessed if a vehicle is towed and/
or impounded with or without prior notice. Request for a hearing after an
impoundment must be made within ten (10) days after notice of impoundment is
provided by the department or shall be deemed waived.
   B.   The person challenging the towing, impoundment, and/or fees and charges
shall be informed of the reason for the towing and/or impoundment, and a
hearing shall be held without unnecessary delay before the city manager or
designee.
   C.   The city manager or designee shall consider all relevant information
offered by witnesses, including the person challenging the towing, impoundment,
and/or fees and charges and shall set forth findings as to the objection and
grounds for challenge. The city manager or designee shall notify the person
challenging the impoundment of the decision, and the decision shall indicate
whether the towing, impoundment, and/or fees and charges was appropriate.
   D.   If the city manager or designee finds the vehicle was improperly towed
and/or impounded, the vehicle shall be released to the person challenging the
towing and/or impoundment upon compliance with subsection
9-9-11A of this chapter. All costs of towing, preservation, storage and
notification accruing through the fourth calendar day after the city manager’s
or designee’s decision shall be paid by the city. All costs accruing thereafter
shall be paid by the person challenging the impoundment prior to the vehicle’s
release from impoundment. If the city manager or designee finds the vehicle was
properly towed and/or impounded, but finds a fee or charge is improper, the
city shall pay the improper fee or charge. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 21-4850, 3-2-
2021)
9-9-11: REDEMPTION OF TOWED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
   A.   Owner To Present Evidence Of Identity And Pay Costs Prior To
Reclaiming: Before a person may recover a vehicle which has been towed and
impounded under the provisions of this title, the person shall present evidence
to the department of the person's identity and right to possession of the
vehicle, sign a receipt for return of the vehicle and pay the costs of towing,
preservation, storage, outstanding parking tickets, notification and
preliminary costs of sale unless some or all of these costs have been waived
after hearing under section
9-9-10 of this chapter.
   B.   Right To Reclaim And Forfeiture:
      1.   The owner, lien holder of record or person claiming rightful
possession of an impounded vehicle shall reclaim the vehicle within ten (10)
days after:
         a.   The effective date of the notice provided in subsection
9-9-1B of this chapter, unless a hearing is requested pursuant to section
9-9-10 of this chapter;
         b.   Receipt of a vehicle release form from the city, if the receipt
is issued prior to the effective date of the notice provided in subsection
9-9-1B of this chapter; or
         c.   The date of the decision from a hearing held pursuant to section
9-9-10 of this chapter.
      2.   If the owner, lien holder or known claimant does not exercise the
right to reclaim an impounded vehicle within the ten (10) day reclaiming
period, such person shall be deemed to have waived any right, title, claim or
interest in or to the vehicle.
      3.   The owner, lien holder of record or known claimant of any vehicle
that is not abandoned may, upon written request and payment of additional
storage charges, delivered to the department prior to the expiration of the ten
(10) day reclaiming period, obtain an additional period of up to fourteen (14)
calendar days within which the vehicle may be reclaimed. (1994 Code; amd. Ord.
21-4850, 3-2-2021)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTRIC DEVICES
SECTION:
9-10-1: Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices
9-10-2: Electric Scooters and Skateboards
9-10-3: Penalty
9-10-1: ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES:
   A.   Safe Operation: A person who operates an electric personal assistive
mobility device shall exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian,
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian, and shall not operate it in
such manner as to indicate a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons.
   B.   Prohibited Operation: No person shall operate an electric personal
assistive mobility device upon a sidewalk in the central downtown business
district. The central downtown business district is the area bounded by and
including Capitol Street to the west, Burlington Street to the south, Gilbert
Street to the east, and Jefferson Street to the north. (Ord. 08-4317, 9-23-
2008; amd. Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-10-2: ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND SKATEBOARDS:
   A.   A person who operates an electric scooter or electric skateboard shall
exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian, and shall not operate it in such manner as to
indicate a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons.
   B.   All electric skateboards and electric scooters used during the hours
from sunset to sunrise shall display or their drivers shall wear a lamp on the
front part of the device, and the lamp shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least three hundred feet (300') from the front of the device and
a red visible light from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') from
the back of the device.
   C.   The provisions of Section
9-8-1  of this Code apply to electric scooters and electric skateboards, except
as to those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application.
(Ord. 19-4802, 8-20-2019)
9-10-3: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 19-4807, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 11
TRAFFIC CAMERAS, DRONES, AND LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-11-1: General
9-11-2: Definitions
9-11-1: GENERAL:
The city shall not:
   A.   Use any automatic traffic surveillance system or device, automatic
license plate recognition system or device, or domestic drone system or device
for the enforcement of a qualified traffic law violation, unless a peace
officer or parking enforcement attendant is present at the scene, witnesses the
event, and personally issues the ticket to the alleged violator at the time and
location of the violation; nor
   B.   Store, archive, transmit, share, publish, grant access to, sell, index,
cross reference, or otherwise aggregate, distribute, analyze, or process any
data obtained through automatic traffic surveillance system or device,
automatic license plate recognition system or device, or domestic drone system
or device unless the data directly pertains to a qualified traffic law
violation or other criminal law violation for which a ticket, citation, or
arrest was issued or made by a peace officer or parking enforcement attendant
who was present at the scene. (Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
             A computer based system(s) that captures an image of a license plate(s) and
AUTOMATIC    converts it to a data file to be compared with databases or hot lists
LICENSE      generated by various law enforcement agencies, and which produces an alert
PLATE        when there is a match between the collected license plate data and those
RECOGNITION  databases. Automatic license plate recognition systems or devices installed
SYSTEM:      in City parking ramps or on City Parking Department vehicles, primarily used
             for parking enforcement, are not included in this definition.
             A device or devices including, but not limited to, a camera system(s) that
             uses any electronic, photographic, video, digital, or computer system
AUTOMATIC    designed for the purpose of producing a photograph, microphotograph,
TRAFFIC      videotape, digital video, or other recorded image or digital record of a
SURVEILLANCE vehicle and/or its operator and/or its occupants that is used to establish
SYSTEM OR    identity or ownership of a vehicle and/or identify its operator, owner, or
DEVICE:      occupants. Specific Streets and Traffic Engineering Division cameras
             installed at intersections with traffic signals or roundabouts, used
             primarily for traffic engineering and study, shall not be included in this
             definition.
DOMESTIC     An aerial vehicle that does not carry a human operator that can fly
DRONE,       autonomously or be piloted remotely that is equipped with one or more
DRONE, OR    onboard cameras or other sensors for registering, observing, or recording
UNMANNED     persons, objects, or events or for transmitting such information as it is
AERIAL       occurring or thereafter.
VEHICLE:
PARKING      Agents or employees designated to enforce the parking ordinances of the
ENFORCEMENT  city.
ATTENDANT:
             A violation of any of the following:
QUALIFIED    A.   Any state or local law relating to compliance with a traffic control
TRAFFIC LAW  signal or railroad crossing sign or signal;
VIOLATION:   B.   Any state or local law limiting the speed of a motor vehicle; or
             C.   Any state or local law regulating motor vehicle parking.
             Any traffic ticket, citation, summons, or other notice of liability, whether
TICKET:      civil, criminal, or administrative, issued in response to an alleged
             qualified traffic law violation detected or recorded by a traffic
             surveillance system or device.
 
(Ord. 13-4539, 6-18-2013; amd. Ord. 24-4934, 8-20-2024)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Definitions And Exemptions
10-1-2: Permit And Compliance Required
10-1-3: Application For Permit
10-1-4: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
10-1-5: Appeals Regarding Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
10-1-6: Revocation Of Permit
10-1-7: Sale Or Assignment Of Permit
10-1-8: Fees
10-1-9: Police Protection
10-1-10: Penalties
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply:
   AFFILIATED GROUP: A group of persons or an entity engaged in sports and/or
recreation that: 1) is affiliated with and either sponsored or cosponsored by
the city of Iowa City including, but not limited to, organized youth soccer,
boys' baseball, and girls' softball; and 2) has executed a memorandum of
understanding with the city for the use of public property.
   APPLICANT: A person who applies for a parade/public assembly permit as
provided in this chapter.
   PARADE: A march or procession of more than twenty five (25) persons,
vehicles or other forms of transportation, such as bicycles, or combination
thereof, in or upon the public right of way or in a park that necessitates or
results in the exclusion, in whole or in part, of use of the public right of
way or the park by others.
   PARADE/PUBLIC ASSEMBLY PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of
public property, including the public right of way, as provided in this
chapter.
   PARK: Any park or playground owned or controlled by the city, including
streets, trails, and roadways therein.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering
of more than twenty five (25) persons on the public right of way or one hundred
(100) persons in a park for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that
interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on the public right of way or in a park or occupies any area in the
public right of way or in a park.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city
plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to
and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
   B.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
      1.   Funeral processions.
      2.   A gathering of an affiliated group or subpart thereof.
      3.   Spontaneous events responding to news or affairs coming into public
knowledge within three (3) days of such public assembly or parade provided that
the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city manager or designee at
least one hour prior to such parade or public assembly. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
10-1-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to engage in,
present, conduct or stage a parade or public assembly without first having
obtained a parade/public assembly permit as provided in this chapter.
   B.   No person shall knowingly participate in or conduct a parade or public
assembly unless a parade/public assembly permit has been obtained.
   C.   All parades and public assemblies shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of the parade/public assembly permit and shall be in compliance
with all applicable state and local laws. No person shall knowingly fail to
comply with the terms and conditions of a parade/public assembly permit.
   D.   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere
with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in any parade or public assembly. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
   E.   No parade or public assembly permittee may sell a good or a service
unless the event: 1) reasonably expects to draw more than five hundred (500)
persons or occupy a substantial area within City Plaza or a similar area within
the downtown; and 2) is a community wide attraction that supports the economic
vitality of the downtown. "Downtown" is defined in title 8, chapter 5 of this
code. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
   F.   No parade or public assembly permittee may use amplified sound unless
it either meets the criteria set forth in subsection E of this section or a
business located in the downtown obtains a permit for musicians to perform on
the sidewalk in front of the business. "Amplified sound" is defined in section
6-4-1 of this code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the director of the
parks and recreation department may approve the use of amplified sound in city
parks pursuant to written rules. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011; amd. Ord. 13-4521,
4-9-2013)
10-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Filing Application:
      1.   An application for a parade/public assembly permit shall be filed
with the city manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to
use any public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is
not a natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who has
authority to act for the applicant with regard to the parade or public
assembly.
      2.   All applications shall be filed at least three (3) working days in
advance of the date of the requested use.
      3.   Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager or
designee.
   B.   Application Form: The application form shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant.
      2.   An acknowledgment to be signed by a natural person that he or she
has authority to act on behalf of the group that is requesting the permit.
      3.   The type of event that is planned, namely parade, or public
assembly.
      4.   Proposed location or locations.
      5.   Expected size of group.
      6.   Date, time and expected duration of the use.
      7.   Names and contact information of the person(s) to be present at and
who will serve as the contact person(s) for the applicant at the proposed
parade or public assembly.
      8.   List and description of mechanical or electronic equipment to be
used, including sound amplification.
      9.   Number and type of any motor vehicles or other forms of
transportation to be used, including bicycles.
      10.   Number and type of any animals to be used.
      11.   Proposal to monitor the event, including the names of any person
not employed by the city who will be responsible for setting up, cleaning up,
or maintaining order and whether the police department will be needed to assist
in maintaining order.
      12.   Proposal for cleanup. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
      13.   If the parade or public assembly requires equipment, cables,
objects, structures, or similar items to be placed on City Plaza, on a
sidewalk, or in a park or if it lasts more than six (6) hours or if it is held
on a street and requires the closure of more than one block, the applicant
shall agree to pay on behalf of the city all sums which the city shall be
obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed upon the city for damages
of any kind resulting from use of public property and the public right of way,
whether sustained by any person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and
shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any claim against the
city arising out of the use of public property and the public right of way.
"Block" means the area on the street in a residential zone between two (2)
intersections or between an intersection and the stub/termination of a street
or five hundred feet (500') in a nonresidential zone. The indemnification
requirement may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to indemnify.
      14.   If the parade or public assembly requires equipment, cables,
objects, structures, or similar items to be placed on City Plaza, on a
sidewalk, or in a park or if it lasts more than six (6) hours or if it is held
on a street and requires the closure of more than one block, insurance is
required in the reasonable amount necessary to minimize risk of harm to persons
and property based on the nature and size of the event, as determined by the
city's risk manager. "Block" means the area on the street in a residential zone
between two (2) intersections or between an intersection and the stub/
termination of a street or five hundred feet (500') in a nonresidential zone.
The speech content of the parade or public assembly shall not be a factor in
determining the amount of insurance. The insurance requirement may be waived if
applicant demonstrates inability to obtain insurance or to pay the cost of
insurance. (Ord. 13-4559, 10-15-2013)
      15.   Any other information that the city manager or designee finds
necessary. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city manager or designee shall
grant or deny the application for a permit in writing, which shall be mailed by
ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant and stating the reasons
therefor within seven (7) working days of the application being filed, and no
later than the day prior to the event assuming the application is timely filed.
The city manager or designee shall examine the application and shall grant a
permit if the following conditions are met:
      1.   The use will not unreasonably interfere with the privacy, safety,
security, convenience and tranquility of the residents or inhabitants of the
area in light of the date and time of said proposed use.
      2.   The proposed public right of way can accommodate the group or use,
based both on group size and on health and sanitation facilities, whether
available or to be provided by applicant.
      3.   The proposed use or activity is compatible with the normal activity
of the proposed public right of way at the requested time or date.
      4.   The application demonstrates the applicant has the means, planning
and coordination to hold the proposed event, considering the time of day,
location, public facilities available, traffic control, parking requirements
and any monitoring required to protect the public health and safety.
      5.   The event will not interfere with either another event for which a
permit has already been granted or an event organized and conducted by the city
for the same date and time.
      6.   The use will not substantially interrupt the flow of street and/or
pedestrian traffic 1 .
      7.   The use will not require the excessive diversion of police from
other duties or substantially interfere with the city's firefighting
operations.
      8.   The use does not create undue health or safety hazards.
      9.   All applicable fees have been paid.
      10.   The application is fully completed and executed.
      11.   The indemnification agreement has been signed, if applicable.
      12.   A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section has
been provided, if applicable.
      13.   The application contains no material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
      14.   The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue and be
sued.
      15.   The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant
has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other outstanding and
unpaid debts to the city.
      16.   The use or activity intended by the applicant is not prohibited by
law.
      17.   The applicant paid cleanup costs, if any, within thirty (30) days
of the date of invoice as the result of a previously issued permit.
      18.   Additional police protection, if required under this chapter, has
been secured.
   B.   Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the
following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of permittee.
      2.   Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
      3.   If a parade, the route and staging area.
      4.   Number of monitors or policing personnel required for safe use of
the public right of way.
      5.   Such other information that the city manager or designee finds
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  6-1-2M of this code for nuisance provisions.
10-1-5: APPEALS REGARDING ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's decision to
grant or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the determination to the
city council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party
files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In such event, a hearing
shall be held by the city council no later than its next regularly scheduled
meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
   B.   Upon such hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards
enumerated herein, reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the city manager's
or designee's decision. The city council's decision is the final decision.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued following
an appeal, may revoke a parade/public assembly permit if:
      1.   It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material fact
in the application;
      2.   There is a substantial and material variance between the information
in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear reasonably
to have occurred;
      3.   When it is determined by the chief of police or the fire chief that,
by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public
safety requires such revocation;
      4.   The permittee's insurance has been canceled; or
      5.   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and conditions
of the permit or local, state, or federal law.
   B.   A permit holder may appeal the revocation in the same manner as
appealing the issuance or denial of a permit. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-7: SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT:
The sale, transfer, or assignment of a permit is prohibited. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-
4-2004)
10-1-8: FEES:
Fees for permits shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-4125,
5-4-2004)
10-1-9: POLICE PROTECTION:
   A.   The chief of police or designee shall determine whether and to what
extent additional police or security protection is reasonably necessary for the
parade or public assembly for traffic control and public safety. The chief of
police or designee shall base this decision on the size, location, duration,
time and date of the event, the number of streets and intersections blocked,
and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the public right of
way. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the
amount of police protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of
ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on
duty personnel will police the event. If additional police or security
protection for the parade or public assembly is deemed necessary by the chief
of police or designee, the applicant shall be so informed. The applicant shall
have the duty to secure the police or security protection deemed necessary by
the chief of police or designee at the sole expense of the applicant.
   B.   Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the
primary purpose of public issue speech protected under the first amendment are
not required to pay for any police protection provided by the city. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
10-1-10: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
04-4125, 5-4-2004)
CHAPTER 2
PICKETING
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-2: Use Of Sidewalks For Picketing
10-2-3: Residential Picketing
10-2-4: Advanced Notice Of Proposed Picketing, Protesting Or Demonstrating
(Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-5: Duty To Disperse As Directed By Police
10-2-6: Obstruction Of Public Ways (Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-7: Penalties
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   PICKETER: A person who engages in picketing with or without signs or
placards.
   PICKETING: The practice of standing, marching, congregating, protesting,
demonstrating, or patrolling by one or more persons for the purpose of
persuading, discussing, educating, advocating, or informing another person or
persons or for the purpose of protesting some action, attitude, policy, or
belief. It does not include social, random, or other everyday communication.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city
plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to
and/or intended primarily for pedestrian use.
   RESIDENTIAL PICKETING: Picketing that is directed, focused, or targeted at a
particular private residence and that takes place directly in front of the
particular private residence or the private residences on either side of the
targeted private residence.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONE: All zones defined in title 14, chapter 2, articles A and B
of this code. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-2: USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR PICKETING:
   A.   No Picketing Except By Permit: No picketing except as authorized by a
parade/public assembly permit issued under chapter 1 of this title, shall be
conducted on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular or
bicycle traffic.
   B.   Interference With Traffic, Businesses And Public Facilities: Picketers
shall not block or obstruct free passage of any pedestrian, vehicular traffic,
or bicycle traffic or interfere with ingress or egress to any business or
public facility. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-3: RESIDENTIAL PICKETING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in residential picketing.
   B.   Nothing herein shall prohibit: 1) the residential picketing of a
residence which is used as the occupant's sole place of business; 2) the
residential picketing of a private residence used as a public meeting place; 3)
a person or group of persons from marching without stopping at a particular
private residence; or 4) a person or group of persons from marching on a
defined route without stopping at any particular private residence.
   C.   Before a person may be cited for violation of this provision, the
person must have been ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the
violation by either a police officer or a person with authority to control the
use of the private residence which is the focus or target of the residential
picketing. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-4: ADVANCED NOTICE OF PROPOSED PICKETING, PROTESTING OR DEMONSTRATING:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-5: DUTY TO DISPERSE AS DIRECTED BY POLICE:
   A.   Police officers are authorized to disperse persons who are picketing
whenever such picketing is in violation of this chapter and poses a threat to
public health, safety or orderly flow of traffic 1 .
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to disperse or move on
when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2M2 of this code.
10-2-6: OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-2-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 3
COMMERCIAL USE OF SIDEWALKS 1
SECTION:
10-3-1: Definitions
10-3-2: Use Of Public Sidewalks Restricted
10-3-3: Use For Sidewalk Cafes
10-3-4: Temporary Use Of Sidewalk Permits
10-3-5: Use By Mobile Vendors
10-3-6: Sidewalk Retailing Permit
10-3-7: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  6-1-2M of this code for obstruction of public ways declared a nuisance.
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   APPLICANT: A person who applies for a permit as provided in this chapter.
   MOBILE VENDING CART: A nonmotorized structure on wheels that is easily moved
and is used for vending.
   MOBILE VENDING LOCATION: An appropriate area to operate a mobile vending
cart as determined and assigned by the city manager, or designee, in writing
within the boundaries of city plaza and the 100, 200, and 300 blocks of Iowa
Avenue for the operation of mobile vending carts. Each mobile vending permit
shall carry with it the authorization to operate at one or two (2) designated
locations.
   MOBILE VENDOR: Operator of mobile vending cart.
   MOBILE VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public
property, including public right of way, by a mobile vendor as provided in this
chapter.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including "city
plaza" as defined in chapter 5 of this title.
   RESTAURANT: A business whose primary function is the service of food to
customers and which meets the following criteria:
   A.   Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service to each floor
of the premises which is open to the public while the kitchen is open;
   B.   Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
   C.   Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an
employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
   D.   Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with all of the following:
a stove, a griddle, a grill or broiler, and a food refrigeration unit with a
capacity in excess of twenty (20) cubic feet;
   E.   Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of
the hours that the business is open to the public; and
   F.   Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a
restaurant if it advertises.
   G.   Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop,
lunchroom or tearoom.
   SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or
intended primarily for pedestrian use.
   SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public right of way,
pursuant to an agreement, contiguous with any side of a building wherein a
restaurant is located and where food and beverages are taken for consumption by
persons sitting or standing at tables in that area.
   TEMPORARY USE OF SIDEWALK PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use
of sidewalk as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995; amd. Ord. 97-
3764, 1-14-1997; Ord. 97-3790, 6-18-1997; Ord. 03-4067, 4-8-2003; Ord. 04-4125,
5-4-2004; Ord. 06-4195, 1-17-2006; Ord. 07-4278, 9-4-2007; Ord. 12-4476, 4-17-
2012)
10-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED:
Use of public sidewalks for any commercial purpose, including sidewalk cafes,
shall be unlawful except as specifically provided herein or as specifically
authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995)
10-3-3: USE FOR SIDEWALK CAFES:
   A.   Except as provided herein, sidewalk cafes are permitted in the public
right of way only in the central business zones (CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones)
and in the riverfront crossings district. Sidewalk cafes are permitted in other
zones if the restaurant does not hold an alcohol license. In said other zones,
the City Manager or designee may limit the hours of operation to fewer than
those allowed herein and impose limitations on the operation of the sidewalk
cafe which are more restrictive than the policy adopted by Council resolution.
   B.   No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe without executing an easement
agreement.
   C.   Each sidewalk cafe applicant shall file an application for an easement
agreement with the public works department, on forms provided by the city.
   D.   The city manager, or designee, shall either grant or deny the
application within thirty (30) days of the application being filed. If the
application is granted, the city manager, or designee, is authorized to enter
into a public right of way easement agreement. If the application is denied,
the applicant may appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal with
the city council, and the appeals process shall be the same as provided for
mobile vendors in this chapter. The city retains the right to limit the number
of sidewalk cafes.
   E.   After execution of an easement agreement, the city manager, or
designee, shall retain the right to terminate the easement agreement but only
after written notice of violation has been given and the time to cure the
violation has expired. Grounds for termination of the easement agreement shall
include, but not be limited to, repeated violations of the state and liquor
control laws, violations of the easement agreement, and creating a safety
hazard, health hazard and/or public nuisance under state or local law.
Additionally, the city manager, or designee, retains the right to terminate the
easement agreement and direct removal of sidewalk cafe operations if there is a
substantial and reasonable need for use of the public right of way for a valid
public purpose. The cafe owner has the right to appeal a decision to terminate
the agreement to the city council. The appeals process shall be the same as
provided for mobile vendors in this chapter.
   F.   The easement agreement, at a minimum, shall require the cafe operator
to provide a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the city, and shall agree
to hold the city harmless against any and all liability arising from or
relating to the operation of the sidewalk cafe or the location of the cafe on
the public right of way including, but not limited to, all claims arising from
occurrences or accidents within the sidewalk cafe area, including the walkway
through a cafe.
   G.   In the central business zones, sidewalk cafes shall operate only
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight. In the riverfront crossings district, sidewalk cafes shall operate
only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. in the RFC-G zone. In all other RFC zones, sidewalk cafes shall operate
only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Friday and Saturday.
   H.   Food and beverages must be available for service to patrons in a
sidewalk cafe during all hours of operation. Sidewalk cafes shall not operate
when the restaurant kitchen is closed.
   I.   A sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee
monitoring the area at all times during the hours alcohol is consumed and shall
dispense any alcoholic beverage under state and local law.
   J.   Amplified sound equipment shall not be permitted.
   K.   The operation of any sidewalk cafe shall be in conformity with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
   L.   All fees for the operation of a sidewalk cafe shall be set by
resolution.
   M.   The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not
inconsistent with any ordinance or policy adopted by the city council. A copy
of the policy and rules shall be on file with the city clerk and available on
the city website. (Ord. 12-4493, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-4642, 9-15-2015; Ord.
22-4891, 12-6-2022)
10-3-4: TEMPORARY USE OF SIDEWALK PERMITS:
The city manager or designee is authorized to issue temporary use of sidewalk
permits to businesses or business organizations for any commercial purpose in
commercially zoned districts excluding permits for sidewalk cafes, sidewalk
retailing, ambulatory vendors, and mobile vending carts. Temporary use of
sidewalk permits shall be limited to the temporary use of sidewalks and public
right of way abutting said businesses and shall be limited to no more than four
(4) days for any one permit. (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
   A.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Filing Application:
         a.   An application for a temporary use of sidewalk permit shall be
filed with the city manager or designee by any person or group of persons
desiring to use the public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the
applicant is not a natural person, the application shall identify a natural
person who has authority to act for the applicant with regard to the temporary
use of the sidewalk.
         b.   All applications shall be received five (5) days before proposed
use.
         c.   Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager
or designee.
      2.   Application Form: The application form shall contain the following
information:
         a.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         b.   An acknowledgment to be signed by a natural person that he or she
has authority over the permitted use of the sidewalk.
         c.   Name and address of applicant's business.
         d.   Days and hours of requested use.
         e.   Description of use.
         f.   An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on behalf
of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of
public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any person or
persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense
and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of
public property and the public right of way.
         g.   Insurance as required in a reasonable amount necessary to
minimize risk of harm to persons or property based on the nature and size of
the event, as determined by the city's risk manager. The insurance requirement
may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to obtain insurance or to pay
the cost of insurance.
         h.   Any other information that the city manager or designee finds
necessary.
   B.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city manager or designee shall
grant or deny the application for temporary use of sidewalk permit in writing,
which shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the
applicant, and state the reasons therefor within seven (7) working days of the
application being filed. The city manager or designee shall examine the
application and shall issue said permit if the following conditions are met:
         a.   The applicant's proposed use will not impede the free flow of
pedestrian traffic along the public right of way or in or out of adjacent
properties.
         b.   All applicable fees have been paid.
         c.   The application is fully completed and executed.
         d.   The indemnification agreement has been signed.
         e.   A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section
has been provided.
         f.   The application contains no material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
         g.   The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue and be
sued.
         h.   The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant
has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other outstanding and
unpaid debts to the city.
         i.   No permit has already been issued for the same time and place.
         j.   The use does not conflict with previously planned programs
organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time
and place.
      2.   Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the
following information:
         a.   Name, telephone number, and address of permittee.
         b.   Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
         c.   The permittee shall only offer for sale its own goods and
products and shall not offer for sale any tobacco product.
         d.   Such other information that the city manager or designee finds
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Appeals: Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's
decision to grant or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the
determination to the city council if, within five (5) working days after the
decision, the party files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In
such event, a hearing shall be held by the city council no later than its next
regularly scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow
notice of said appeal in accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such
hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein,
reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the city manager's or designee's
decision. The city council's decision is the final decision.
   D.   Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of a temporary use of
sidewalk permit is expressly prohibited.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued
following an appeal, may revoke a permit if:
         a.   It is determined by the chief of police or the fire chief that,
by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public
safety requires such revocation is necessary to protect health, safety, and
welfare.
         b.   The permittee has misstated any material fact in the application.
         c.   There is a substantial and material variance between the
information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred.
         d.   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and
conditions of the permit.
         e.   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms of the
permit or local, state, or federal law.
         f.   The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
      2.   A permit holder may appeal the revocation in the same manner as
appealing the issuing or denying of a permit.
   F.   Fees: Fees for permits shall be set by resolution of city council.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-3-5: USE BY MOBILE VENDORS:
   A.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Filing Application:
         a.   An application for a mobile vendor permit shall be filed with the
city manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to use the
public right of way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is not a
natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who has authority
to act for the applicant with regard to the mobile vending operation. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
         b.   Permits will be issued for three (3) year periods beginning May
1, 2013 to April 30, 2016. All applications for mobile vendor permits must be
received by January 31 of the calendar year for which the three (3) year permit
will be issued. Permits for partial periods may be available as provided in the
administrative rules. (Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
         c.   Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the city manager
or designee. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
      2.   General Provisions:
         a.   No more than six (6) permits shall be issued for each three (3)
year period. All permits shall be issued for City Plaza except that up to two
(2) permits may be issued for the 100, 200, and 300 blocks of Iowa Avenue.
(Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
         b.   No tobacco or alcoholic beverages shall be offered for sale.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
         c.   At a minimum, mobile vendors shall operate from May 1 to October
1. (Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
         d.   No person may have an ownership interest, as determined by the
city, in more than three (3) mobile vending cart operations.
         e.   If the city council decides to eliminate or reduce the mobile
vending permit program, the city may terminate all permits upon one hundred
twenty (120) day notice to the permittees. (Ord. 12-4506, 12-4-2012)
      3.   Application Form: The application form shall contain the following
information:
         a.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         b.   An acknowledgement to be signed by a natural person that he or
she has authority over the permitted use of the sidewalk.
         c.   List of past permits issued. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
         d.   (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
         e.   Requested location or locations of operation.
         f.   Electrical appliances to be used.
         g.   Fuel needed to power equipment. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
         h.   (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
         i.   (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
         j.   Location of overnight cart storage.
         k.   Description of cart including its dimensions. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
         l.   (Rep. by Ord. 10-4386, 3-23-2010)
         m.   An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on behalf
of the city all sums which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any
liability imposed upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from use of
public property and the public right of way, whether sustained by any person or
persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own expense
and on behalf of the city any claim against the city arising out of the use of
public property and the public right of way.
         n.   Acknowledgment that the applicant has contacted the Johnson
County health department and has reviewed health code requirements.
         o.   Insurance is required in a reasonable amount necessary to
minimize risk of harm to persons and property based on the intended use, as
determined by the city's risk manager.
         p.   Any other information that the city manager or designee finds
necessary.
   B.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Standards: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the
application for a mobile vendor permit in writing within a reasonable time,
which shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the
applicant, and state the reasons therefor no later than sixty (60) calendar
days after the application being filed. The length of time which is reasonable
shall be determined by the type of use requested, the information supplied, the
time the application is filed, and the extent of advance preparation and
planning demonstrated and reasonably required. The city manager or designee
shall issue a permit if the following conditions have been met:
         a.   A mobile vending location is available which will not interfere
the free movement within the emergency/service lane.
         b.   The applicant's proposed mode of operation will not impede the
free flow of pedestrian traffic along the public right of way or in or out of
adjacent properties.
         c.   The applicant agrees to operate the applicant's business only at
assigned mobile vending locations.
         d.   The dimensions of the applicant's vending cart shall not exceed a
size of four feet (4') wide by nine feet (9') long by eight feet (8') high.
         e.   The applicant has adequate storage for the mobile vending cart
off the city plaza or public right of way.
         f.   The applicant has obtained all necessary permits required by the
county department of health.
         g.   All applicable fees have been paid.
         h.   The application is fully completed and executed.
         i.   The indemnification agreement has been signed.
         j.   A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section
has been provided.
         k.   The application contains no material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
         l.   The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the applicant
has, the damage has been paid in full, and the applicant has paid all other
outstanding and unpaid debts to the city.
         m.   The applicant has complied with applicable laws concerning the
sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
         n.   The use or activity intended by the applicant is not prohibited
by law.
      2.   Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the
following information:
         a.   Permittee's name, telephone number, and address. (Ord. 04-4125,
5-4-2004)
         b.   (Rep. by Ord. 11-4426, 5-3-2011)
         c.   The permittee's mobile vending location.
         d.   Such other information that the City Manager or designee finds
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Appeals: Any party aggrieved by the City Manager's or designee's
decision to grant or deny a mobile vending permit may appeal the determination
to the City Council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the
party files a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. In such event, a
hearing shall be held by the City Council no later than its next regularly
scheduled meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said
appeal in accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such hearing, the
City Council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm
or modify in any regard the City Manager's or designee's decision. The City
Council's decision is the final decision.
   D.   Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of a mobile vending
permit is expressly prohibited.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   The City Manager or designee, or City Council if issued following an
appeal, may revoke a mobile vending permit if:
         a.   It is determined by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief that,
by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the public
safety requires such revocation.
         b.   The permittee has misstated any material fact in the application.
         c.   There is a substantial and material variance between the
information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred.
         d.   The permittee is operating a mobile vending cart in violation of
the terms of the permit.
         e.   The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
         f.   The permittee violates any administrative rules.
      2.   A permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as
appealing the issuance or denial of a permit.
   F.   Fees: Fees for mobile vending permits shall be set by resolution of the
City Council.
   G.   Administrative Rules: The City Manager is authorized to establish
administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. A copy of said rules shall be on file with the City
Clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-3-6: SIDEWALK RETAILING PERMIT:
The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue an annual sidewalk
retailing permit to businesses or business organizations for any commercial
purpose in commercially zoned districts, excluding permits for sidewalk cafes,
temporary use of sidewalks, ambulatory vendors, and mobile vending carts, upon
completion of an application form prepared by the City Manager or designee. The
sidewalk retailing permit shall be limited to the use of sidewalks and public
right-of-way abutting said businesses and shall be subject to the following
conditions: (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
   A.   Use is limited to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
March 1 to October 31; (Ord. 18-4771, 11-20-2018)
   B.   Insurance coverage as required by the City's Risk Manager;
   C.   Execution of an agreement to indemnify the City;
   D.   Rules as established by the City Manager or designee, a copy of which
shall be on file with the City Clerk and available on the City website;
   E.   No fee shall be charged; and
   F.   No sale, transfer, or assignment of a sidewalk retailing permit is
allowed.
The city manager or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully
completed the application which includes signing the indemnification agreement
and providing a certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section.
If the permit is denied, the city manager or designee shall state the reasons
therefor within three (3) working days of the application being filed. The
process for appeals and revocation of the permit shall be the same as for a
temporary use of sidewalk permit. (Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
10-3-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
95-3676, 5-9-1995; amd. Ord. 03-4067, 4-8-2003; Ord. 09-4337, 5-5-2009)
CHAPTER 4
POSTING HANDBILLS 1
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Manner Of Distribution Generally; Unlawful Distributions On Public Ways
10-4-3: Posting Of Handbills Prohibited
10-4-4: Billboard Maintenance Requirements
10-4-5: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14, chapter 5, article B of this code for sign regulations.
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature which: a) advertises
for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; b) directs attention to
any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for
the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by
sales; c) directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind; or d) while containing reading
matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an
advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or
for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter that is not a
newspaper.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-2: MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION GENERALLY; UNLAWFUL DISTRIBUTIONS ON PUBLIC
WAYS:
Distribution of commercial handbills and noncommercial handbills shall be made
in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
10-4-3: POSTING OF HANDBILLS PROHIBITED:
In the right of way or on public land, no person shall post, stick, stamp,
paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any
commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill calculated to attract the
attention of the public, upon any right of way or any lamppost, electric light,
telephone pole, bulletin board of a kiosk, railway structure, hydrant, tree or
tree box, or upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other
public part of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or
building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm except as may be
authorized or required by law. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-4: BILLBOARD MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All billboards and supports, braces, guys and anchors therefor shall be kept in
good repair and neatly painted or posted at all times. No person shall maintain
billboards in such a manner to allow wastepaper or refuse to accumulate in or
about the premises on which the same are constructed or maintained, and such
accumulation of wastepaper or refuse shall be deemed unlawful littering. (1994
Code; amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-4-5: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code; amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
CHAPTER 5
CITY PLAZA
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purpose And Intent
10-5-2: Definitions
10-5-3: Bicycle And Nonmotorized Vehicle Restrictions
10-5-4: Motor Vehicle Regulations
10-5-5: Removal Of Snow And Ice Accumulations From Building Runoff
10-5-6: Animals Restricted
10-5-7: Use Of City Plaza
10-5-8: City Plaza Use Permits
10-5-9: Administrative Rules
10-5-10: Penalties
10-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the use of city plaza in order to
promote the public health, safety and welfare as follows:
   A.   Making city plaza an active and attractive environment and encouraging
a pleasant and aesthetic ambience designed to attract pedestrian focused
traffic and use.
   B.   Providing the opportunity for creative and colorful pedestrian focused
activities.
   C.   Encouraging the upgrading of storefronts and the development of
compatible and well designed elements within zone 1.
   D.   Limiting the use of vehicles and bicycles in city plaza. (1978 Code
§9.1-1; amd. 1994 Code)
   E.   Supporting economic activity by allowing vendors to sell their goods in
city plaza.
   F.   Ensuring safe movement of pedestrians in city plaza. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-
4-2004)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AMBULATORY VENDOR: A person selling goods or services, including arts and
crafts, while moving through zones 1, 2 and 3 and operating without the use of
a mobile vending cart and with a minimum of equipment such as a person selling
balloons and a portrait artist.
   AMBULATORY VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of
public property, including public right of way, by an ambulatory vendor as
provided in this chapter.
   APPLICANT: A person who applies for a permit as provided in this chapter.
   AUDIO AMBIENCE: A localized use of sound intended to create a pleasant,
relaxing atmosphere.
   CITY PLAZA: That part of city property extending from the northern right of
way line to the southern right of way line of College Street from the eastern
right of way line of Clinton Street to the western right of way line of Linn
Street; and extending from the western right of way line to the eastern right
of way line of Dubuque Street from the southern right of way line of Washington
Street to the southern right of way line of College Street. Also, beginning at
the northwest corner of Lot 4, Block 65, of the original Town of Iowa City,
Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof, thence north 90 degrees 00
minutes 00 seconds east, an assumed bearing, along the southerly right of way
line of Washington Street, 60.28 feet; thence south 00 degrees 03 minutes 02
seconds west, 110.36 feet; thence south 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds west,
59.93 feet to a point on the easterly right of way line of Dubuque Street,
thence north 00 degrees 07 minutes 39 seconds west, along said easterly right
of way line, 110.65 feet to the point of beginning. Except for the following:
Commencing at the northwest corner of Lot 4, Block 65, the original Town of
Iowa City, Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof; thence north 90
degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east, an assumed bearing, along the southerly
right of way line of Washington Street, 60.28 feet to the point of beginning;
thence south 00 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds west, 110.36 feet; thence south
89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds west, 1.50 feet; thence north 00 degrees 03
minutes 02 seconds east, 36.36 feet; thence south 89 degrees 43 minutes 36
seconds west, 2.50 feet; thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds east,
18.0 feet; thence north 89 degrees 43 minutes 36 seconds east, 2.50 feet;
thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds east, 56.0 feet, to the southerly
right of way line of Washington Street; thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes 00
seconds east, an assumed bearing, along said southerly right of way line of
Washington Street, 1.50 feet to the point of beginning. For purposes of this
title, City Plaza includes Black Hawk Mini Park.
   COMMERCIAL: The exchange of goods or services for money or other
consideration.
   KIOSK: A small, public owned structure that is stationary and that contains
newspaper vending units.
   LANDSCAPING: Live plant material used strictly for an ornamental or
ecological purpose.
   MOBILE VENDOR PERMIT: Written authorization by the city for use of public
property, including public right of way, by a mobile vendor as provided in
chapter 3 of this title.
   NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. postal service, in accordance with
federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any
recording officer as provided by general law. And, in addition thereto, shall
mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with
not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.
   PERMANENT STRUCTURE: Any structure erected for a year round use.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
cartway, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use, including
City Plaza.
   SEASONAL CONSTRUCTION: Any structure erected for a seasonal or temporary
activity and is removed from the plaza in the off season.
   SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public sidewalk
contiguous with a building wherein a restaurant is located and where food and
beverages are taken for consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables in
that area. Permitted sidewalk cafes must abide by the requirements and
limitations set forth in this title.
   ZONE 1: The ten foot (10') strip directly abutting the private property
lines in City Plaza. Zone 1 extends the length of the City Plaza along all
sides of the plaza. Zone 1 is illustrated on the City Plaza map that is kept on
file in the office of the city clerk, which can be amended, from time to time,
by resolution of the city council.
   ZONE 2: The six foot (6') pedestrian lanes in the City Plaza adjoining zone
1 on each side, the landscaped areas, the areas with street furniture and
features and other areas as specified on the City Plaza map. Zone 2 is
illustrated on the City Plaza map that is kept on file in the office of the
city clerk, which can be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city
council.
   ZONE 3: The emergency/service lane in City Plaza. Zone 3 is illustrated on
the City Plaza map that is kept on file in the office of the city clerk, which
can be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. (1978
Code §9.1-2; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 95-3676, 5-9-1995; Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004;
Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011; Ord. 13-4563, 12-3-2013)
10-5-3: BICYCLE AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Bicycles: No person shall ride a bicycle within the City Plaza; no
bicycles shall be left unattended within City Plaza unless located in a bicycle
rack; no bicycle shall be locked or affixed to any post or structure other than
a bicycle rack.
   B.   Nonmotorized Vehicles: No person shall travel upon or operate a
nonmotorized vehicle within the City Plaza, except for persons with
disabilities using a vehicle designed for use by persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-4: MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, except emergency vehicles, within the
limits of City Plaza without authorization issued by the city manager or
designee:
   A.   Any business located on property which does not otherwise abut a public
right of way other than City Plaza may be granted continuous motor vehicle
authorization upon a showing that such is necessary to provide for the delivery
of goods to or from the business. Such authorization shall allow the vehicle
within the City Plaza only during active loading and unloading.
   B.   Any person may be granted such authorization upon a showing that the
placement or operation of a motor vehicle upon City Plaza for a specified,
limited period of time is necessary for delivery or other legitimate purpose.
(Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-5-5: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATIONS FROM BUILDING RUNOFF 1 :
Removal of accumulations of snow and/or ice in zone 1 of City Plaza resulting
from building runoff shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property
owner. Violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction punishable by
a penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 04-4135, 8-3-2004)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 6-1-2K and sections
  9-4-9 and
  16-1A-8 of this code.
10-5-6: ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
No person shall take, accompany or allow any animal into City Plaza with the
following exceptions:
   A.   An animal permitted in section
 8-4-12 of this code;
   B.   An animal trained to assist persons with disabilities;
   C.   An animal securely confined within an animal carrier, kennel, cage, or
crate and does not create a public nuisance; or
   D.   A dog restrained with a leash no greater than six feet (6') in length
and not:
      1.   Within fifteen feet (15') of the concrete border of the playground
equipment located south of the public library;
      2.   In a limestone planter;
      3.   Tethered or tied to any object on public or private property; or
      4.   In a sidewalk cafe. (Ord. 12-4504, 12-4-2012)
10-5-7: USE OF CITY PLAZA:
   A.   Commercial Use: No commercial use of City Plaza is allowed except as
authorized in this title. (Ord. 06-4195, 1-17-2006)
   B.   Private Uses Authorized In Each Zone:
      1.   Zone 1:
         a.   Ambulatory vendor permits, arts and crafts vendor permits,
sidewalk cafe permits, parade/public assembly permits.
         b.   Building extensions where, in the sole judgment of the city
council, such extensions enhance the quality of City Plaza.
         c.   Landscaping with the permission of the city manager or designee.
         d.   Display window extensions with the permission of the city manager
or designee.
         e.   Building front and/or basement extensions, provided the use of
the extension is the same as the store activity with the permission of the city
manager or designee.
      2.   Zone 2:
         a.   Permits issued under either this chapter or chapter 1 of this
title.
         b.   Landscaping with the permission of the city manager or designee.
         c.   Newspaper racks.
         d.   Temporary placement of noncommercial objects and structures as
authorized herein.
      3.   Zone 3:
         a.   Ambulatory vendor permits.
   C.   Modification Of Plaza Landscaping: City Plaza landscaping may be
modified or removed to a limited extent if the net effect enhances the ambience
of the City Plaza and if approved by the city manager or designee. In such
cases, the person must agree to restore the City Plaza landscaping to its
original condition and provide a bond or escrow account in an amount determined
by the city manager or designee.
   D.   Days And Hours Of Operation: Buildings extended onto the City Plaza are
to be open at least during normal retail business hours, Monday through
Saturday, throughout the year. Mobile vendors shall operate during the times
prescribed in this chapter.
   E.   Authority Of City Manager: The city manager or designee may:
      1.   Require a reasonable amount of insurance coverage for any use in the
City Plaza not inconsistent with other provisions of this title to minimize the
risk of harm to persons and property when the activity or event being sponsored
on City Plaza creates a higher than usual risk of city or public liability
exposure due to the nature of the activity or event or due to the expected
number of participants or spectators as determined by the city's risk manager.
      2.   Waive the insurance requirements for events or activities sponsored
by the agencies of the state, the University Of Iowa or other governmental
subdivisions, provided such entities enter into an agreement satisfactory to
the city attorney to protect and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents
and employees from and against all claims, lawsuits, damages, losses and
expenses in any manner resulting from or arising out of the activity or event
covered by the permit or to accept full responsibility for safe activity or
event and to defend the city, its officers, agents and employees with regard
thereto.
   F.   Newspaper Vending Units In Kiosks:
      1.   Newspapers may utilize the newspaper vending units in the kiosks.
      2.   Upon the filing of an application by a newspaper with the city
manager or designee and upon payment of an annual administrative fee, payable
April 1 of each year and set by city council resolution, the city shall make
available one unit in a kiosk. Each newspaper may utilize only one unit unless
the number of applications does not exceed the available kiosk units.
      3.   If the number of applications exceeds the available kiosk units, the
city will handle the applications on a lottery basis, to be conducted by the
city manager or designee prior to April 1 of each year. After completion of the
lottery, if needed, the city manager or designee shall provide written notice
of the lottery results to the requesting newspapers. The selected newspapers
shall pay the annual administrative fee to the city manager or designee.
      4.   The newspaper which pays the administrative fee and is assigned a
space may not affix a logo or sign to its assigned unit.
      5.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit or interfere
with alternative methods of distribution available to newspapers throughout the
city, as permitted by federal law.
   G.   Placement Of Noncommercial And Commercial Objects And Structures:
      1.   No person shall place any freestanding noncommercial object or
structure in City Plaza without authorization issued by the city manager or
designee.
      2.   To obtain authorization, the person shall inform the City Manager or
designee of the proposed duration of the placement, the proposed location of
the object or structure, and the physical dimensions of the object or
structure.
      3.   Upon receipt of such information, the City Manager or designee shall
promptly authorize the display in Zone 2 only for a maximum of thirty (30) days
in any one year period, unless the City Manager or designee finds that said
object or structure will impede the flow of pedestrian traffic at the proposed
location. If the City Manager or designee finds that said object or structure
will impede the flow of pedestrian traffic at the proposed location, then the
City Manager or designee shall deny the authorization in writing.
      4.   Any party aggrieved by the City Manager's or designee's decision to
grant or deny such authorization may appeal the determination to the City
Council if, within five (5) working days after the decision, the party files a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. In such event, a hearing shall be
held by the City Council no later than its next regularly scheduled meeting,
assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code. Upon such hearing, the City
Council may, based upon the standards enumerated herein, reverse, affirm or
modify in any regard the City Manager's or designee's decision. The City
Council's decision is the final decision. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
      5.   No person shall place any freestanding commercial object or
structure in City Plaza, unless issued a permit as follows: (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004; amd. Ord. 17-4733, 11-21-2017)
         a.   The City Manager or designee may issue a permit to an association
of downtown businesses for the placement of a structure on City Plaza for
commercial purposes under the following conditions:
            (1)   The applicant must complete an application prepared by the
City Manager's Office. (Ord. 17-4733, 11-21-2017)
            (2)   The duration of the permit cannot exceed forty five (45) days
per calendar year except for calendar years 2018 and 2019. (Ord. 18-4748, 5-1-
2018)
            (3)   Insurance coverage as required by the City's risk manager.
            (4)   Execution of an agreement to indemnify the City.
            (5)   The structure must be approved by the building official.
            (6)   No sale, transfer or assignment of the permit is allowed.
            (7)   Other conditions consistent with the purpose of this title.
         b.   The City Manager or designee shall either grant or deny the
application within seven (7) working days of the application being filed. The
City Manager or designee shall have the discretion to deny the application due
to the amount of space requested and/or the conflicting demands for space
during the time period requested. The process for appeals and revocation of the
permit shall be the same as for a temporary use of sidewalk permit. (Ord. 17-
4733, 11-21-2017)
   H.   Permit For Amplified Sound:
      1.   The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue a permit for
"amplified sound", as defined in section
6-4-1 of this Code, on City Plaza subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Use is limited to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to one o'clock (1:
00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. on
Mondays through Fridays and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:
30) P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays;
         b.   The location is limited to Black Hawk Minipark and the stage
south of the fountain;
         c.   No sale, transfer, or assignment of the amplified sound permit is
allowed without written consent of the City;
         d.   No sign or advertisement is allowed except for a sign identifying
the permittee;
         e.   The City Manager or designee shall grant the permit if the
applicant has fully completed the application. If the permit is denied, the
City Manager or designee shall state the reasons therefor within three (3)
working days of the application being filed.
      2.   The City Manager or designee may revoke the permit if:
         a.   It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material
fact in the application;
         b.   There is a substantial and material variance between the
information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred; or
         c.   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and
conditions of the permit or local, State, or Federal law.
      3.   The process for appeals of a denial or revocation of the permit
shall be the same as for a parade/public assembly permit.
   I.   Amplified Sound Compliance: No person shall use amplified sound in City
Plaza except as authorized in this title. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
10-5-8: CITY PLAZA USE PERMITS:
   A.   Mobile Vendors: The requirements for mobile vendors in City Plaza are
identical to those for mobile vendors as provided in section
10-3-5 of this title.
   B.   Ambulatory Vendors:
      1.   Application For Permit:
         a.   Filing Application:
            (1)   An application for an ambulatory vendor permit shall be filed
with the City Manager or designee by any person or group of persons desiring to
use the public right-of-way as provided in this chapter. If the applicant is
not a natural person, the applicant shall identify a natural person who has
authority to act for the applicant with regard to the ambulatory vending
operation.
            (2)   All applications must be received at least five (5) working
days before the proposed start of operations.
            (3)   Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the City
Manager or designee.
         b.   Application Form: The application form shall contain the
following information:
            (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
            (2)   An acknowledgment to be signed by a natural person that he or
she has the authority to act on behalf of the ambulatory vending operation.
            (3)   List of past permits issued.
            (4)   Product to be sold.
            (5)   Hours of operation.
            (6)   Months of operation.
            (7)   An agreement in which the applicant shall agree to pay on
behalf of the City all sums which the City shall be obligated to pay by reason
of any liability imposed upon the City for damages of any kind resulting from
use of public property and the public right-of-way, whether sustained by any
person or persons, caused by accident or otherwise and shall defend at its own
expense and on behalf of the City any claim against the City arising out of the
use of public property and the public right-of-way.
            (8)   Acknowledgment that the applicant has contacted the Johnson
County Health Department and has reviewed Health Code requirements.
            (9)   Fee.
            (10)   Insurance is required in a reasonable amount necessary to
minimize risk of harm to persons or property based on the nature and size of
the event, as determined by the city's risk manager. The insurance requirement
may be waived if applicant demonstrates inability to obtain insurance or to pay
the cost of insurance.
            (11)   Any other information that the city manager or designee
finds necessary.
      2.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
         a.   Standards: The city manager or designee shall grant or deny the
application for the ambulatory vendor permit within a reasonable time, which
shall be mailed by ordinary mail or personally delivered to the applicant and
stating the reasons therefor no later than sixty (60) working days of the
application being filed. The length of time which is reasonable shall be
determined by the type of use requested, the information supplied, the time the
application is filed, and the extent of advance preparation and planning
demonstrated and reasonably required. The city manager or designee shall issue
an ambulatory vendor permit if the following conditions have been or will be
met:
            (1)   The application is received at least five (5) working days
before the proposed start of operations.
            (2)   The applicant will operate without the use of a mobile
vending cart and with a minimum of equipment.
            (3)   The applicant's proposed mode of operation will not impede
the free flow of pedestrian traffic along the City Plaza right of way, nor
shall it interfere with such pedestrian movement into or out of retail
establishments fronting on the plaza 1 .
            (4)   The applicant will conduct the vending completely within the
boundaries of City Plaza.
            (5)   The applicant has obtained all necessary permits required by
the county department of health.
            (6)   All applicable fees have been paid in full.
            (7)   The application is fully completed and executed.
            (8)   The indemnification agreement has been signed.
            (9)   A certificate of insurance showing compliance with this
section has been provided.
            (10)   The application contains no material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
            (11)   The applicant is legally competent to contract and to sue
and be sued.
            (12)   The applicant has not damaged city property, and if the
applicant has, the damage has been paid in full, and has paid all other
outstanding and unpaid debts to the city.
            (13)   The applicant has complied with applicable laws concerning
the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
            (14)   Such other information that the city manager or designee
finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
         b.   Contents And Conditions Of Permit: The permit shall contain the
following information:
            (1)   Name, telephone number, and address of permittee.
            (2)   Time, date and place of the permitted activity.
            (3)   Such other information that the city manager or designee
finds necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
      3.   Appeals:
         a.   Any party aggrieved by the city manager's or designee's decision
to issue or deny a permit under this chapter may appeal the determination to
the city council if, within ten (10) working days after the decision, the party
files a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. In such event, a hearing
shall be held by the city council no later than at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, assuming the appeal is filed in time to allow notice of said appeal in
accordance with chapter 21 of the Iowa Code.
         b.   Upon such hearing, the city council may, based upon the standards
enumerated herein, reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the city manager's
or designee's decision. The city council's decision is the final decision.
      4.   Prohibited: The sale, transfer, or assignment of an ambulatory
vendor permit for City Plaza is expressly prohibited.
      5.   Revocation Of Permit:
         a.   The city manager or designee, or city council if issued following
an appeal, is authorized to revoke an ambulatory vendor permit issued under
this chapter whenever:
            (1)   The permit has failed to comply with any provisions of this
chapter;
            (2)   The permitted activity creates an obstruction to pedestrian
use of the City Plaza or a nuisance or violates of any statute, law, rule or
regulation involving the permitted event;
            (3)   It is necessary to protect health or safety as determined by
the police chief or designee or fire chief or designee;
            (4)   The permittee has misstated any material fact in the
application;
            (5)   There is a substantial and material variance between the
information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred;
            (6)   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and
conditions of the permit; or
            (7)   The permittee's insurance has been canceled.
         b.   A permittee may appeal the revocation in the same manner as
appealing the issuance or denial of a permit.
      6.   Fees: Fees for ambulatory vendor permits shall be set by resolution
of the city council.
   C.   Permanent And Temporary Structures: The city manager or designee, upon
approval of city council, may enter into an agreement for the sale or lease of
public right of way in the City Plaza for the construction of an addition to an
existing storefront or for the temporary or seasonal use of zone 1 by the owner
or operator of abutting property. Said lease or sale shall only be entered into
after careful consideration and assurance that the following conditions have
been or will be met:
      1.   Building Design:
         a.   Additions to buildings shall be harmonious in scale and design
with permanent neighboring structures and with the City Plaza.
         b.   Materials shall be suitable for the style and design of buildings
in which they are used.
         c.   Materials which are architecturally harmonious shall be used for
all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly
visible from public ways.
         d.   Selection of materials shall be guided by the following:
            (1)   Harmony with adjoining buildings.
            (2)   Relationship to the brick and wood theme of City Plaza.
            (3)   Materials shall be of durable quality.
         e.   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets,
shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.
         f.   Colors shall be selected for their harmony and/or ability to
complement the color scheme of the City Plaza.
         g.   Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the
building or shall be located so as not to be visible from any public ways.
         h.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with
building design.
      2.   Signs:
         a.   All signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size,
color, lettering, location and arrangement shall be harmonious with the
building design and shall be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings.
         b.   Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character
and be harmonious with building design and the materials used in the City
Plaza.
         c.   Every sign shall express, in scale and in proportion, an
appropriate visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
         d.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive
brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious
with the design. If external spotlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that
the light source is shielded from view.
      3.   Additional Criteria:
         a.   The design review committee may, from time to time, formulate
additional design criteria for the review of proposed construction pursuant to
this chapter. Such criteria shall become effective when adopted by the city
council by resolution.
         b.   No building permit for the construction of any temporary
structure or any building extension to be constructed pursuant to this chapter
shall be issued until plans for said construction have been reviewed by the
design review committee and approved by the city council. The design review
committee shall, within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of said plans,
review the plans and advise approval, approval with conditions or disapproval
in a written report forwarded to the city council and the applicant. City
council approval of the plans shall require a majority of votes cast at any
meeting at which a quorum is present.
      4.   Illumination: Nighttime interior illumination of all building fronts
and basement extensions, display window extensions and basement stairwells is
required during hours of operation.
      5.   Construction Costs: All costs of construction are to be paid by the
permittee, including costs of damage or repair to the City Plaza caused by the
construction. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
   D.   Information Tables: The city manager or designee is authorized to grant
a permit for the placement of an information table in City Plaza subject to the
following conditions: (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-2011)
      1.   The location shall be determined by the city manager or designee.
(Ord. 13-4515, 1-22-2013)
      2.   The size of the table shall not exceed three feet by three feet (3'
x 3').
      3.   Soliciting as defined in section
8-5-2 of this code is prohibited.
      4.   The purpose of the table is limited to providing noncommercial
information to the general public. Information containing commercial and
noncommercial information is allowed if the commercial information is
characteristically intertwined with noncommercial information. "Noncommercial
information" is information that is of public concern or that conveys
political, social, religious, or philosophical messages. "Commercial
information" is information proposing the exchange of goods or services for
money or other consideration.
      5.   Commercial activity is prohibited.
      6.   Goods or services cannot be provided or demonstrated. Collection of
signatures incident to provision of information, including, but not limited to,
gathering signatures for a petition or registering persons to vote, shall not
be considered a service.
      7.   The city manager or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant
has fully completed the application. If the permit is denied, the city manager
or designee shall state the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of
the application being filed.
      8.   The city manager or designee, or the city council if issued
following an appeal, may revoke a permit if:
         a.   It is determined that the permittee has misstated any material
fact in the application;
         b.   There is a substantial and material variance between the
information in the application and the actual facts or those facts which appear
reasonably to have occurred; or
         c.   The permittee is operating in violation of the terms and
conditions of the permit or local, state, or federal law.
      9.   The process for appeals of a denial or revocation of the permit
shall be the same as for a parade/public assembly permit. (Ord. 11-4435, 6-21-
2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2M of this code.
10-5-9: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The city manager is authorized to establish administrative rules not
inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out the provisions of this chapter. A
copy of said rules shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-
2004)
10-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
04-4125, 5-4-2004)
CHAPTER 6
IOWA RIVER
SECTION:
10-6-1: State Statutes Incorporated By Reference
10-6-2: Prohibited Operations, Additionally
10-6-1: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Subject to the following additional sections, this chapter of the code shall
incorporate by reference the definitions, restrictions, requirements and
limitations contained in chapter 462A, code of Iowa, as amended. Referenced
chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, are hereby made a part of this
chapter as if set forth herein.
Definitions
Classification Of Vessels
Required Equipment
Prohibited Operations
Right-Of-Way Rules
Permit To Drive Over Ice
Authorized Emergency Vessels
Collisions, Accidents And Casualties
Boat Liveries
Buoys
Penalty
(1994 Code)
10-6-2: PROHIBITED OPERATIONS, ADDITIONALLY:
   A.   No person shall:
      1.   Waterskiing Or Skiing In Certain Areas: Operate any vessel towing
persons on water skis, surfboards or similar devices on the Iowa River in the
area bounded by the Coralville Mill Dam and the Burlington Street Dam, except
during regattas, races, marine parades or exhibitions authorized by the natural
resource commission or its successor to be held in such area.
      2.   Swimming In Certain Areas: Swim in the Iowa River between the Iowa
Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam.
      3.   Walking, Ice Skating, Fishing In Certain Frozen Areas: Walk, ice
skate, fish or otherwise be upon the surface of the ice on the Iowa River
between the Iowa Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam. (1978 Code §24-
83; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   No craft or vehicle shall be operated on the surface of the ice on the
Iowa River between the Iowa Avenue Bridge and the Burlington Street Dam.
   C.   No owner or operator of any vessel propelled by a motor of more than
six (6) horsepower shall permit any person under twelve (12) years of age to
operate such vessel, except when accompanied by a responsible person of at
least eighteen (18) years of age who is experienced in motorboat operation.
(1978 Code §24-83)
   D.   No person owning or operating a vessel shall permit such vessel to be
occupied by more passengers and crew than the registration capacity permits.
(1978 Code §24-85)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CEMETERY
SECTION:
10-7-1: Responsibility For Care And Maintenance
10-7-2: Regulations
10-7-3: Rates And Charges
10-7-4: Nonperpetual Care
10-7-5: Closing Hours
10-7-6: Speed Limit
10-7-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
10-7-8: Penalties
10-7-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
The director of parks and recreation shall be charged with the care and
maintenance of the city cemetery and shall herein be referred to as "director".
(1978 Code §9-1; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-2: REGULATIONS:
Regulations for the city cemetery shall be established by resolution of the
city council, which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk, available
for inspection by the public during normal business hours. (1978 Code §9-2)
10-7-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
Rates and charges for services and burial spaces of the city cemetery shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be on file in the
office of the city clerk, available for inspection by the public during normal
business hours. (1978 Code §9-3)
10-7-4: NONPERPETUAL CARE:
All city cemeteries shall be nonperpetual care cemeteries, and all lots sold
after the effective date of ordinance 77-2823 shall be maintained as such. The
establishment of the cemeteries as nonperpetual care cemeteries shall in no way
alter any rights of purchasers under perpetual care as established by ordinance
2331. (1978 Code §9-10)
10-7-5: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall be in the city cemetery, whether on foot, in a vehicle or
otherwise, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven thirty
o'clock (7:30) A.M. unless granted special authorization by the director. (1978
Code §9-5; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-6: SPEED LIMIT:
No person shall operate any vehicle within the city cemetery at a speed in
excess of ten (10) miles per hour. (1978 Code §9-6; amd. 1994 Code)
10-7-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Animals: No person shall bring or permit any dog or domestic animal to
enter into the city cemetery unless such animal is on a leash or confined in
either a vehicle or in a cage, kennel, crate, or carrier. Said prohibition does
not apply to an animal trained to assist persons with disabilities. (Ord. 17-
4700, 3-21-2017)
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms 1 : No person shall discharge any gun, toy gun,
toy weapon, pistol or other firearm within the city cemetery, except firearms
utilizing blank ammunition may be discharged within the city cemetery in
conjunction with a funeral, committal or memorial service, provided prior
approval is obtained from the director or designee. This subsection shall not
apply nor be construed to prevent any United States, state, county or city
peace officer from discharging any firearms in the execution of official
duties. (1978 Code §9-7; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Defacement Of Monuments: No person shall mar or deface any monument,
stone or statuary within the city cemetery. (1978 Code §9-8; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Injury To Plants: No person shall pick any wild or cultivated flowers
or injure any shrub, tree or plant material within the city cemetery. (1978
Code §9-9; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-7-1 of this code.
10-7-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 8
TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS 1
SECTION:
10-8-1: Definitions
10-8-2: Forestry Administration
10-8-3: Container Planting
10-8-4: Felling Trees In Public Places
10-8-5: Damage To Trees Or Plant Materials Prohibited
10-8-6: Nuisances
10-8-7: Trimming Trees And Plant Materials
10-8-8: Public Utility Installations
10-8-9: Improper Planting Of Trees And Plant Materials
10-8-10: Arboricultural Specifications And Standards Of Practice
10-8-11: Permits For Work On Public Places
10-8-12: Interference With City Forester
10-8-13: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 14, chapter 5, articles E and F of this code.
10-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   PLANT MATERIALS: Any form of plant vegetation.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes public parks, city right of way or any other public
property owned or controlled by the city and dedicated to public use.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: A business or service engaged in regularly supplying the
public with some commodity or service of public consequence and need.
   STREET: The improved portion of public right of way primarily intended for
vehicle travel, including alleys.
   TREES: Any woody vegetation. (1994 Code)
10-8-2: FORESTRY ADMINISTRATION:
Upon appointment by the city manager or designee, the city forester shall have
authority to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and plant
materials on streets and public places in order to ensure public safety and
protect public places. (1978 Code §34-18; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-3: CONTAINER PLANTING:
   A.   Approval And Permit Required: No person shall establish a container
either above or below ground for trees and plant materials on public places
without approval of the city council. Following city council approval, a permit
will be issued by the city forester. Containers and their maintenance become
the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
   B.   Maintenance Required; Notice To Remove Or Replant: All containers and
trees and plant materials shall be maintained to quality and design standards
as required by the city forester. Failure to properly maintain containers and
trees and plant materials may result in a notice to replant or remove, to be
issued in writing by the city forester. Failure to comply with the forester's
notice may result in the city's removing, with costs to be assessed against the
abutting property owner, after written notice, in the same manner as a property
tax, as provided in chapter 364, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §34-19;
amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-4: FELLING TREES IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Trees or branches which are felled or trimmed onto public places must be
removed as directed by the city manager or designee. (1994 Code)
10-8-5: DAMAGE TO TREES OR PLANT MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall damage, move, remove or otherwise injure or vandalize
any trees or plant materials located within public places. (1994 Code)
   B.   Trees and plant materials near any excavation or construction of any
building or structure shall be adequately protected as determined by the city
forester. (1978 Code §34-25; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-6: NUISANCES 1 :
   A.   Generally: Any tree or plant material so placed as to substantially
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic is a public nuisance.
   B.   Cotton Bearing Trees: Cotton bearing cottonwood trees and all other
cotton bearing poplar trees are deemed a public nuisance as provided by the
code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §34-23; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsections
   6-1-2B and M of this code.
10-8-7: TRIMMING TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS:
Trees or plant materials on public or private property abutting on any street
or public place shall be trimmed to a sufficient height to allow free passage
of pedestrian and vehicular travel as required by standards established by the
city forester. (1978 Code §34-24; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-8: PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS:
Work performed by a public utility company under a permit issued under section
10-8-11 of this chapter to treat, trim or remove trees or plant materials on or
within a public place shall be performed in accordance with the standards
established by the city forester. The city forester may assign an inspector to
supervise the provisions of the permit, and the cost of such service shall be
charged to the public utility. (1978 Code §34-26; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-9: IMPROPER PLANTING OF TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS:
Whenever any tree or plant material shall be planted in or within a public
place contrary to standards established by the city forester, the city forester
may require its removal or replanting. Failure to so remove or replant may
result in the city's removing, with costs to be assessed against the abutting
property owner, after written notice, in the same manner as a property tax, as
provided in chapter 364, code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §34-29; amd. 1994
Code)
10-8-10: ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE:
The city forester is hereby authorized to establish specific standards
governing the planting, selection of species, support, treatment of root
systems, trimming, spraying, removal, filling of cavities and bracing for all
trees and plant materials in, on or within public places. (1994 Code)
10-8-11: PERMITS FOR WORK ON PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, except the city or a person hired by the
city, shall treat, plant, trim, remove or otherwise disturb any tree or plant
material on any street or public place without first obtaining a permit from
the city forester. (1978 Code §34-49; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Storage Of Materials That May Inhibit Growth: No person shall deposit,
place, store or maintain upon any street or public place any stone, brick,
sand, concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water,
air and fertilizer to the roots of any trees or plant materials growing
therein, except upon approval of the city forester. (1978 Code §34-56; amd.
1994 Code)
   C.   Public Utility Installations: All permits issued for the installation
of public utilities that affect public trees or public plant materials shall
first be approved by the city forester. A public utility may be issued a permit
to treat, trim or remove any tree or plant material on any street or public
place. (1978 Code §34-57; amd. 1994 Code)
10-8-12: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTER:
No person shall interfere with the city forester in carrying out the duties of
this chapter. (1994 Code)
10-8-13: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 9
PARKS AND RECREATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Definitions
10-9-2: Prohibited Actions In Parks
10-9-3: Traffic And Parking Regulations
10-9-4: Facility Permit
10-9-5: Fees For Use Of City Park And Recreation Areas And Facilities
10-9-6: Penalties
10-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   APPLICANT: A person who applies for permit as authorized in this chapter.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the parks and recreation department.
   PARADE: A march or procession of more than twenty five (25) persons,
vehicles or other forms of transportation, such as bicycles, or any combination
thereof, in or upon the public right of way or in a park that necessitates or
results in the exclusion, in whole or in part, of use of the public right of
way, including a park by others. Funeral processions shall not be deemed to be
included in this definition and shall not be considered a parade.
   PARK FACILITY: A baseball field, softball field, soccer field, tennis court,
secured shelter, or unsecured shelter in a park or Riverside Festival Stage.
   PARK, PUBLIC PARK: Any park or playground owned or controlled by the city,
including streets, trails, and roadways therein.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering
of more than twenty five (25) persons for a common purpose as a result of prior
planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on the public right of way or in a park or occupies any area
in the public right of way or in a park.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use.
   SPONSORING AGENCY: Any organization or group, regardless of whether it is
legally constituted, and including, but not limited to, corporations and
partnerships, on whose behalf a natural person or individual makes application
for a park permit.
   TRAIL: A way or place, the use of which is controlled by the city as owner
of the real property, used for persons walking, jogging, skateboarding, in-line
skating, or bicycling or motorized devices designed for and used by persons
with disabilities. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-2: PROHIBITED ACTIONS IN PARKS:
In any park no person shall:
   A.   Damage To Property, Animals, Trees And Plant Materials:
      1.   Pick or destroy any plant materials or walk or run upon any
flowerbeds.
      2.   Break or tear any limbs or branches from any tree.
      3.   Throw objects or missiles at any animal or bird or molest any animal
or bird in any way.
      4.   Tear down, mutilate, destroy or carry away any sign constructed
under the authority of the City Council or the Parks and Recreation Department.
      5.   Tear down, mutilate, destroy or burn any building, shelter
equipment, picnic table, grill, or any personal property owned by the City.
   B.   Motor Vehicles And Traffic 1 :
      1.   Park any vehicle in any area where parking is prohibited by posted
signs.
      2.   Drive any vehicle within any park, except upon the designated
streets, driveways and parking areas of such parks, except motorized devices
designed for and used by persons with disabilities.
      3.   Drive any vehicle within any park at a speed in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted 2 .
      4.   Drive any vehicle in the wrong direction upon any one-way street
within a park.
   C.   Weapons: Carry firearms or weapons into any park. This subsection shall
not apply to any peace officer in the execution of the officer's duties or an
individual discharging firearms with the written consent of the City for the
purpose of killing deer pursuant to a deer management plan.
   D.   Animals:
      1.   Bring, cause or permit any pet to enter into any park unless such
animal is on a leash or confined in either a vehicle or in a cage, kennel,
crate, or carrier.
      2.   Ride any horse in any park except upon streets and trails, and then
only if the horse rider provides for the immediate disposal of solid waste
material excreted by any animal.
      3.   This provision shall not apply to: a) an animal trained to assist
persons with disabilities; b) a person issued a permit as authorized in section
8-4-12 of this Code; or c) a dog in a City dog park that has been issued a use
permit.
   E.   Fires 1: Build or aid and abet the building of any fire in any park,
except in stoves or fireplaces designated for such purposes.
   F.   Alcoholic Beverages 2: Possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in
any park, except as provided in Section
4-5-3 of the Code.
   G.   Practice Golf: Practice golf in any park.
   H.   Unauthorized Use Of Buildings: Occupy any shelter or building or
recreation area which has been reserved by others through the provisions of
this chapter or install any unauthorized reserved sign in any shelter, building
or recreation area.
   I.   Hours:
      1.   Except as provided for herein, occupy any park, whether on foot, on
a non-motorized vehicle, or in a vehicle, or permit any vehicle to remain
parked from dusk to dawn at any park. "Dusk" means thirty (30) minutes after
"sunset" and "dawn" means thirty (30) minutes before sunrise.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   Blackhawk Mini Park remains open at all times and is not subject
to the closure hours;
         b.   Chauncey Swan Park and College Green Park are closed from
midnight to dawn;
         c.   Persons may use trails and sidewalks as a mode of transportation
when a park is closed; and
         d.   The Director or designee may authorize persons to occupy a park
after closure hours for a specific event.
   J.   Bicycles, E-Devices, And Nonmotorized Vehicles:
      1.   No person shall travel upon or operate a bicycle, electric assist
bicycle, electric scooter, electric skateboard, or nonmotorized vehicle within
Chauncey Swan Park or Black Hawk Mini Park.
      2.   Persons may travel upon or operate bicycles, electric assist
bicycles, electric scooters, electric skateboards, and nonmotorized vehicles in
all other City parks except where posted as prohibited. A person who operates a
bicycle, electric assist bicycle, electric scooter or electric skateboard shall
exercise caution to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian, and shall not operate it in such manner as to
indicate a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
      3.   This provision shall not apply to a person with disabilities using a
nonmotorized device designed for a person with disabilities.
      4.   Electric assist bicycles, electric scooters, and electric
skateboards mean the same as defined in Title 9, Section 1 of this Code.
   K.   Commercial Use: No commercial use of City parks is allowed except as
approved by the Director.
   L.   Smokeless Tobacco: In addition to the prohibition of use of tobacco and
electronic cigarettes in City parks as provided in title 6, chapter 10 of this
Code, no person shall use smokeless tobacco in any City park except when in a
privately owned vehicle. Smokeless tobacco is defined as any product that
contains cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco and is intended to be placed in
the oral or nasal cavity, including, but not limited to, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco products and snus. (Ord. 04-4125,
5-4-2004; amd. Ord. 10-4400, 7-12-2010; Ord. 12-4504, 12-4-2012; Ord. 13-4563,
12-3-2013; Ord. 17-4729, 10-17-2017; Ord. 19-4791, 5-21-2019; Ord. 19-4806, 9-
17-2019; Ord. 19-4812, 11-19-2019; Ord. 21-4855, 5-4-2021; Ord. 21-4859, 6-1-
2021; Ord. 24-4925, 6-4-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-9-3 of this chapter.
2 2. See subsection
  9-3-6A2e of this Code.
10-9-3: TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS 1 :
   A.   Duties Of Director: The Director is hereby authorized and directed to:
1) designate streets and drives for use within the parks; 2) designate parking
areas for the parks; and 3) prohibit, regulate or limit stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles on the streets, driveways and parking areas in the parks at
all times or during specified hours. The Director shall also cause signs to be
posted designating streets, drives and parking areas or prohibiting, regulating
or limiting stopping, standing or parking in the parks.
   B.   Vehicle Owner Prima Facie Responsible For Violations: If any vehicle is
found stopped, standing or parked in any manner violative of the provisions of
this chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the owner is responsible for such violation. (Ord.
04-4125, 5-4-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-9-2B of this chapter.
10-9-4: FACILITY PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or group of
persons to use any park or the facilities of any park without complying with
the requirements of chapter 1 of this title including first having obtained a
parade/public assembly permit if applicable.
   B.   Secured Shelter: No person or sponsoring agency shall use a secured
shelter without obtaining the authorization of the Director or designee.
   C.   Park Facility: Any person or sponsoring agency may reserve a park
facility by completing and filing an application with the Director on a form
prepared by the Director. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-5: FEES FOR USE OF CITY PARK AND RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Fees Established: Upon recommendation of the Parks and Recreation
Commission, all parks and recreation fees shall be established by resolution of
the City Council. (1994 Code)
   B.   Reduction Or Waiver Of Fees: Notwithstanding the above, the Director is
authorized to reduce or waive fees for use of park facilities or equipment for
affiliate groups or organizations providing public recreational opportunities
and which are under the sponsorship or cosponsorship of the Parks and
Recreation Department. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-9-6: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 10
CHUTES AND VAULTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION:
10-10-1: Definitions
10-10-2: Use Prohibited
10-10-3: Agreements For Chutes And Vaults
10-10-4: Penalties For Violation
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
   AGREEMENT: The official agreement between the city and a property owner and/
or lessee authorizing a person to use a chute or vault.
   CHUTE: A below grade passageway through which goods may pass and persons may
gain access to private property that is located below grade. Said passageway
extends from an at grade opening covered by a vault hatch located within the
public right of way to a private property line and includes the entire
passageway below the right of way from said opening to said property line.
   PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on or below a public roadway, highway, street,
cartway, bicycle lane, alley, and public sidewalk which is designed for
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel and dedicated to public use.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY ADMINISTRATOR: Public works director, or his or her
designee.
   VAULT: The area that is located below grade in the public right of way
contiguous to an adjoining building on private property, which is utilized by a
person for such uses as storage, office space, and deliveries. Access to a
vault may be through the adjoining building or through a vault hatch located at
grade level within the public right of way. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-2: USE PROHIBITED:
Use of chutes and vaults within the public right of way shall be unlawful
except as specifically provided herein or as specifically authorized by this
chapter. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-3: AGREEMENTS FOR CHUTES AND VAULTS:
   A.   Application: An application to enter into an agreement to use a chute
or vault in the public right of way shall be filed with the city department of
public works on a form provided by said department. The application shall
include the name of the property owner abutting the portion of the right of way
containing said chute or vault and the name of all lessees. A person shall
submit with said application a certificate of insurance that complies with the
insurance provision of this chapter.
   B.   Agreement Required: Beginning ninety (90) days from the effective date
hereof, no person shall use a chute or vault in the public right of way without
first executing an agreement with the city. Agreements will be executed on
behalf of the city by the director of public works if the director determines
that the use is a minimal intrusion into the public use of the right of way and
that pedestrian traffic will not be materially impaired. All agreements shall
include provisions for the following:
      1.   Insurance: A person shall provide, at the time the application is
filed, a certificate of insurance for general liability and casualty insurance,
naming the city of Iowa City as an additional insured, which provides coverage
in the following minimum amounts: comprehensive general liability for bodily
injury and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each
occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. A person
shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city before cancellation of said
insurance.
      2.   Maintenance: A person shall maintain the chute and vault and its
appurtenant vault hatches within the right of way in good and reasonable repair
as determined by the public right of way administrator.
      3.   Inspection: The city may inspect a chute or vault after giving
twenty four (24) hours' notice.
      4.   Hold Harmless: A person shall pay on behalf of the city all sums
which the city shall be obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed
upon the city for damages of any kind resulting from using or accessing a chute
or vault, whether sustained by any person or persons, caused by accident or
otherwise and shall defend at its own expense and on behalf of the city any
claim against the city arising out of the use of the public right of way.
      5.   Assumption Of Risk And Waiver Of Liability: A person shall
acknowledge that there are risks arising from other uses, operation, repair,
and maintenance of the right of way, including, but not limited to, utilities
such as water mains, water lines, sewer mains, sewer lines, gas lines, fiber
optic lines, pedestrian traffic, and vehicular traffic, and will absolve the
city of liability for damages sustained by said person as a result of such
approved uses of the right of way.
      6.   Temporary Use: A person shall acknowledge and agree that the city is
not empowered to grant a permanent use of its right of way for private
purposes.
   C.   Sealed: If the use of a chute or vault is abandoned, if a person using
a chute or vault refuses to enter into an agreement, or if an agreement is
terminated, the city may seal the chute or vault. "Abandoned" means no use for
ninety (90) continuous days.
   D.   Additional Requirements: The public right of way administrator may
establish additional requirements, as necessary, for the protection of the
right of way. (Ord. 02-4021, 5-21-2002)
10-10-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal infraction. (Ord.
02-4021, 5-21-2002)
CHAPTER 11
FARMERS' MARKET
SECTION:
10-11-1: Definitions
10-11-2: Registration
10-11-3: Standards For Granting Or Denying Authorization
10-11-4: Appeals
10-11-5: Revocation Of Authorization
10-11-6: Administrative Rules
10-11-7: Fees
10-11-8: Penalties
10-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   DIRECTOR: The director of city parks and recreation department.
   FARMERS' MARKET: An open air market sponsored by the city that is intended
to provide an opportunity for individuals to sell permitted items that are
grown or produced by them, which conform to all applicable city, county and
state health and safety provisions, including state department of agriculture
regulations.
   FARMERS' MARKET VENDOR: Person who is authorized under this chapter to
occupy a stall and to sell items in the farmers' market or who is a grilling
vendor.
   GRILLING SITE: A location designated by the director that a grilling vendor
is authorized to occupy in order to prepare and sell items consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
   GRILLING VENDOR: Person who is authorized under this chapter to occupy a
grilling site to grill or cook food and offer the prepared item for sale. A
grilling vendor who grills or cooks food on site may in addition sell
nonalcoholic beverages that have been prepared on site.
   PERSON: A natural person.
   SEASON VENDOR: A farmers' market vendor who is authorized by the city to
occupy a stall or grilling site for the entire season.
   STALL: A space designated by the director that a farmers' market vendor is
authorized to occupy in order to sell items consistent with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004; amd. Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007; Ord. 10-
4387, 4-6-2010)
10-11-2: REGISTRATION:
   A.   Authorization Required: No person shall sell or offer for sale any item
at the farmers' market without authorization from the director or designee.
   B.   Obtaining Authorization: In order to receive authorization, a person
shall register with the director at least one day in advance of the market date
on a form prepared by the director.
   C.   Registration Form: The registration form shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the farmers' market vendor.
      2.   Agreement to indemnify the city. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-3: STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OR DENYING AUTHORIZATION:
The director or designee shall examine the registration form and shall grant
authorization if the following conditions are met:
   A.   All applicable fees have been paid.
   B.   A stall or grilling site is available.
   C.   The person has not had his or her farmers' market authorization revoked
in the last year.
   D.   If there are more registrants than available stalls and grilling sites,
selection will be pursuant to standards set forth in the administrative rules.
Notwithstanding any other provision, the administrative rules may provide that
a vendor who has violated any provision of this chapter or an administrative
rule will not be given priority.
   E.   Vendor requirements:
      1.   The vendor has obtained insurance in a reasonable amount necessary
to minimize risk of harm to persons and property based on the intended use, as
determined by the city's risk manager.
      2.   The vendor has obtained all necessary permits required by the
Johnson County health department.
      3.   Such other requirements as the director may establish in the
administrative rules.
   F.   If the person intends to sell alcohol, the person has obtained all
necessary permits and licenses from the state of Iowa. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004;
amd. Ord. 07-4268, 7-10-2007; Ord. 10-4387, 4-6-2010; Ord. 16-4677, 9-20-2016;
Ord. 22-4874, 2-1-2022)
10-11-4: APPEALS:
   A.   Any party aggrieved by the decision of the director to grant or deny
authorization under this chapter may appeal within ten (10) calendar days of
the date of the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
manager.
   B.   The hearing shall be before the city manager, who may reverse, affirm
or modify, in any regard, the determination of the director based upon the
standards enumerated herein. The city manager's decision is the final decision
of the city. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-5: REVOCATION OF AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   Authorization may be revoked by the director if:
      1.   The farmers' market vendor has misstated in any way material facts
on the registration form.
      2.   There is a material variance between the information on the
registration form and the facts reasonably ascertained by the director.
      3.   When, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other
emergency, as determined by the director, city manager, fire chief, or chief of
police, that the safety of the public requires such revocation.
      4.   The farmers' market vendor is operating in violation of the terms
and conditions of the authorization.
   B.   A person may appeal a revocation of authorization in the same manner as
appealing the denial of authorization as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 04-
4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-6: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The director is authorized to establish administrative rules. A copy of said
rules shall be on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-7: FEES:
Fees for authorization of a farmers' market vendor shall be established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-4125, 5-4-2004)
10-11-8: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
04-4125, 5-4-2004)
TITLE 11
PUBLIC LIBRARY
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
SECTION:
11-1-1: Library Established
11-1-2: Board Of Library Trustees
11-1-3: Nonresident Use Of Library
11-1-4: Conduct Within Library
11-1-5: Library Account; Expenditures
11-1-6: Penalties
11-1-1: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a free public library for the city, to be known as
the Iowa City public library. (1978 Code §20-1)
11-1-2: BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES:
   A.   Board Created: There is hereby created a board of trustees of the Iowa
City public library. (1978 Code §20-16)
   B.   Membership; Appointment: The board of trustees of the city public
library, hereinafter referred to as the "board", consists of nine (9) members.
All resident board members are to be appointed by the mayor with the approval
of the city council. If the library is receiving funds for countywide public
library service on a contract basis, there may be one nonresident board member
who shall be appointed by the county board of supervisors with the approval of
the city council. (1978 Code §20-17; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Qualifications Of Trustees: All members of the board shall be bona fide
residents of the city, except the nonresident member, and all shall be over the
age of eighteen (18) years. (1978 Code §28-18; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Terms And Vacancies:
      1.   Terms Of Office: All appointments to the board shall be for six (6)
years except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total
number, as near as possible, to stagger the terms. The present incumbents are
confirmed in their appointments and terms.
      2.   Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if the
trustee moves permanently from the city, or in case of a nonresident member,
from the county, or if the trustee is absent for four (4) consecutive regular
meetings of the board. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment of
the mayor with the approval of the city council, or in the case of the
nonresident member, with the approval of the board of supervisors, with the
concurring approval of the city council. An appointed trustee shall fill out
the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. (1978 Code §20-19; amd.
1994 Code)
   E.   Powers And Duties Generally: The board shall have and exercise the
following powers and duties:
      1.   To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary and such
other officers as it deems necessary. The city finance officer shall serve as
board treasurer but shall not be a member of the board.
      2.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms.
      3.   To direct and control all the activities and operations of the
library.
      4.   To employ a librarian and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting
in favor thereof.
      5.   To remove, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board, the librarian
and provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for
misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the
provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended.
      6.   To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases
of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other
library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library
within budgetary limits set by the board.
      7.   To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and
to fix charges therefor.
      8.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use and management
of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing penalties
for violations.
      9.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated
for library purposes by the city council and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the construction or remodeling of library buildings and of all
other monies belonging to the library, including fines and rentals collected,
under the rules of the board.
      10.   To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed
property and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of such property; and to expend the funds received from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library.
      11.   To keep a record of its proceedings.
      12.   To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations,
devises and bequests.
      13.   To have authority to make agreements with the local county
historical association, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room
and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the
association. The trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are, in their judgment, of a historical and educational nature and pay for
the same out of funds allocated for library purposes. (1978 Code §20-20; amd.
1994 Code)
   F.   Contract With Others For Use Of Library:
      1.   Contracting: The board may contract with any other boards of
trustees of free public libraries, any other city, school, corporation, private
or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township or county
or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library
by their respective residents. Where deemed appropriate or beneficial by the
board and city council, the board may authorize the city council to negotiate
and execute such library services contracts on its behalf. The terms and
conditions of any such authorization shall be set forth in a joint agreement
between the board and city council, copies of which shall be maintained by the
city clerk.
      2.   Termination Of Contract: Such a contract may be terminated at any
time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by
a majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting
parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by
the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less
than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the
territory of such party at the last general election. The petition must be
presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the
election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that
is held in the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract.
(1978 Code §20-21)
   G.   Annual Report: The board shall make a report to the city council
immediately after the close of the city fiscal year. This report shall contain
statements of the condition of the library, the number of books added thereto,
the number circulated, the amount of fines collected and the amount of money
expended in the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such
further information required by the city council. (1978 Code §20-22)
   H.   Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services. (1978 Code §20-19)
11-1-3: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The board created by this chapter may authorize the use of the library by
nonresidents, upon contractual arrangements, fee charges or other methods of
recovering the cost thereof, in any one or more of the following ways:
   A.   By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents
of the city or upon payment of a special nonresident library fee.
   B.   By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to nonresidents.
   C.   By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or
other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   D.   By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library
materials to nonresidents. (1978 Code §20-2)
11-1-4: CONDUCT WITHIN LIBRARY:
No person shall engage in conduct, such as loud talking or audible use of sound
equipment, which interferes with the order and quiet attendant in a library
setting and/or which materially disturbs the ability of library patrons to
receive information. (1994 Code)
11-1-5: LIBRARY ACCOUNT; EXPENDITURES:
All money appropriated by the city council from the general fund for the
operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for
the library. Expenditures shall be paid only on orders of the board of
trustees, signed by its president and secretary. (1978 Code §20-4; amd. 1994
Code)
11-1-6: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
TITLE 12
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE 1
SECTION:
12-1-1: Franchise Granted
12-1-2: Franchise Continuation; Termination
12-1-3: Rights Of Company Subject To Applicable Provisions
12-1-4: Restructured Retail Electric Utility Industry
12-1-5: Placement Of Facilities And Structures
12-1-6: Excavations
12-1-7: Customer Notification Of Work
12-1-8: Tree Pruning
12-1-9: Indemnification
12-1-10: Authority Of Company
12-1-11: Availability Of Service
12-1-12: Street Modifications
12-1-13: Furnish Sufficient Energy For Demand
12-1-14: Company Contributions To Benefit City
12-1-15: City Use Of Company Poles
12-1-16: Franchise Fee; Audit
12-1-17: Eminent Domain
12-1-18: Location And Relocation Of Installations
12-1-19: Energy Efficiency And/Or Conservation Programs
12-1-20: Disaster Or Emergency Response Communications Task Force
12-1-21: Renewable Energy Options
12-1-22: Franchise Is Binding; Assignment Or Termination Of Franchise
12-1-23: Effective Date
12-1-24: Severability
 
Notes
1 1. See title 16, chapter 2 of this code for public utilities and use of city
  right of way.
12-1-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called the "company", and its successors and assigns, the
nonexclusive right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and
operate in the city of Iowa City, hereinafter the "city", an electric light and
power system including the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles,
lines, wire, transmission lines, conduits and other appliances for the
transmission and distribution of electric energy along, under and upon the
streets, avenues and alleys to serve customers within and without said city,
and to furnish and sell electric energy to said city and its inhabitants. The
city council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other
public places at the request of the company. Rights are hereby granted for all
existing facilities located in other public places prior to the date of this
agreement. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-2: FRANCHISE CONTINUATION; TERMINATION:
The city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but
less than two (2) years prior to the tenth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this
franchise will terminate on the tenth anniversary of the effective date. The
city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less
than two (2) years prior to the twentieth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this
franchise will terminate on the twentieth anniversary of the effective date. If
both such resolutions are adopted, this franchise will terminate on the twenty
fifth anniversary of the effective date. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
   A.   This franchise is renewed and continued for a period of ten (10) years
until December 4, 2027. (Ord. 16-4681, 11-1-2016)
12-1-3: RIGHTS OF COMPANY SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
The rights and privileges hereby granted to the company, its successors and
assigns, are subject to applicable provisions of the Iowa Code, including, but
not limited to, the restrictions and limitations of Iowa Code chapter 364
(2007) or as subsequently amended or changed, this code, any other applicable
statutes or regulations promulgated by federal or state agencies under federal
or state laws, all of said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes and regulations as
presently enacted or subsequently amended. The company reserves the right to
challenge or contest the city's interpretation or application of any of said
laws, codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations. The city may make such
lawful and reasonable amendments to the provisions of this code affecting or
regulating the company in its operation of the electric utility, as the city
deems necessary and proper, within the scope of its authority as authorized by
the constitution and code of Iowa. The franchise granted herein shall not
restrict in any manner the right of the city in the exercise of any power which
it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the
constitution or laws of the state of Iowa. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-4: RESTRUCTURED RETAIL ELECTRIC UTILITY INDUSTRY:
Nothing in this agreement shall be construed or interpreted to limit or
prohibit the city, residents or businesses of Iowa City from participating in
or enjoying any benefits and protections of a restructured retail electric
utility industry to the extent that such benefits and protections are made
available to consumers of competitive retail electric services under state and
federal rules, regulations and law. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-5: PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES:
The company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place
thereon the necessary wires, fixtures and accessories as well as to excavate
and bury conduits or conductors for the distribution of electric energy in and
through the city, provided the same shall be placed in accord with this
franchise and any regulation the city may from time to time adopt or amend
regarding the placement of facilities or structures of utilities, and other
right of way users' facilities or structures, in the right of way. All electric
utility system components placed above, upon, in or under public right of way,
and the wires placed thereon or therein, shall comply with the national
electrical safety code as adopted by the regulations of the Iowa utilities
board. The company shall not without express approval from the city place in
the right of way any substation operating at greater than fifteen thousand
(15,000) volts, transmission lines, equipment or appliances operated at greater
than fifteen thousand (15,000) volts or pad mounted distribution facilities of
greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) volts serving an underground
distribution feeder system. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-6: EXCAVATIONS:
The company is authorized to make excavations in city streets, avenues and
alleys for purposes of routine repair, replacement, and maintenance of poles,
wires, conduits, lines or other electric utility system components. In making
such excavations, the company shall obtain a city permit therefor and shall not
unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets, avenues or alleys, shall provide the
public works director with twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to the actual
commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and requirements
of the city in its regulation of the use of city right of way in performing
such work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the company may
proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit,
provided, however, that the company shall apply for and obtain the excavation
permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work. (Ord. 07-4294,
11-27-2007)
12-1-7: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION OF WORK:
Prior to commencing significant construction or maintenance projects in the
public right of way, the company shall use its best efforts to notify the
contiguous affected customers. Best efforts shall include, but are not limited
to, at least one of the following: door hangers, telephone contact, or direct
mail. Notification shall not be required in the event of emergency repairs or
electric outage restoration efforts. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-8: TREE PRUNING:
The company is authorized and empowered consistent with this franchise to prune
or remove at company expense any tree extending into any street, alley, right
of way or public grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore
utility service and to prevent limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with
the wires and facilities of the company. The pruning shall be completed in
accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards, ANSI
Z133.1 - 2006, American national standard for arboriculture operations - safety
requirements, and ANSI A300 (part 1) - 2001 Pruning, American national standard
for tree, shrub, and other woody plant maintenance - standard of practices
pruning, or subsequent revisions to these standards, and city ordinances
regarding the pruning of trees and the protection of its facilities upon public
ground. The company shall not remove or prune any tree on public grounds, other
than right of way, except in an emergency or when necessary to alleviate an
existing electrical outage without first obtaining permission of the city's
public works director, nor shall the company dig or otherwise excavate under
the canopy of any tree on public ground, unless using trencherless technologies
or directional boring, except in an emergency or when necessary to alleviate an
existing electrical outage, without having first given the city's public works
director twenty four (24) hours' notice. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
The company shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the
company's negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided,
however, that the company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save
harmless the city for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the
city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-10: AUTHORITY OF COMPANY:
The company, and its successors and assigns, is authorized to extend its lines,
wires and conduits, to expand its transmission and distribution systems, to
engage in repair work and to install new distribution and transmission systems
within the city. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-11: AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The company shall maintain the availability of service throughout the entire
city including newly annexed areas, excluding areas designated by the Iowa
utilities board to be the exclusive service territory of another electric
provider, by extending lines or facilities in a manner consistent with Iowa
law. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-12: STREET MODIFICATIONS:
The city shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make
provision for the placement of company service lines and facilities on city
owned right of way without charge to company. In planning for the extension or
modification of streets and roads, the city shall, to the extent practicable in
the discretion of its public works director, design such changes to limit the
need for the relocation of company facilities. Nothing in this franchise shall
be construed as a guarantee that in either existing right of way or in future
acquired right of way the city will provide sufficient space for any particular
need of the company nor shall the city be required to obtain additional right
of way solely for the use of the company. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-13: FURNISH SUFFICIENT ENERGY FOR DEMAND:
The said company, its successors and assigns, as long as it shall operate under
the terms of this franchise, shall furnish electric energy in sufficient
quantities to supply the reasonable demands of said city and the inhabitants
thereof in accordance with the company's rules, regulations and conditions of
service as approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-14: COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS TO BENEFIT CITY:
The company shall make an annual written report to the city council summarizing
community contributions which benefit the people of Iowa City which have been
made by the company or its foundation. The written report shall include the
name of each entity to which such contributions have been made, the amount of
such contribution and a comparison showing contributions for that year and the
three (3) prior years. The report shall be filed with the city council within
three (3) months of the close of the company's fiscal year. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-
27-2007)
12-1-15: CITY USE OF COMPANY POLES:
The city shall be privileged upon thirty (30) days' advance notice to the
company, without charge, to make use of the distribution poles of the company
that are placed within city right of way for any city alarm, city control, or
city communication function, excluding any paid subscriber services (but
including any city owned cable or wireline communication system for which use
the city shall pay an amount consistent with federal law), to the extent that
such use shall not interfere with their use by the company, but the city shall
hold the company harmless from any and all causes of action, litigation or
damages arising through the placing of the facilities of the city upon the
company's poles. If at the sole discretion of the company, it is determined
that said attachments may create a clearance violation or other hazardous
situation, or that wind or other conditions may place undue stress on specific
company facilities, the city shall not be authorized to attach to those
facilities. If attachments are in place, upon notification by the company of
damage or potential damage, the city shall promptly remove said attachments.
(Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-16: FRANCHISE FEE; AUDIT:
The city reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant to the Iowa
Code, on the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts,
derived from the distribution and the retail sale of electricity by the company
to customers within the current or future corporate limits of the city. The
city shall provide the company with ninety (90) days' advance notice of the
effective date of any franchise fee put into effect by the city. The city may
require the company to provide an accounting to establish that the fee has been
correctly calculated. The city may include a requirement that an audit of the
calculation and basis for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted by an
auditor of the city's selection and the company will cooperate with such an
audit. Said audit shall not be conducted more than once a year. The city shall
pay the costs of the audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of franchise
fees by an amount equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in which
event the company shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-17: EMINENT DOMAIN:
With the permission of the city council, to be separately given in regard to
each application to use powers of eminent domain, company shall have the power
to condemn private property for the purpose of providing electric service to
the public and in a reasonable relationship to an overall plan of distributing
electrical energy within the city. The company must establish the necessity of
each taking of private property and, when so established, the city council
shall approve the condemnation of the private property by resolution if the
council finds the use of such powers is in the public interest, does not create
an unacceptable public safety problem and there is not any reasonable
alternative. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-18: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in
such manner as the city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of
facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any
public improvement of, in, or about any such street or alley, or promoting the
efficient operation of any such improvement. The city may require the company
to place or bury its electrical utility system components underground as
consistent with company tariffs (it is the understanding of the parties that
under current tariffs the company shall assume and pay as its own expense the
cost of moving a line from one aboveground location to another aboveground
location and the city shall reimburse the company for any additional cost
occasioned by placing a facility underground). (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-19: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND/OR CONSERVATION PROGRAMS:
The company shall, at all times during which this franchise is in effect,
maintain, administer and operate such energy efficiency and/or conservation
programs within the city, as may be approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord.
07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-20: DISASTER OR EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMUNICATIONS TASK FORCE:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a disaster or
emergency response communications task force to address such topics as a
dedicated communications link between the city and the company during
emergencies, an interoperable radio communications system between the company
and the city, a reverse telephone messaging system and participation by the
company in city and Johnson County joint drills and emergency training
exercises. It is the intent of the parties that such participation may be
established by a separate agreement which refers to this franchise. (Ord. 07-
4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-21: RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a city task force to
identify and utilize city generated renewable energy options, including sewage
treatment gas or landfill gas available to the city. In the event that the city
should at any time during the term of this franchise become an alternate energy
producer of electrical energy at a municipally owned or operated facility the
company shall, if requested by the city, enter into an agreement to purchase
the electric energy produced from such qualifying alternate generating
facility, subject to applicable statutory requirements and regulations. (Ord.
07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-22: FRANCHISE IS BINDING; ASSIGNMENT OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
This franchise shall apply to and bind the city and the company and their
successors and assigns; provided that any assignment by the company shall be
subject to the approval of the city council by resolution, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld.
The city expressly reserves the right to terminate the franchise granted herein
if the company breaches any of the provisions of this franchise; provided,
however, there shall be no termination if the company shall correct the breach
within sixty (60) days' written notice provided by the city to do so.
The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this franchise by any failure of the city to insist upon or seek
compliance with any such terms or conditions. Further, it is agreed that the
subject matter of this franchise is unique and may be enforced by specific
performance, at the city's option, since a remedy at law may be inadequate.
(Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-23: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage
in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the company. The
company shall within thirty (30) days after the approval of this chapter by the
city council, file in the office of the clerk of the city its acceptance in
writing of all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following city council
approval and written acceptance by the company, this chapter shall be published
in the "Iowa City Press Citizen". The effective date hereof shall be the date
of publication. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-2007)
12-1-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this franchise ordinance are for any reason
declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise
ordinance, which are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and
remain in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise ordinance
contained no illegal or void provisions. In the event any provision or
provisions are ruled illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
city and the company shall forthwith amend this franchise to insert a successor
provision that complies with the applicable court ruling. (Ord. 07-4294, 11-27-
2007)
CHAPTER 2
GAS FRANCHISE 1
SECTION:
12-2-1: Franchise Granted
12-2-2: Franchise Continuation; Termination
12-2-3: Rights Of Company Subject To Applicable Provisions
12-2-4: Excavations For Placement Of Facilities
12-2-5: Maintenance Of Gas System; Notice; Permit
12-2-6: Customer Notification Of Work
12-2-7: Indemnification
12-2-8: Authority Of Company
12-2-9: Availability Of Service
12-2-10: Street Modifications
12-2-11: Furnish Sufficient Gas For Demand
12-2-12: Company Contributions To Benefit City
12-2-13: Franchise Fee; Audit
12-2-14: Eminent Domain
12-2-15: Location And Relocation Of Installations
12-2-16: Energy Efficiency And/Or Conservation Programs
12-2-17: Disaster Or Emergency Response Communications Task Force
12-2-18: Franchise Is Binding; Assignment Or Termination Of Franchise
12-2-19: Effective Date
12-2-20: Severability
 
Notes
1 1. See title 16, chapter 2 of this code for public utilities and use of city
  right of way.
12-2-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called "company", and to its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city of
Iowa City, Iowa, hereinafter called the "city", a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and
rights of way of the city to serve customers within and without the city and to
furnish and sell natural gas to the city and its inhabitants. The city council
reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other public places
upon request from the company. Rights are hereby granted for all existing
facilities located in other public places prior to the date of this agreement.
(Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-2: FRANCHISE CONTINUATION; TERMINATION:
The city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but
less than two (2) years prior to the tenth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this
franchise will terminate on the tenth anniversary of the effective date. The
city may continue this franchise by resolution adopted more than one, but less
than two (2) years prior to the twentieth anniversary of the effective date
hereof. In the event the city council does not adopt such a resolution, this
franchise will terminate on the twentieth anniversary of the effective date. If
both such resolutions are adopted, this franchise will terminate on the twenty
fifth anniversary of the effective date. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
   A.   This franchise is renewed and continued for a period of ten (10) years
until December 4, 2027. (Ord. 16-4682, 11-1-2016)
12-2-3: RIGHTS OF COMPANY SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
The rights and privileges hereby granted to the company, its successors and
assigns, are subject to applicable provisions of the Iowa Code, including, but
not limited to, the restrictions and limitations of Iowa Code chapter 364
(2007) or as subsequently amended or changed, this code, any other applicable
statutes or regulations promulgated by federal or state agencies under federal
or state laws, all of said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes and regulations as
presently enacted or subsequently amended. The company reserves the right to
challenge or contest the city's interpretation or application of any of said
laws, codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations. The city may make such
lawful and reasonable amendments to the provisions of this code affecting or
regulating the company in its operation of the natural gas utility, as the city
deems necessary and proper, within the scope of its authority as authorized by
the constitution and code of Iowa. The franchise granted herein shall not
restrict in any manner the right of the city in the exercise of any power which
it now has or which may hereafter be authorized or permitted by the
constitution or laws of the state of Iowa. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-4: EXCAVATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES:
The company shall have the right to excavate in any city street, avenue or
alley for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes,
mains, conduits, and other gas system components, provided the same shall be
placed in accord with this franchise and any regulation the city may from time
to time adopt or amend regarding the placement of facilities or structures of
utilities, provided same is not in conflict with company's standards or state
and federal regulation, and other right of way users' facilities or structures,
in the right of way. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-5: MAINTENANCE OF GAS SYSTEM; NOTICE; PERMIT:
The company is authorized to make excavations in city streets, avenues and
alleys for purposes of routine repair, replacement, and maintenance of gas
pipes, mains, conduits, and other gas system components. In making such
excavations, the company shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of streets,
avenues or alleys, shall provide the public works director with twenty four
(24) hours' notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, and shall
comply with all provisions and requirements of the city in its regulation of
the use of city right of way in performing such work. The company shall not dig
or otherwise excavate under the canopy of any tree on public ground, unless
using trencherless technologies or directional boring. In emergencies which
require immediate excavation, the company may proceed with the work without
first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that the company
shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after
commencing such emergency work. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-6: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION OF WORK:
Prior to commencing significant construction or maintenance projects in the
public right of way, the company shall use its best efforts to notify the
contiguous affected customers. Best efforts shall include, but are not limited
to, at least one of the following: door hangers, telephone contact, or direct
mail. Notification shall not be required in the event of emergency repairs or
natural gas restoration efforts. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
The company shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the
company's negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify
and save harmless the city for any costs or damages arising from the negligence
of the city, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-8: AUTHORITY OF COMPANY:
The company, and its successors and assigns, is authorized to extend its
natural gas distribution system and to engage in repair work and to install new
gas distribution and transmission facilities within the city. (Ord. 07-4293,
11-27-2007)
12-2-9: AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The company shall maintain the availability of service throughout the entire
city including newly annexed areas, by extending natural gas facilities in a
manner consistent with Iowa law. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-10: STREET MODIFICATIONS:
The city shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make
provision for the placement of company service lines and facilities on city
owned right of way without charge to company. In planning for the extension or
modification of streets and roads, the city shall, to the extent practicable in
the discretion of its public works director, design such changes to limit the
need for the relocation of company facilities. Nothing in this franchise shall
be construed as a guarantee that in either existing right of way or in future
acquired right of way the city will provide sufficient space for any particular
need of the company nor shall the city be required to obtain additional right
of way solely for the use of the company. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-11: FURNISH SUFFICIENT GAS FOR DEMAND:
The said company, its successors and assigns, as long as it shall operate under
the terms of this franchise, shall furnish natural gas in sufficient quantities
to supply the reasonable demands of said city and the inhabitants thereof in
accordance with the company's rules, regulations and conditions of service as
approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-12: COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS TO BENEFIT CITY:
The company shall make an annual written report to the city council summarizing
community contributions which benefit the people of Iowa City which have been
made by the company or its foundation. The written report shall include the
name of each entity to which such contributions have been made, the amount of
such contribution and a comparison showing contributions for that year and the
three (3) prior years. The report shall be filed with the city council within
three (3) months of the close of the company's fiscal year. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-
27-2007)
12-2-13: FRANCHISE FEE; AUDIT:
The city reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant to the Iowa
Code, on the gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts,
derived from the distribution, delivery and retail sale of natural gas by the
company or other natural gas providers utilizing the distribution system of the
company, to customers within the current or future corporate limits of the
city. The city shall provide the company with ninety (90) days' advance notice
of the effective date of any franchise fee put into effect by the city. The
city may require the company to provide an accounting to establish that the fee
has been correctly calculated. The city may include a requirement that an audit
of the calculation and basis for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted
by an auditor of the city's selection and the company will cooperate with such
an audit. Said audit shall not be conducted more than once a year. The city
shall pay the costs of the audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of
franchise fees by an amount equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in
which event the company shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-
2007)
12-2-14: EMINENT DOMAIN:
With the permission of the city council, to be separately given in regard to
each application to use powers of eminent domain, company shall have the power
to condemn private property for the purpose of providing natural gas to the
public and in a reasonable relationship to an overall plan of distributing
natural gas within the city. The company must establish the necessity of each
taking of private property and, when so established, the city council shall
approve the condemnation of the private property by resolution if the council
finds the use of such powers is in the public interest, does not create an
unacceptable public safety problem and there is not any reasonable alternative.
(Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-15: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS:
The company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the city in
such manner as the city may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of
facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any
public improvement of, in, or about any such street or alley, or promoting the
efficient operation of any such improvement. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-16: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND/OR CONSERVATION PROGRAMS:
The company shall, at all times during which this franchise is in effect,
maintain, administer and operate such energy efficiency and/or conservation
programs within the city, as may be approved by the Iowa utilities board. (Ord.
07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-17: DISASTER OR EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMUNICATIONS TASK FORCE:
If requested by the city, the company shall participate in a disaster or
emergency response communications task force to address such topics as a
dedicated communications link between the city and the company during
emergencies, an interoperable radio communications system between the company
and the city, a reverse telephone messaging system and participation by the
company in city and Johnson County joint drills and emergency training
exercises. It is the intent of the parties that such participation may be
established by a separate agreement which refers to this franchise. (Ord. 07-
4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-18: FRANCHISE IS BINDING; ASSIGNMENT OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
This franchise shall apply to and bind the city and the company and their
successors and assigns; provided that any assignment by the company shall be
subject to the approval of the city council by resolution, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld.
The city expressly reserves the right to terminate the franchise granted herein
if the company breaches any of the provisions of this franchise; provided,
however, there shall be no termination if the company shall correct the breach
within sixty (60) days following written notice provided by the city to do so.
The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this franchise by any failure of the city to insist upon or seek
compliance with any such terms or conditions. Further, it is agreed that the
subject matter of this franchise is unique and may be enforced by specific
performance, at the city's option, since a remedy at law may be inadequate.
(Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage
in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the company. The
company shall within thirty (30) days after the approval of this chapter by the
city council, file in the office of the clerk of the city its acceptance in
writing of all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following city council
approval and written acceptance by the company, this chapter shall be published
in the "Iowa City Press Citizen". The effective date hereof shall be the date
of publication. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-2007)
12-2-20: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this franchise ordinance are for any reason
declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise
ordinance, which are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and
remain in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise ordinance
contained no illegal or void provisions. In the event any provision or
provisions are ruled illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
city and the company shall forthwith amend this franchise to insert a successor
provision that complies with the applicable court ruling. (Ord. 07-4293, 11-27-
2007)
CHAPTER 3
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE 1
SECTION:
12-3-1: Franchise Granted; Nonexclusive
12-3-2: Pole Requirements
12-3-3: Restoration Of Public Ways
12-3-4: Nonliability Of City
12-3-5: Police And Fire Alarms
12-3-6: Compliance With Provisions
 
Notes
1 1. See title 16, chapter 2 of this code for public utilities and use of city
  right of way, including underground services.
12-3-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED; NONEXCLUSIVE:
To the extent not inconsistent with federal law:
   A.   The city may grant to any person a franchise to construct, maintain and
operate plants and systems for the purpose of sending, transmitting and
distributing voice, audio, data, information, images, graphics, video, alarm
monitoring and similar services in wire, wireless, electronic and digital form.
Such information, services and technologies include, but are not limited to,
telephone, video dialtone, direct broadcast satellite (DBS), multi-point
distribution system (MMDS), satellite master antenna television (SMATV),
wireless cable, and personal communication systems (PCS).
A franchise granted under this chapter shall be for a term of not more than
twenty five (25) years. The franchise may be granted, amended, extended or
renewed only by an ordinance, but no exclusive franchise shall be granted,
amended, extended or renewed.
   B.   No such ordinance shall become effective unless approved at an
election. The proposal may be submitted by the city council on its own motion
to the voters at any city election. Upon receipt of a "valid petition" as
defined in section 362.4, code of Iowa, as amended, requesting that a proposal
be submitted to the voters, the city council shall submit the proposal at the
next regular city election or at a special election called for that purpose
prior to the next regular city election. If a majority of those voting approves
the proposal the city may proceed as proposed.
   C.   The person asking for the granting, amending, extension or renewal of a
franchise shall pay the costs incurred in holding the election, including the
costs of the notice. A franchise shall not be finally effective until an
acceptance in writing has been filed with the council and payment of the costs
has been made.
   D.   The franchise ordinance may regulate the conditions required and the
manner of use of the streets and public grounds of the city.
   E.   If a city franchise fee is assessed to customers of a franchise, the
fee shall not be assessed to the city as a customer. (Ord. 95-3682, 6-27-1995)
   F.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as to grant unto
the company an exclusive right upon the streets and alleys or to interfere with
any rights already granted or to prevent the grant of similar privileges to
other individuals or companies for like purposes. (1978 Code §14-56)
12-3-2: POLE REQUIREMENTS:
All poles installed pursuant to this chapter shall be installed under the
supervision of the committee on streets and alleys and shall be so located as
not to interfere with the public use and travel of the streets and alleys. All
poles shall be neat, symmetrical, shaven and kept neatly painted, and no
electrical conductors shall be placed thereon less than twenty feet (20') above
the surface of the ground. (1978 Code §14-53)
12-3-3: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
After the installation of the poles and fixtures referred to in section
12-3-2 of this chapter, said company shall restore the surface of the streets,
alleys and sidewalks to the same condition in which it found them. The work of
restoring the street as aforesaid shall be done under the supervision of the
committee on streets and alleys. Any expense to which the city shall be put by
reason of the neglect of the company to do such work in a workmanlike manner
shall be paid by the company upon the presentation of bills certified by such
committee. In case the company's lines shall be found to interfere with the
change of grade of any street or with any public improvement, the company
shall, upon receipt of written notice thereof from the council, move its lines
at its own expense so as to conform with such change of grade or such
improvement. (1978 Code §14-54)
12-3-4: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The company shall hold the city free and harmless from all damages or claims
for damage of any kind whatsoever caused by the construction or negligent
maintenance of its lines and shall be liable for injuries to public or private
property of every kind. (1978 Code §14-55)
12-3-5: POLICE AND FIRE ALARMS:
In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the company shall
furnish, free of cost to the city, one tenpin cross-arm for its fire alarm and
police wires upon all poles installed pursuant to this chapter. (1978 Code §14-
57)
12-3-6: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
The company shall be at all times subject to all ordinances now in force or
that may hereafter be passed, relative to the use of public streets and alleys
or other public places 1 . (1978 Code §14-58)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 16, chapters 1 and 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
CABLE TELEVISION
(Rep. by Ord. 21-4854, 5-4-2021)
CHAPTER 5
FRANCHISE FEES
SECTION:
12-5-1: Electric Franchise Fee
12-5-2: Gas Franchise Fee
12-5-3: Audit
12-5-4: Revenue Purpose Statement
12-5-1: ELECTRIC FRANCHISE FEE:
Pursuant to section
12-1-16 of the City's franchise agreement with MidAmerican Energy Company
(hereinafter "company"), there is hereby imposed upon the company a franchise
fee in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenue of the company,
minus uncollectible accounts, derived from the distribution, delivery and
retail sale of electricity by the company to customers within the current or
future corporate limits of the City, commencing with gross revenue received on
or after November 15, 2025. (Ord. 10-4382, 2-16-2010; amd. Ord. 25-4959, 8-5-
2025)
12-5-2: GAS FRANCHISE FEE:
Pursuant to section
12-2-13 of the City's franchise agreement with company, there is hereby imposed
upon the company a franchise fee in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross revenue of the company, minus uncollectible accounts, derived from the
distribution, delivery and retail sale of natural gas by the company or other
natural gas providers utilizing the distribution system of the company, to
customers within the current or future corporate limits of the City, commencing
with gross revenue received on or after November 15, 2025. (Ord. 10-4382, 2-16-
2010; amd. Ord. 25-4959, 8-5-2025)
12-5-3: AUDIT:
The city may, at its option, require that an audit of the calculation and basis
for calculation of the franchise fee be conducted by an auditor of the city's
selection and the company will cooperate with such an audit. Said audit shall
not be conducted more than once a year. The city shall pay the costs of the
audit unless the audit shows an underpayment of franchise fees by an amount
equal to three percent (3%) or more of the fees, in which event the company
shall pay the cost of the audit. (Ord. 09-4374, 12-7-2009)
12-5-4: REVENUE PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The revenue collected from said franchise fees will be expended for any of the
following purposes:
   A.   Inspecting, supervising and otherwise regulating the MidAmerican Energy
Company's gas and electric franchises.
   B.   Property tax relief.
   C.   The repair, remediation, restoration, cleanup, replacement, and
improvement of existing public improvements and other publicly owned property,
buildings, and facilities.
   D.   Projects designed to prevent or mitigate future disasters.
   E.   Energy conservation measures for low-income homeowners, low-income
energy assistance programs, and weatherization programs.
   F.   Public safety, including the equipping of fire, police, emergency
services, sanitation, street, and civil defense departments.
   G.   The establishment, construction, reconstruction, repair, equipping,
remodeling, and extension of public works, public utilities, and public
transportation systems.
   H.   The construction, reconstruction, or repair of streets, highways,
bridges, sidewalks, pedestrian underpasses and overpasses, street lighting
fixtures, and public grounds, and the acquisition of real estate needed for
such purposes.
   I.   Property tax abatements, building permit fee abatements, and abatement
of other fees for property damaged by a disaster.
   J.   Economic development activities and projects.
   K.   Any other lawful purpose. (Ord. 09-4374, 12-7-2009; amd. Ord. 25-4959,
8-5-2025)
TITLE 13
AIRPORTS AND AVIATION 1
CHAPTER 1
AIRPORT COMMISSION
SECTION:
13-1-1: Commission Created
13-1-2: Composition; Appointment; Term; Vacancies
13-1-3: Bond
13-1-4: Organization
13-1-5: Powers And Duties
13-1-6: Annual Report
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14, chapter 6 of this code for airport zoning.
13-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as the
"airport commission", to manage and control the Iowa City municipal airport,
together with any and all additions and improvements hereafter made. (1978 Code
§4-16)
13-1-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM; VACANCIES:
The commission created by this chapter shall consist of five (5) members who
shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of the city
council. Commission members shall be residents of Iowa City. Upon expiration of
the current six (6) year terms, all appointments shall be for terms of four (4)
years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments
are made. At the request of the airport commission and upon approval of the
city council, the mayor may appoint a nonvoting, advisory commission member who
resides outside the city boundaries. (Ord. 10-4381, 2-2-2010)
13-1-3: BOND:
Each member of the commission created by this chapter shall execute and furnish
a bond in the amount set by the airport commission and filed with the city
clerk. The cost of such bond shall be paid from the general funds of the city.
This bond shall not be required of any nonvoting advisory commission member.
(1978 Code §4-19; amd. 1994 Code)
13-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The airport commission shall elect from its own members a
chairperson and a secretary/vice chairperson. These officers shall serve for
such terms as the commission shall determine. (1978 Code §4-22)
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The airport commission is authorized to adopt
rules and regulations for the management and control of the Iowa City municipal
airport. (1978 Code §4-23)
13-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The airport commission shall have and exercise all the powers granted
to cities under the code of Iowa, as amended, except the power to sell the
airport. The commission shall annually certify the amount of taxes, within the
limitations of the statutes of the state, to be levied for airport purposes,
and upon such certification, the city council may include all or a portion of
such amount in its budget.
   B.   All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall
be under the full and absolute control of the commission for the purposes
prescribed by law, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from the
acquisition and construction of airports and maintenance, operation and
extension thereof. Said funds shall be deposited with the city, to the credit
of the airport commission and shall be dispersed only upon the written warrants
or orders of the airport commission. (1978 Code §4-20; amd. 1994 Code)
13-1-6: ANNUAL REPORT:
Immediately after the close of each city fiscal year, the airport commission
shall file with the city its report of all money received and dispersed by the
airport commission during the prior fiscal year and shall publish a summary
thereof in an official newspaper. (1978 Code §4-21; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Purpose
13-2-2: Definitions
13-2-3: FAA And IDOT Regulations Adopted
13-2-4: Fire Precautions
13-2-5: Violations
13-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide regulations for operating the Iowa City
municipal airport as a safe, efficient and effective public airport for Iowa
City and the surrounding areas. (1978 Code §4-1)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AIRCRAFT: A pilot controlled structure for flight in the air. Examples
include, but are not limited to, an airplane, helicopter, glider or lighter
than air aircraft.
   AIRPORT: Any area on land or water that is used or intended to be used for
landing and departure of aircraft. In this title, the reference is to the Iowa
City municipal airport.
   AIRPORT COMMISSION: Iowa City airport commission.
   CODE OF IOWA: Chapters of the code of Iowa, as amended, that regulate
aeronautics and aviation.
   COMMERCIAL AVIATION: Any person or business who, for compensation or hire,
engages in activity which relates to the operation of aircraft. Such activity
includes, but is not limited to, charter operations, pilot training, aircraft
rental and sightseeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, aerial advertising
and surveying, air taxi operations, aircraft sales and services, sale of
aviation petroleum products, repair and maintenance of aircraft and the sale of
aircraft parts.
   DEADLINE: Point of access between the air side operations of the airport and
the land side operations.
   FAA (FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION): Federal aviation regulative branch of
the United States department of transportation.
   FBO (FIXED BASE OPERATOR): Airport based tenant who may supply a variety of
aviation services.
   PILOT: An individual who operates an aircraft any time the craft's engine is
running or whenever the aircraft is in motion under its own power or guidance.
   UNICOM RADIO: A nongovernmental communication facility operating on an
assigned frequency for the purpose of providing airport information. (1978 Code
§4-3; amd. 1994 Code)
13-2-3: FAA AND IDOT REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
No person shall operate any aircraft, service, maintain or repair an aircraft
on the airport or conduct any airport operations on or from the airport except
in conformity with the regulations of the code of federal regulations title 14,
as amended. Said regulations are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this title as fully as if set forth herein. Chapters 328 (aeronautics), 329
(airport zoning), 330 (airports) and 330A (aviation authorities), code of Iowa,
all as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title.
(1978 Code §4-2)
13-2-4: FIRE PRECAUTIONS:
All persons using the airport or any of its facilities shall exercise the
utmost care to guard against fire and injury to persons or property. All city,
state and federal fire code regulations shall be followed. (1978 Code §4-65)
13-2-5: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be a municipal infraction to violate or refuse to obey any of
the rules or regulations of this title as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (1978 Code §4-4; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Any person in violation of this title or refusing to comply therewith
shall immediately vacate the airport property upon order of the airport manager
or duly authorized deputy and may be deprived further use of the airport and
its facilities for such time as may be required to ensure the safety of the
public and the airport. (1978 Code §4-4)
CHAPTER 3
OPERATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13-3-1: Aircraft Operations
13-3-2: Student Pilots
13-3-3: Flying Clubs
13-3-4: Parking And Mooring Areas; Deadline
13-3-5: Use Of The Airport
13-3-6: Aircraft Fueling Operations
13-3-7: Unicom Radio
13-3-8: Aircraft Repair; Disposal Of Wrecked Aircraft
13-3-9: Accidents
13-3-10: Dangerous Conditions
13-3-11: Building Construction
13-3-12: Ground Rental; Fees
13-3-13: Assumption Of Risk; City Not Liable
13-3-1: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS:
   A.   Operation Within The City:
      1.   Aircraft Operation Regulations: No person operating any aircraft
shall land or depart at any location within the city, except at a landing site
approved and/or certified by the federal aviation administration.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   An exception to subsection A1 of this section may be granted by
the airport commission or designee when it can be determined that the landing
or departing aircraft will not interfere with the operations of any approved
landing site, and the landing or departure can be conducted in a safe manner.
         b.   This subsection shall be waived for hot air balloons operated by
licensed, insured pilots if ballooning operations are conducted in a safe and
prudent manner, do not interfere with airport air traffic and are in accordance
with applicable federal aviation administration regulations. No person shall
use any site in the city for ballooning operations, including departure or
landing, without obtaining prior approval from the landowner. (1978 Code §4-33)
   B.   Ground Operation Of Aircraft: No person shall operate any aircraft on
the airport in a reckless manner that endangers persons or property. (1978 Code
§4-34)
   C.   Landing, Departing And Taxiing:
      1.   Use Of Field: Landing and departing aircraft shall utilize the full
effective landing area of the field. Landing and departing aircraft shall
maintain as much distance as possible from taxiing planes. Aircraft shall taxi
as little as possible on the field, and aircraft landing or departing shall
proceed to and from the effective landing area with the least possible delay
consistent with safety.
      2.   Taxiing Precautions: When landing on the airport, an operator shall
first determine that there is no danger of collision with other departing,
landing or taxiing aircraft before taxiing to the line or other part of the
airport.
      3.   Taxiing Speed Limit: All aircraft shall be taxied at a slow and
reasonable speed not to exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour, particularly in the
vicinity of hangars and other buildings, and shall be brought to a full stop
when in the vicinity of landing airplanes. (1978 Code §4-47)
   D.   Starting And Warming Up Engines:
      1.   General Requirements: Aircraft shall be started and warmed up only
in the places designated for such purposes by the airport manager. At no time
shall any engine be operated in such a position that hangars or other buildings
or any person in the observation areas shall be in the path of the propeller
stream. (1978 Code §4-52)
      2.   Blocks And Brakes: Blocks, equipped with ropes or other suitable
means of pulling them, shall always be placed in front of the wheels before
starting the engine unless the airplane is provided with a brake system. (1978
Code §4-49)
   E.   Pilot Or Mechanic Required At Controls: No aircraft engine shall be
operated unless a licensed pilot, student pilot or licensed mechanic is in the
cockpit and attending the controls, or the aircraft is properly moored. (1978
Code §4-50)
   F.   Suspension Of Operations By Airport Manager: Except in the case of
scheduled operators or aircraft operated by the federal government or other
public authorities, the airport manager shall have authority to suspend flying
operations on or from the airport when, in the manager's opinion, the condition
of the landing area and/or local meteorological conditions might make such
operations unsafe. (1978 Code §4-46)
13-3-2: STUDENT PILOTS:
All persons instructing student pilots shall fully acquaint the students with
the rules and regulations in effect at the airport, including the air
regulations of the federal aviation administration of the department of
transportation. The instructor shall be responsible for the conduct of the
students during instruction. (1978 Code §4-35)
13-3-3: FLYING CLUBS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the following definition shall
apply:
   FLYING CLUB: A nonprofit entity organized for the purpose of providing its
members with aircraft for noncommercial use and enjoyment.
   B.   Restricted And Prohibited Conduct: A flying club shall not conduct
charter, air taxi or aircraft rental operations, nor provide aircraft
instruction except for club members. Only club members shall operate a flying
club aircraft.
   C.   Requirements For Use Of Airport:
      1.   To operate on the airport, a flying club shall:
         a.   File a copy of the club's charter and bylaws with the airport
commission.
         b.   File with the airport commission a list of club members entitled
or authorized by the club to operate the club's aircraft. The list shall
identify the names and current addresses of all members in good standing. (1978
Code §4-38)
         c.   Notify the airport commission, in writing, of any change in
membership, charter or bylaws within thirty (30) calendar days of the change.
(1978 Code §4-38; amd. 1994 Code)
      2.   All aircraft to be used by the flying club must be identified to the
airport commission, and a valid certificate of insurance shall be filed with
the airport commission for each aircraft.
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Any violation of this title by a club or club member shall be
considered a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
      2.   Flying clubs in violation of any provision of this title shall
suspend all operations until such violations have been corrected. (1978 Code
§4-38)
13-3-4: PARKING AND MOORING AREAS; DEADLINE:
   A.   Mooring Required; Liability: All unhoused aircraft shall be parked in
the space designated for this purpose by the airport manager. Such aircraft
shall be firmly secured to the ground by ropes and stakes, or otherwise, when
left unattended or when weather conditions indicate the need for a mooring.
Owners of unmoored aircraft shall be responsible for any damage resulting from
failure to comply with this rule.
   B.   Deadlines: A deadline shall be designated by the airport manager.
      1.   No person shall cross the deadline, except:
         a.   A pilot or mechanic employed by the airport or by the owner of an
aircraft located upon the airport.
         b.   A pilot or passenger preparing to participate in a flight. The
person shall not cross the deadline toward an operating aircraft until the
aircraft has come to a full stop and the operator has signaled for pedestrian
approach.
         c.   An officer or official authorized to enforce local, state or
federal laws upon the airport.
         d.   The airport manager and staff.
      2.   A person crossing the deadline to leave the landing area shall use
the shortest possible route.
      3.   The deadline will be indicated by a fence or other suitable markers
and may be changed, from time to time, as conditions require.
   C.   Vehicle Parking Spaces: Automobiles and other vehicles, except vehicles
regularly employed in the service of the airport, shall be parked in designated
areas. Unauthorized vehicles, as determined by the airport manager, may be
towed at the expense of the vehicle owner. Hangar tenants may park vehicles in
or near their hangars while their aircraft is in use if the airport manager
determines that such parking is safe and does not interfere with routine use
and maintenance of airport property. (1978 Code §4-36)
13-3-5: USE OF THE AIRPORT:
   A.   No person shall use the airport as a base or terminal for commercial
aviation, except by a lease or agreement with the airport commission. For
single commercial events, written application must be made and approval
received from the airport commission or airport manager.
   B.   None of the operating standards contained herein are intended to
prevent any person operating aircraft on the airport from performing any
services, including but not limited to maintenance and repair, on the person's
own aircraft nor for the purpose of excluding commercial competition.
   C.   Leases or agreements are required for, but not limited to, the
following list of services:
      1.   Aircraft sales.
      2.   Airframe and/or power plant repair.
      3.   Aircraft rental.
      4.   Flight training.
      5.   Radio, instrument or propeller repair.
      6.   Air taxi, charter or casual passenger carrying for hire.
      7.   Aerial applicators. (1978 Code §4-37)
13-3-6: AIRCRAFT FUELING OPERATIONS:
   A.   A person wishing to operate an aircraft fueling service for the public
at the airport shall provide, at a minimum, the following services:
      1.   Approved aviation and jet fuel storage and distribution equipment.
      2.   Sufficient land, by lease from the airport commission, for fueling
aircraft and parking mobile fuel dispensing equipment.
   B.   All regulations in this title regarding safe fueling of aircraft and
maintenance of underground storage tanks shall apply to persons operating an
aircraft fueling service. (1978 Code §4-39; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-7: UNICOM RADIO:
The fixed base operator (FBO) shall provide personnel to monitor and operate
unicom radio equipment at the airport during all hours of normal operation
according to standards established by the airport commission. Hours of normal
operation shall be approved by the airport commission. Should there be more
than one FBO located at the airport, the operation of the unicom radio shall be
on a rotating schedule, agreed upon by the FBOs and approved by the airport
commission. If no agreement is made between the FBOs, the airport commission
shall establish a rotation schedule. (1978 Code §4-40; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-8: AIRCRAFT REPAIR; DISPOSAL OF WRECKED AIRCRAFT:
   A.   Aircraft Repair: All repairs to aircraft shall be made in areas
designated for such purpose. (1978 Code §4-41)
   B.   Disposal Of Wrecked Aircraft: The aircraft owner, pilot or agent shall
be responsible for promptly disposing of aircraft wreckage as directed by the
airport manager unless directed to delay removal pending investigation of an
accident. (1978 Code §4-42)
13-3-9: ACCIDENTS:
Witnesses of and participants in accidents on or incidents near the airport
shall make a full report, including their names, current addresses and phone
numbers, to the airport manager within seven (7) calendar days after the
accident or incident and shall render further reports at a later date if
required. (1978 Code §4-43; amd. 1994 Code)
13-3-10: DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
   A.   Unsafe Landing Areas To Be Marked: Any parts of the landing area
temporarily unsafe for landing or which are not available for use shall be
clearly marked at all times. (1978 Code §4-44)
   B.   Alcoholic Liquors And Drugs: No person shall operate any aircraft on
the airport while using or consuming any alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance as defined by the code of Iowa, as amended. (1978 Code §4-48; amd.
1994 Code)
13-3-11: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION:
Any person who desires to construct a building on the airport shall be required
to submit plans and specifications for the same to the airport commission.
Commercial buildings shall satisfy all city and state building and fire codes
and conform, in general, as to size and shape to existing airport buildings.
(1978 Code §4-54)
13-3-12: GROUND RENTAL; FEES:
Rent for buildings or businesses on the airport shall be determined by written
agreement with the airport commission. All rents and fees shall be paid in
advance to the airport manager or designee. (1978 Code §4-54)
13-3-13: ASSUMPTION OF RISK; CITY NOT LIABLE:
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities and of landing upon and
departing from the same shall be, at all times, conditioned upon the assumption
by the user of full responsibility and risk thereof. The user, including
visitors to airport property, operators and their passengers, lessors and the
employees and agents of each of them, shall release, hold harmless and
indemnify the city, the airport commission and the airport manager from any and
all responsibility for loss or damage, including attorney fees, to persons or
property arising from the use of any portion or facility of the airport. (1978
Code §4-45)
CHAPTER 4
SELF-FUELING OPERATIONS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Application Of Provisions
13-4-2: Fueling And Vending Operations
13-4-3: Refueling And Defueling Aircraft
13-4-4: Maintenance And Repair Operations
13-4-5: Liquid Disposal Prohibited
13-4-6: Underground Storage Tanks
13-4-7: Penalties
13-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Persons operating noncommercial aircraft on the airport and intending to fuel
their own aircraft must do so in accordance with the requirements of the safe
fueling standards of this title. (1978 Code §4-90; amd. 1994 Code)
13-4-2: FUELING AND VENDING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Aviation fuels shall be sold on airport property only by vendors
meeting the standards set forth in this title.
   B.   Private users shall only fuel aircraft owned, rented or leased by them
and shall be performed in compliance with this chapter. (1978 Code §4-91; amd.
1994 Code)
13-4-3: REFUELING AND DEFUELING AIRCRAFT:
The following general rules shall govern refueling, defueling, oil service and
sumping of aircraft and placing fuels in storage tanks or dispensers:
   A.   Aircraft Not To Be Running Or In Enclosed Space: No aircraft shall be
refueled, defueled or oil serviced while aircraft engines are running, when
aircraft is being warmed by application of heat or when aircraft is in a closed
hangar or a congested or an enclosed space.
   B.   Smoking And Open Flames Prohibited: No person shall smoke or permit any
open flame, except in designated areas.
   C.   Grounding Requirements:
      1.   Prior to fuel servicing, the aircraft and the fuel dispensing
equipment shall be grounded to one or more points of zero electrical potential
to prevent the possibility of static ignition of volatile liquids. The
refueling unit shall be grounded to aircraft. The following grounding sequence
is preferred:
         a.   Aircraft to apron or ground.
         b.   Refueling unit to ground.
         c.   Refueling unit to aircraft.
         d.   Refueling nozzle to aircraft.
      2.   The foregoing procedure, modified as necessary, will apply to
storage dumping and to filling dispensing equipment.
   D.   Damaged, Malfunctioning Refueling Equipment: If refueling equipment is
found to be damaged or malfunctioning, refueling shall cease immediately, and
refueling shall not resume until the damage or malfunction is remedied. Damaged
or malfunctioning refueling equipment of an aircraft being serviced will be
brought to the attention of the aircraft owner or operator immediately. (1978
Code §4-92)
   E.   Fuel Spills: Utmost caution to prevent spills of aviation fuels shall
be exercised by any person fueling or defueling aircraft, filling dispensing
equipment or dumping fuel into storage. If a spill occurs, servicing shall
cease, and the spill must be removed or absorbed with suitable material. The
airport manager shall be immediately notified of spills or overfills. (1978
Code §4-92; amd. 1994 Code)
   F.   Maintenance Of Equipment:
      1.   Pumps, meters, hoses, nozzles, fire extinguishers and grounding
devices shall be kept in operable condition.
      2.   Manufacturer equipped grounding devices on all hoses, funnels and
appurtenances used in refueling and defueling operations shall be maintained in
good working condition.
   G.   Fire Extinguishers: During aircraft fuel handling operations, CO2 or
approved dry chemical fire extinguishers (15 pounds or larger) shall be
immediately available for use.
   H.   Fuel Handling Vehicles:
      1.   During refueling or defueling, fuel handling vehicles shall be
parked in a site and manner to permit rapid and direct emergency departure. No
more than one refueler shall be parked at each wing of an aircraft, and no more
than two (2) refuelers shall serve the same aircraft at one time. When high
capacity aircraft are refueled, additional refuelers shall park only in areas
designated for that purpose by the airport manager and shall not be parked
closer than one hundred feet (100') of the aircraft being refueled.
      2.   Each fuel handling vehicle shall be conspicuously marked, in letters
of contrasting color, with the word "Flammable" on both sides and rear of the
cargo tank in letters at least six inches (6") high and with the wording
"Emergency Shut Off" and other appropriate operating instructions in letters at
least two inches (2") high at the emergency operating devices on the vehicle.
Each fuel handling vehicle will also be conspicuously marked on both sides and
rear with the type and grade of fuel it contains.
      3.   Each fuel handling vehicle shall meet all requirements of the
uniform fire code, as amended, adopted by this city code regarding fueling on
airports.
      4.   A fueling vehicle may be stored upon the airport only pursuant to
written lease with the airport commission.
   I.   Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
      1.   No refueling operation may be performed during an electrical storm.
      2.   No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or other
electrical device during aircraft refueling or defueling.
      3.   No person shall use any material or equipment during refueling or
defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or ignition.
      4.   No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is any
aircraft fuel on the ground below the aircraft.
      5.   No aircraft shall be refueled or defueled while passengers are on
board the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin
door of the aircraft, the aircraft door is in the open position and a cabin
attendant is present at or near the cabin door.
      6.   No airborne radar equipment shall be operated or ground tested in
any area where the directional high intensity radar beam is within three
hundred feet (300') or the low intensity radar beam (less than 50 kilowatt
output) is within one hundred feet (100') of another aircraft, an aircraft
refueling operation, an aircraft refueling truck or any flammable liquid
storage facility. (1978 Code §4-92)
13-4-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OPERATIONS:
   A.   Cleaning, Painting And Refurbishing Operations:
      1.   No person shall use flammable, volatile liquids having a flash point
of less than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) to clean aircraft, aircraft
engines, propellers, appliances or for any other purpose unless such operation
is conducted in open air or in a room specifically set aside and approved for
that purpose. This room must be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate
and readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus.
      2.   The procedures and precautions outlined in the criteria of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA pamphlet no. 401D, "Safeguarding
Aircraft Cleaning, Painting And Paint Removal", and NFPA pamphlet no. 410F,
"Aircraft Cabin Cleaning And Refurbishing Operations"), including any
amendments thereto, shall be followed in all cleaning, painting and
refurbishing operations. (1978 Code §4-90)
   B.   Cleaning Floors: Hangar and shop area floors shall be kept clean and
free of oil. Volatile flammable solvents shall not be used to clean floors.
(1978 Code §4-95)
   C.   Drip Pans: Drip pans shall be placed under aircraft engines when
recommended or required by aircraft designers. The pans shall be cleaned
regularly and shall not be used or allowed to store flammable materials. (1978
Code §4-96)
13-4-5: LIQUID DISPOSAL PROHIBITED:
No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be dumped or disposed of
in drains, ramp areas, catch basins, ditches or any other area of the airport.
(1978 Code §4-94)
13-4-6: UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS:
Persons operating aircraft on the airport may, pursuant to written lease with
the airport commission, install underground storage tanks for aircraft fuel.
   A.   Land: The person ("lessee") shall execute a written lease with the
airport commission for sufficient ground to accommodate such buildings,
aircraft parking, paved ramp area, fuel farm and motor vehicle parking as the
parties deem necessary. Access to airport property from privately owned land,
commonly referred to as "through-the-fence" operations, is strictly prohibited.
   B.   Personnel: At least one properly trained person shall be on duty during
all hours of operations as provided for by the uniform fire code, as amended.
   C.   Services: The lessee may hangar, adjust, repair, refuel, clean and
otherwise service the lessee's owner operated aircraft, provided it is done by
lessee's employees. This would not prevent lessee from hiring outside
mechanical labor when adequate service cannot be obtained by existing lessees
of the airport commission.
   D.   Fuel Facilities: Metered, filter equipped dispensers for dispensing
aviation fuels shall meet the requirements found in FAA advisory circular, FAA
AC no. 150/5230-4, as amended, and the uniform fire code, as amended.
   E.   Fueling Aircraft: Only aircraft owned, rented, leased or operated by
the lessee may be fueled from the lessee's fueling facilities.
   F.   Fuel Quality Control Program: All tanks and accessories shall be
maintained and operated by the lessee in accordance with federal, state and
local laws regarding fuel storage and dispensing on airports, including but not
limited to the uniform/national fire code, FAA advisory circular no. 150/5230-
4, as amended, and the uniform fire code, as amended.
   G.   Hours Of Operation: The operating hours shall be determined by the
lessee.
   H.   Insurance Requirements:
      1.   Lessee shall maintain the insurance coverage requirements
established by the city.
      2.   Lessee shall provide a certificate of insurance upon request of
lessor.
   I.   Hold Harmless Clause: The land lease shall include a clause that holds
the city and the airport commission harmless of any liability resulting from
the operation of the self-fueling facility. (1978 Code §4-98; amd. 1994 Code)
13-4-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1994
Code)
TITLE 14
ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A. TITLE, APPLICABILITY, PURPOSE
SECTION:
14-1A-1: Title
14-1A-2: Applicability
14-1A-3: Purpose
14-1A-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and officially cited as the IOWA CITY ZONING CODE.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title shall be applicable to all property within the
corporate limits of the city of Iowa City as provided by chapter 414, code of
Iowa. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1A-3: PURPOSE:
   A.   Generally: The provisions of this title are intended to implement the
city of Iowa City's comprehensive plan in a manner that promotes the health,
safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of
Iowa City.
   B.   Specifically: The provisions of this title are specifically intended
to:
      1.   Conserve and protect the value of property throughout the city;
      2.   Encourage the most appropriate use of land and foster convenient,
compatible and efficient relationship among land uses;
      3.   Provide the opportunity for a variety of housing types to meet the
needs of the city's population;
      4.   Promote the economic stability of existing and future land uses that
are consistent with the comprehensive plan and protect them from intrusions by
incompatible land uses;
      5.   Lessen congestion in the streets and promote safe and effective
access to property;
      6.   Prevent the overcrowding of land;
      7.   Avoid undue concentration of population; and
      8.   Conserve open space and protect natural, scenic, and historic
resources. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. INTERPRETATION AND SCOPE
SECTION:
14-1B-1: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
14-1B-2: Rules Of Word Construction
14-1B-3: Scope
14-1B-4: Zoning Map; Determination Of Zoning Boundaries
14-1B-1: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, such
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public safety, health, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare.
   B.   This title is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except if this title
imposes a greater restriction, this title shall control.
   C.   In case of any inconsistency between the text of this title and any
heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
   D.   If the provisions of this title are inconsistent with those of the
state or federal government, the more restrictive provision will control to the
extent permitted by law.
   E.   If the provisions of this title are inconsistent with one another or if
they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances, resolutions,
or regulations of the city, the provision that is more specific to the
situation will control. When regulations are equally specific or when it is
unclear which regulation to apply, the more restrictive provision will control.
   F.   Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute,
regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most
recent edition of such regulation (as amended), resolution, ordinance, statute,
regulation or document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   G.   Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or
another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that
provision shall be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to
delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority.
   H.   The applicable standards of this Title apply so as to not require
stating the phrase “and all applicable standards” throughout this Title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
14-1B-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples
that use terms such as "including", "such as", or similar language are intended
to provide examples, not to be exhaustive of all possibilities.
   B.   Words in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is
also true. Words in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   C.   The words "shall", "shall not", "must", "must not", "will", "will not",
and "may not" are mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. The word “should” is
advisory and identifies guidance provided by the City in implementation of
these standards.
   D.   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      1.   “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply;
      2.   “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply; and
      3.   “Either/or” indicates that the connected items or provisions apply
singly but not in combination. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 21-4866,
11-16-2021)
14-1B-3: SCOPE:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the use of premises and structures
in the city shall be in accordance with the minimum standards hereinafter
established:
   A.   No use shall be established nor shall any structure be installed,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, except in
conformity with the regulations and standards of this title.
   B.   No land shall be used or divided, and no structure shall be occupied,
constructed, installed, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered until:
      1.   All applicable review and approval procedures have been followed;
      2.   All applicable approvals have been obtained; and
      3.   All required permits or authorizations to proceed have been issued.
   C.   The lot area required for one structure or use under this title cannot
be used to meet the requirements for another structure or use.
   D.   Every use established or structure installed or structurally altered
shall be located on a "lot" as defined in this title. The number of principal
uses and structures permitted on a lot shall be as follows:
      1.   In RS zones and the RNS-12 zone, there shall not be more than one
principal use or building per lot, except as permitted through a board of
adjustment approval of a special exception to establish or expand an
educational facility or religious/private group assembly use.
      2.   In all other zones, there may be more than one principal use,
building or structure on a lot.
      3.   In the RR-1 zone, there shall not be more than one principal
dwelling per lot.
   E.   Except as specifically allowed by this title, no use permitted as a
special exception under this title shall be established or enlarged except as
permitted by the board of adjustment. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-1B-4: ZONING MAP; DETERMINATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the various zoning districts, hereinafter referred to as
"zones", are shown on the zoning map, said map made a part of this title by
reference and on file in the offices of the city clerk and the department of
planning and community development. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of zones as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply.
   A.   Where the boundaries of the zones are along streets and alleys, they
shall be construed to be along the centerlines of such streets and alleys.
   B.   Where boundaries of the zones are not clearly indicated on the map and
where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots,
the boundaries of the zones shall be construed to be the nearest lot lines.
   C.   Where the zones designated on the zoning map are bounded approximately
by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries of the
zones. The intent of this provision is that no lot shall be divided by a zone
boundary.
   D.   In separate tracts not subdivided and for unsubdivided property, the
zoning boundary lines on the map shall be determined by use of the scale on the
map.
   E.   Where boundaries cannot be determined using the subsections A through D
of this section, the zoning code interpretation panel shall interpret the zone
boundaries. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
CHAPTER 2
BASE ZONES
ARTICLE A. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
14-2A-1: Establishment And Intent Of Single-Family Residential Zones
14-2A-2: Land Uses Allowed
14-2A-3: General Provisions
14-2A-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2A-5: Maximum Occupancy For Household Living Uses
14-2A-6: Single-Family Site Development Standards
14-2A-7: Special Provisions
14-2A-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established single-family
residential zones are listed in this section. When this title refers to the
single-family residential zones, it is referring to the zones listed in this
section. When this title refers to residential zones, or R zones, it is
referring to both the single-family residential zones listed in this section
and the multi-family residential zones listed in
chapter 2, article B of this title.
   A.   Rural Residential Zone (RR-1): The rural residential zone (RR-1) is
intended to provide a rural residential character for areas in the city that
are not projected to have the utilities necessary for urban development in the
foreseeable future or for areas that have sensitive environmental features that
preclude development at urban densities.
   B.   Low Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-5): The low density
single-family residential zone (RS-5) is primarily intended to provide housing
opportunities for individual households. The regulations are intended to
create, maintain, and promote livable neighborhoods. The regulations allow for
some flexibility of dwelling types to provide housing opportunities for a
variety of household types. This zone also allows for some nonresidential uses
that contribute to the livability of residential neighborhoods, such as parks,
schools, religious institutions, and daycare facilities. Related nonresidential
uses and structures should be planned and designed to be compatible with the
character, scale, and pattern of the residential development.
   C.   Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-8): The purpose of
the medium density single-family residential zone (RS-8) is primarily to
provide for the development of small lot single-family dwellings. The
regulations are intended to create, maintain, and promote livable
neighborhoods. The regulations allow for some flexibility of dwelling types to
provide housing opportunities for a variety of household types. Special
attention should be given to site design to ensure the development of quality
neighborhoods. Nonresidential uses and structures permitted in this zone should
be planned and designed to be compatible with the character, scale, and pattern
of the residential development.
   D.   High Density Single-Family Residential Zone (RS-12): The high density
single-family residential zone (RS-12) is intended to provide for development
of single-family dwellings, duplexes and attached housing units at a higher
density than in other single- family zones. Because this district represents a
relatively high density for single-family development, dwellings should be in
close proximity to all city services and facilities, especially parks, schools
and recreational facilities. Special attention should be given to site design
to ensure the development of quality neighborhoods. Nonresidential uses and
structures permitted in this zone should be planned and designed to be
compatible with the character, scale, and pattern of the residential
development.
   E.   Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone (RNS-12): The purpose of
the neighborhood stabilization residential zone (RNS-12) is to stabilize
certain existing residential neighborhoods by preserving the predominantly
single-family residential character of these neighborhoods. Provisions in this
zone prevent the conversion or redevelopment of single-family uses to multi-
family uses. However, existing conforming multi-family uses retain their
conforming status when rezoned to RNS-12. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2A-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2A-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in a particular single-family residential zone. A number in
superscript indicates that a special provision applies. See table notes for
more information.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in the table. For example, a church is classified as religious/private
group assembly. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for
special exceptions are stated in
chapter 4, article B of this title, along with specific approval criteria for
most special exception uses.
   B.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are
stated in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2A-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Single-Family Residential Zones
USE CATEGORIES SUBGROUPS RR-1 RS-5 RS-8 RS-12 RNS-12
USE CATEGORIES            SUBGROUPS                RR-1 RS-5 RS-8 RS-12 RNS-12
Residential Uses
Household living uses     Detached single- family  P    P    P    P     P
                          dwellings
                         Detached zero lot line   PR   PR   PR   PR
                          dwellings
                         Attached single- family       PR2  PR   PR
                          dwellings
                         Two-family uses               PR2  PR   PR    PR
                          (duplexes)
                         Group households         PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
                         Multi-family uses                       PR    1
Group living uses         Assisted group living
                         Independent group living                      1
                         Fraternal group living                        1
Commercial Uses
Animal related commercial General                  PR
uses                      Intensive                PR
Institutional And Civic Uses
Daycare uses                                      S    S    S    S     S
Educational facilities    General                  PR   S    S    S     S
                          Specialized
Parks and open space uses                         PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
Religious/private group                           PR   S    S    S     S
assembly uses3
Other Uses                 
Agricultural uses         Plant related            P
                          Animal related
Communication
transmission facility                             PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
uses
 
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See
chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and
special exceptions.)
Notes to
table 2A-1:
   1.   Multi-family and group living uses in the RNS-12 zone must comply with
the special provisions contained in section
14-2A-7 of this article.
   2.   Special provision may apply to existing two-family uses and attached
single-family dwellings located on interior lots in the RS-8 zone. See
subsection
14-2A-7D of this article.
   3.   Any establishment that is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or
alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth
in subsection
14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-
2023)
14-2A-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a
permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions of chapter 3 of this
title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Planned development overlay: See
chapter 3, article A of this title.
      2.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      3.   Design review: See
chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See
chapter 4, article C of this title.
      3.   Temporary uses: See
chapter 4, article D of this title.
      4.   Nonconforming situations: See
chapter 4, article E of this title.
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: See
chapter 5, article A of this title.
      2.   Sign regulations: See
chapter 5, article B of this title.
      3.   Access management standards: See
chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See
chapter 5, article D of this title.
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: See
chapter 5, article E of this title.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See
chapter 5, article F of this title.
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See
chapter 5, article G of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See
chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See
chapter 5, article I of this title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See
chapter 5, article J of this title.
      11.   Neighborhood open space requirements: See
chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2A-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the single-family residential zones are stated
in
 table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Each of the following
subsections describes in more detail the regulations for each of the
dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed
by special exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified
in
table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in
chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or
modified for developments approved through the planned development (see
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title)
or through the historic preservation exception as outlined in section
14-2A-7, "Special Provisions", of this article.
   A.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to
ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the
other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure
consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for
the various single-family residential zones and for specific residential uses
are stated in
table 2A-2, located at the end of this section.
      3.   Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
         a.   Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific lot size requirements not specified in
table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
         b.   If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular
land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special
exception, that use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot,
even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as
permitted under
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
   B.   Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
         a.   Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access
for firefighting;
         b.   Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
         c.   Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in
the city's neighborhoods;
         d.   Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings and
between residences; and
         e.   Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible
with buildings in the vicinity.
      2.   General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings in residential zones are stated in
table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for
principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal
buildings are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in
this subsection.
      3.   Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain
setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
         a.   Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
            (1)   On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot
(40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial
street or future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map,
located in
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot is located along an arterial street that is
substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way as specified in
title 15, "Land Subdivisions", of this code, then the minimum forty foot (40')
front setback along said street is increased by the number of additional feet
that will be required for future upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots
platted prior to December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement. In
addition, setback averaging may apply in certain circumstances. (See subsection
B3e of this section.)
         b.   Lots With Multiple Frontages:
            (1)   On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless
specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth
in
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to
have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback
must be provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front
setback for purposes of this title.
         c.   Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on the lot
must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10').
Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire
protection requirements.
         d.   Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have
been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development,
or in the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback
requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to
chapter 3, article B of this title and also the applicable setback provisions
in the Iowa City historic preservation handbook. For a property located in a
planned development overlay zone, refer to the approved planned development
overlay plan for the subject property. For two-family uses, multi-family uses,
group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located on property in the
Central Planning District, refer to the applicable setback provisions in
section
14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this chapter.
         e.   Setback Averaging:
            (1)   Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a
frontage have been developed and all of these developed lots are occupied by
principal buildings that are located at least five feet (5') further from the
street than the required front setback, the required front setback along the
frontage is increased to the equivalent of the setback of the building closest
to the street. However, this averaging provision does not apply to frontages
that contain three (3) or fewer lots.
Figure 2A.1 - Setback Averaging (1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2542.png]
 
            (2)   Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a
frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located closer to the
street than the required front setback, the front setback may be reduced to the
average of the respective setbacks on the abutting lots. Only the setbacks on
the lots that abut each side of the subject property along the same street may
be used to calculate the average. Setbacks across the street or along a
different street frontage may not be used. When one abutting lot is vacant or
if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is based on the setback of the
nonvacant lot and the required setback for the zone in which the lot is
located. (See
figure 2A.2 of this section.)
Figure 2A.2 - Setback Averaging (2)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2544.png]
 
      4.   Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The
following building features may extend into the required principal building
setback area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of
such a feature does not violate the provisions of
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The
setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not
considered part of the principal building are addressed in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         a.   Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses,
buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features
that extend beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet
(6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay
windows, and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to
three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet
(2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal building
must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
         b.   Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building
setbacks of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area.
Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non- habitable space) may extend up to
fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least
twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered decks and
patios are specified in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Enclosed
porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to an accessory
building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as specified in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not
extend more than three feet (3') into any side setback.
         d.   Stairways that function as the principal means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not
extend into any required setback.
         e.   Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to
the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback,
provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp
cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested according to
the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      5.   Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce principal building setback
requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures
for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building
setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board of
Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a
property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and
the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The subject building will be located no closer than three
feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property
line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
   C.   Building Bulk Standards:
      1.   Maximum Height:
         a.   Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options
for light, air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate
other buildings in the vicinity.
         b.   Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for structures
in single-family residential zones are stated in
 table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. Height standards for accessory
buildings are addressed in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following
structures or parts thereof are exempt from the height limitations set forth in
the zones indicated, provided an increase in height does not conflict with
chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title:
            (1)   Chimneys or flues.
            (2)   Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
            (3)   Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions
not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
            (4)   Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and
similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
            (5)   Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the
height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the
roof, whichever is less.
            (6)   Parapet or fire walls extending not more than three feet (3')
above the limiting height of the building.
            (7)   Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic
utility use, such as street lights and utility poles.
            (8)   If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and
communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height
standards, but are subject to any limitations placed by the Board of
Adjustment.
            (9)   Roof structures, including solar energy systems, elevator
bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary
mechanical and electrical appurtenances required to operate and maintain the
building.
            (10)   Television antennas and similar apparatus.
         d.   Adjustment Of Height Standards:
            (1)   The maximum height for a principal building may be increased;
provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet
(2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
            (2)   A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the
maximum height for a particular building or property according to the
procedures and approval criteria for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Minimum Building Width:
         a.   Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
         b.   Standards: The minimum building width requirements for principal
structures in single-family residential zones are stated in
 table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. A principal building must be
in compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least seventy
five percent (75%) of the building's length. (See
 figure 2A.3 below.)
Figure 2A.3 - Minimum Building Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2546.png]
 
   D.   Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
      1.   Total Building Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the
character of single-family residential zones by limiting the land area that can
be covered by buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum
lot requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built up a
neighborhood appears.
         b.   Standards: The total building coverage standards for the various
single-family residential zones are stated in
 table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. The maximum building coverage
standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be
covered by buildings. The total building area of all buildings on the property,
including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the
building coverage.
      2.   Front Setback Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a
certain portion of the front setback area remains free of impervious surface,
which helps to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along
neighborhood streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing
excessive front yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the
principal dwelling and the main entrance from view of the street. In addition,
this standard helps to prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front
yard pavement, particularly along frontages with narrow residential lots.
         b.   Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the
single-family residential zones is stated in
 table 2A-2, located at the end of this section. The table lists the maximum
percentage of the required front setback that may be covered by impervious
surface, including driveways, walkways, patios, decks, and other paved areas.
Front setback coverage may not exceed the percentage indicated in said
 table 2A-2.
         c.   Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the
allowed front setback coverage. The Board of Adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property
demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title, and the following specific approval
criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe
topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback
coverage standard.
            (2)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the
front setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of
driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing alternative
means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or
private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage standard may not be
increased.
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the front setback coverage regulations.
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent practical.
   E.   Minimum Open Space Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure
a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support the
health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent
of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses,
usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square
feet per bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in
one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet
(15'). On lots that contain multi-family uses in the RS-12 zone, a minimum of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space per unit shall be
provided, located in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
         b.   On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of
five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
         c.   On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided,
located in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
         d.   On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred
(300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less
than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than twelve feet
(12').
      3.   Standards:
         a.   For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall
meet the standards as set forth in subsections
14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this chapter, except that multi-family uses in the RS-
12 zone shall comply with the standards below.
         b.   For single family uses, two family uses, and multi-family uses in
RS-12 zones, open space shall be located behind the principal dwelling in an
area visible and easily accessible from the principal dwelling and shall
consist of open planted green space, which may include trees, planters,
gardens, and other amenities that support passive recreation or leisure
activities. Paved areas shall not be counted toward usable open space. For
attached single family uses, rooftop or upper floor open air terraces or rear
yard-facing porches, including screened-in porches (non-habitable space only)
may count toward the open space requirement.
      4.   Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according
to the provisions and approval criteria of section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open
space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances,
provided the additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this
section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the
allowed occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code):
         a.   In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces
(surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2)
off-street parking spaces; or
         b.   If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in
size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that
there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         c.   The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/
dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         d.   The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the
side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
         e.   Approval criteria:
            (1)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the
width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new buildings or
additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property;
and
            (2)   The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent
possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
            (3)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent possible.
Table 2A-2: Dimensional Requirements In The Single-Family Residential Zones
      Minimum Lot Requirements  Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk    Maximum Lot
                                                                   Coverage          Maximum  Minimum
Zone/ Lot  Area/                                          Minimum                    Number   Open
Use   Size Unit  Lot   Frontage Front Side  Rear  Maximum Building Total    Front    Of       Space
      (Sq. (Sq.  Width (Ft.)    (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) Height  Width    Building Setback  Bedrooms (Sq.
      Ft.) Ft.)  (Ft.)                            (Ft.)   (Ft.)    Coverage Coverage Per Unit Ft.)10
               Minimum Lot Requirements       Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk    Maximum Lot
                                                                                 Coverage          Maximum  Minimum
               Lot    Area/                                             Minimum                    Number   Open
Zone/Use       Size   Unit     Lot   Frontage Front Side  Rear  Maximum Building Total    Front    Of       Space
               (Sq.   (Sq.     Width (Ft.)    (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) Height  Width    Building Setback  Bedrooms (Sq.
               Ft.)   Ft.)     (Ft.)                            (Ft.)   (Ft.)    Coverage Coverage Per Unit Ft.)10

     Detached
     single-
     family,   40,000 40,000   80    50       156   5+22  20    35      203      40%      50%      n/a      500
RR-1 including
     zero lot
     line
     Other     40,000 n/a      80    50       20    5+22  20    35      203      40%      50%      n/a      n/a
     uses1
     Detached
     single-
     family,   6,0008 6,0008   508   408      156   5+22  20    35      203      45%      50%      n/a      500
     including
     zero lot
RS-5 line
     Duplexes  10,000 5,000    70    70       156   5+22  20    35      203      45%      50%      411      300/unit
     Attached                                       0 or
     single-   5,000  5,000    35    35       156   105   20    35      203      45%      50%      411      150
     family
     Other     6,000  n/a      50    40       20    5+22  20    35      203      45%      50%      n/a      n/a
     uses1
     Detached
     single-                                              See
     family,   5,0008 5,000    458   408      156   5+22  note  35      203      45%      50%      n/a      500
     including                                            9
     zero lot
     line
RS-8                                                      See
     Duplex    8,000  4,000    60    60       156   5+22  note  35      203      45%      50%      411      300/unit
                                                          9
     Attached                                       0 or
     single-   4,000  4,000    30    30       156   105   20    35      203      45%      50%      411      150
     family
     Other     5,000  n/a      45    40       20    5+22  20    35      203      45%      50%      n/a      n/a
     uses1
     Detached
     single-                                              See
     family,   5,0008 5,0008   458   408      156   5+22  note  35      203      50%      50%      n/a      500
     including                                            9
     zero lot
     line
                                                          See
RS-  Duplex    6,000  3,000    55    40       156   5+22  note  35      203      50%      50%      411      300/unit
12                                                        9
     Attached                  20/                  0 or
     single-   3,000  3,000    287   20       156   105   20    35      183      50%      50%      411      150
     family
     Multi-
     family    9,000  3,000    76    60       156   10    20    35      543      50%      50%      411      150/unit
     uses
     Other     5,000  n/a      45    40       20    5+22  20    35      203      50%      50%      n/a      n/a
     uses1
     Detached                                             See
     single-   5,0008 5,0008   458   258      156   5+22  note  27      203      40%      50%      n/a      500
     family                                               9
                                                          See
     Duplex    6,000  3,000    45    25       156   5+22  note  27      203      40%      50%      411      300/unit
RNS-                                                      9
12                                                                                                          10/
     Multi-           Existing                                                                              bedroom,
     family    5,000  4        45    25       156   5+22  20    35      203      40%      50%      311      but no
     uses                                                                                                   less
                                                                                                            than 400
     Other     5,000  n/a      45    25       20    5+22  20    35      203      40%      50%      n/a      n/a
     uses1
 
n/a = not applicable
Notes:
   1.    Other uses must comply with the standards listed in this table unless
specified otherwise in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
   2.    Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories plus 2 feet for
each additional story. Detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the
applicable side setback standards in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
   3.    A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building
width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
   4.    See the special provisions of this article regarding multi-family
uses.
   5.    See applicable side setbacks for attached single-family as provided in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
   6.    The principal dwelling must be set back at least 15 feet, except on
lots located around the bulb of a cul-de-sac; on such lots the principal
dwelling must be set back at least 25 feet. On all lots, garages, both attached
and detached, must be set back as specified in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   7.    Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and
28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are
attached, lots must be 28 feet wide.
   8.    If the single family density bonus options have been applied, the
minimum lot area, lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements
may be reduced accordingly. (See section
14-2A-7 of this article.)
   9.    The principal building rear setback is 20 feet, except in the Central
Planning District and Downtown Planning District, where the rear setback is
dependent on the depth of the lot. For lots equal to or less than 100 feet in
depth: minimum rear setback = 20 feet. For lots greater than 100 feet in depth:
minimum rear setback = lot depth less 80 feet. For purposes of this provision,
garages located in the rear yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a
(non-habitable) breezeway (8 feet or narrower in width) will be considered
detached accessory buildings and, therefore, are subject to the setback
requirements for detached accessory buildings, rather than principal building
setback requirements. Similarly, subject breezeways shall be treated as
detached accessory structures/buildings.
   10.    Open space must meet standards set forth in subsection
14-2A-4E of this section.
   11.    Outside of the University Impact Area (see map 2B.1 in Section
14-2B-6), the maximum number of bedrooms may be increased by one (1). Any
bedroom within a multi-family, attached single family or duplex that exceeds
225 square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet
shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum
number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of title 17,
chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009; Ord. 12-4488, 8-21-
2012; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023;
Ord. 24-4919, 1-16-2024)
14-2A-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one
"household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in
chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title. The residential
occupancy of a household living use is constrained by the provisions of title
17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code. Occupancy of properties that are
not in compliance with the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as
set forth in subsection
17-5-18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744,
4-2-2018)
14-2A-6: SINGLE-FAMILY SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The single-family site development standards are intended to:
      1.   Ensure that parking areas are located so as to prevent drainage onto
adjoining properties, to prevent vehicles from blocking sidewalks and to ensure
that front yard areas remain free of large parking areas that will detract from
the residential character of the neighborhood.
      2.   Enhance public safety for residents and visitors by lining streets
with active living spaces, ensuring that there is a physical and visual
connection between the living area of the residence and the street.
      3.   Enhance the pedestrian oriented character of the neighborhood by
preventing blank facades and large expanses of concrete along the street.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The standards of this section apply to all single-family and two-
family uses located in any zone.
      2.   Multi-family dwellings, group living uses, and institutional/civic
uses located in a single-family zone are subject to the multi-family site
development standards specified in
chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family Residential Zones", of this title.
   C.   Garage, Driveway And Parking Location Standards:
      1.   For single-family uses and two-family uses, a required parking space
may be located behind another parking space on a regularly constructed aisle,
provided the spaces are not stacked more than two (2) spaces deep, counting the
space within a garage. (See
figure 2A.4 of this section.)
Figure 2A.4 - Stacked Parking Spaces
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2548.png]
 
      2.   Parking for single-family uses and two-family uses may be designed
to allow cars to exit by backing into a street, except if street access is
restricted or alley access is required.
      3.   Parking is not permitted in the front principal dwelling setback,
except in the following situations:
         a.    For single-family uses, one of the required parking space(s) may
be provided in the front principal dwelling setback on a regularly constructed
aisle that leads directly to a parking space that is not located in the front
principal dwelling setback, provided not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
front principal dwelling setback area remains open space, free of impervious
surface.
         b.   For two (2)-family uses and group households, two (2) of the
required parking spaces may be provided in the front principal dwelling setback
on a regularly constructed aisle that leads directly to a parking space that is
not located in the front principal dwelling setback, provided not less than
fifty percent (50%) of the front principal dwelling setback area remains open
space, free of impervious surface.
         c.   For single-family uses, two-family uses, and group households, up
to three (3) nonrequired parking spaces may be provided in the front principal
dwelling setback, provided any such space is located on a regularly constructed
aisle that leads directly to a parking space that is not located in the front
principal dwelling setback, and provided that not less than fifty percent (50%)
of the front principal dwelling setback area remains open space, free of
buildings and impervious surfaces. (See figure 2A.5 of this section.)
Figure 2A.5 - Nonrequired Parking Within The Front Setback Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2548.png]
 
      4.   Garages and carports must be located so as to provide a driveway, at
least twenty five feet (25') in length, between the entrance to the garage or
carport and the street right of way line. Garages and carports accessed from an
alley must be located so as to provide a driveway at least five feet (5') in
length between the entrance to the garage or carport and the alley right of way
line. In cases where the configuration of the lot, the topography, and/or other
physical characteristic of the property makes the application of this standard
impractical, a minor modification may be requested to reduce the driveway
length, provided that the following approval criteria are met in addition to
the general minor modification standards set forth in subsection
14-4B-1B of this title:
         a.   There will be at least twenty five feet (25') of driveway length
between the entrance to the garage or carport and any existing public sidewalk.
In cases where there is no public sidewalk, but where a public sidewalk is
likely to be built in the future, there must be at least twenty five feet (25')
of driveway length between the entrance of the garage or carport and the likely
location of a future public sidewalk, as determined by the city.
         b.   The resulting garage or carport location and driveway length will
not compromise public safety along the fronting street or alley.
      5.   A nonhard surfaced drive or aisle may not be located closer than
three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of access with a street,
alley, or private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives must be set back at least
three feet (3') from any side or rear lot line, except under the following
circumstances:
         a.   The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to
prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
         b.   A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle
stormwater runoff; or
         c.   Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive
is shared with an abutting lot; or
         d.   At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane.
      6.   On lots less than sixty feet (60') in width, the length of any
garage wall that faces a street-side lot line may not exceed sixty percent
(60%) of the total length of the building facade that faces the same street-
side lot line. On corner lots, only the garage wall(s) containing a garage door
must meet this standard. For two-family uses and attached single-family
dwellings, additional vehicular access standards may apply. See applicable
standards in section
14-4B-4, "Specific Approval Criteria For Provisional Uses And Special
Exceptions", of this title.
   D.   Pedestrian Circulation: Where no sidewalk exists, sidewalks shall be
constructed in the abutting public right-of-way according to the standards in
section
15-3-3. The Director of Neighborhood and Development Services may exempt a
property from this requirement where a finding is made that such a sidewalk is
unlikely to connect to future pedestrian routes. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 11-4451, 10-18-2011; Ord. 19-4815, 12-17-2019; Ord. 21- 4858, 6-1-
2021; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
14-2A-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Single-Family Density Bonus Options: For detached single-family
dwellings and detached zero lot line dwellings, the following density bonuses
are allowed in the following zones and under the following conditions:
      1.   RS-5 zone: If vehicular access to garages and off street parking
spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the following
modifications to dimensional requirements are allowed:
         a.   The minimum lot width may be reduced to forty five feet (45') and
the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to thirty feet (30');
         b.   The minimum lot size and lot area per unit may be reduced to five
thousand (5,000) square feet; and
         c.   The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if
utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first
floor elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent
public sidewalk.
      2.   RS-8 zone: If vehicular access to garages and off street parking
spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the following
modifications to dimensional requirements are allowed:
         a.   The minimum lot width may be reduced to forty feet (40') and the
minimum frontage to twenty five feet (25');
         b.   The minimum lot size and lot area per unit may be reduced to four
thousand (4,000) square feet; and
         c.   The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if
utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first
floor elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent
public sidewalk.
      3.   RS-12 and RNS-12 zones: If vehicular access to garages and off
street parking spaces is restricted to an alley or private rear lane, then the
following modifications to dimensional requirements are allowed:
         a.   The minimum lot width may be reduced to thirty feet (30') and the
minimum frontage to twenty feet (20');
         b.   The minimum lot size and lot area per unit may be reduced to
three thousand (3,000) square feet; and
         c.   The minimum front setback may be reduced to ten feet (10'), if
utilities are also located along the alley or private rear lane and the first
floor elevation is at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of the adjacent
public sidewalk.
   B.   Historic Preservation Exceptions:
      1.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or
modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or
in chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4,
article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property
located in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) or registered on the national
register of historic places. In addition to the general special exception
approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, the
following approval criteria must be met:
         a.   The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic,
aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property;
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
      2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a
property located in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) or registered on the
national register of historic places to be adapted and reused as a community
service use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail
use. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in
chapter 4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following
criteria in order for the Board to grant this exception:
         a.   The exception is necessary to preserve the historic, aesthetic,
or cultural attributes of the property.
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
   C.   Special Provisions In Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone:
      1.   At the time a property is rezoned to neighborhood stabilization
residential (RNS-12), any uses that were conforming with regard to use and
minimum lot area per unit requirements under the previous zoning designation
shall be considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per unit
requirements under the neighborhood stabilization residential zone. Any
building containing a conforming use may be torn down and rebuilt to its
present density or to the allowed density in the neighborhood stabilization
residential zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title.
      2.   The special provision described in subsection C1 of this section
does not exempt a property from compliance with other relevant dimensional
standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any subsequent
amendments to this title that pertain to the property.
   D.   Two-Family Uses And Attached Single-Family Dwellings In RS-8 Zone:
Existing two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings located on
interior lots in the RS-8 zone that were conforming with regard to use and
minimum lot area per unit requirements as of December 27, 2005, shall be
considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per unit
requirements regardless of location. Any building containing a conforming use
may be torn own and rebuilt to its present density or to the allowed density in
the RS-8 zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title. This provision does not exempt a property from compliance with other
dimensional standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any
subsequent amendments to this title that pertain to the property.
   E.   Sustainability Density Bonus: The minimum lot size or minimum lot area
per unit may be reduced by ten percent (10%) of the applicable requirement for
each of the following provisions that is met, up to a maximum of twenty-five
percent (25%). This bonus may be used in conjunction with subsection
14-5A-4F10 (Sustainability Parking Reduction).
      1.   A solar energy system is installed onsite where the size is equal to
forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the roofs of all buildings.
      2.   All uses within the development utilize electricity for one hundred
percent (100%) of their regular energy consumption after construction.
      3.   All buildings within the development are constructed to the most
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code standards
published by the International Code Council.
   F.   Affordable Housing Bonus: Residential uses are eligible to utilize
affordable housing bonuses pursuant to Article 14-4F, "Affordable Housing".
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 22-4884, 8-2-2022; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-
2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
ARTICLE B. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
14-2B-1: Establishment And Intent Of Multi-Family Residential Zones
14-2B-2: Land Uses Allowed
14-2B-3: General Provisions
14-2B-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2B-5: Maximum Occupancy For Household Living Uses
14-2B-6: Multi-Family Site Development Standards
14-2B-7: PRM Zone Bonus And Minor Adjustment Provisions
14-2B-8: Special Provisions
14-2B-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established multi-family
residential zones are listed below. When this title refers to the multi-family
residential zones, it is referring to the zones listed below. When this title
refers to residential zones, or R zones, it is referring to both the single-
family residential zones listed
chapter 2, article A of this title and the multi-family residential zones
listed below.
   A.   Low Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-12): The purpose of the
low density multi-family residential zone (RM-12) is to provide for the
development of high density, single-family housing and low density, multi-
family housing. This zone is intended to provide a diverse variety of housing
options in neighborhoods throughout the city. Careful attention to site and
building design is important to ensure that the various housing types in any
one location are compatible with one another.
   B.   Medium Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-20): The purpose of
the medium density multi-family residential zone (RM-20) is to provide for the
development of medium density multi-family housing. This zone is particularly
well suited to locations adjacent to commercial areas and in areas with good
access to all city services and facilities. This zone allows a mix of detached
and attached single-family housing, duplexes, and multi-family housing. Careful
attention to site and building design is important to ensure that the various
housing types in any one location are compatible with one another.
   C.   Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone (RNS-20): The purpose of
the neighborhood stabilization residential zone (RNS-20) is to stabilize and
preserve the character of older neighborhoods that contain a mix of single-
family housing, duplexes, single-family structures that have been converted to
multi-family housing, and properties that have been redeveloped with multi-
family housing. Higher density multi-family uses that were conforming prior to
rezoning to RNS-20 remain conforming when rezoned to RNS-20. Conversions and
redevelopment may occur up to the density allowed in this zone.
   D.   High Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (RM-44): The purpose of the
high density multi-family residential zone (RM-44) is to establish areas for
the development of high density, multi- family dwellings and group living
quarters. Properties zoned RM-44 should be located with good access to all city
services and facilities, including public transportation services. Vehicular
access and parking should be designed carefully to ensure efficient traffic and
pedestrian circulation on adjacent streets. Due to the high density permitted
in this zone, careful attention to site design is expected to ensure that
buildings are compatible with surrounding land uses and that a quality living
environment will be maintained over time.
   E.   Planned High Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (PRM): The purpose
of the planned high density multi-family residential zone (PRM) is to provide
for development of high density multi-family housing in close proximity to
centrally located employment, educational, and commercial uses. Because of the
high density of development anticipated in this zone, special consideration of
building and site design is required. Density bonuses may be granted when
additional amenities are provided. Establishing a pleasant, safe and efficient
pedestrian environment is important, since many of the city's primary
destinations are within walking distance of properties zoned PRM. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2B-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2B-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in a particular multi-family residential zone.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in the table. For example, a rooming house is classified as independent
group living. To find out how a specific land use is categorized see
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The approval criteria for special
exceptions are stated in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
   B.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are
stated in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2B-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Multi-Family Residential Zones
Use Categories Subgroups RM-12 RM-20 RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
Use Categories          Subgroups                 RM-12 RM-20 RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
Residential uses:                                                      
                        Detached single-family    P     P     P            
                        dwellings
                        Detached zero lot line    PR    PR    PR           
                        dwellings
Household living uses   Attached single-family    PR    PR    PR           
                        dwellings
                        Duplexes                  PR    PR    PR           
                        Group households          PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
                        Multi-family dwellings    P     P     P      P     P
                        Assisted group living     PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
Group living uses       Independent group living       PR          PR    PR
                        Fraternal group living         PR    S      PR    PR
Commercial uses:                                                       
Eating and drinking                                                    
establishments
Office uses             General office                                  
                        Medical/dental office                           
                        Sales oriented                                  
                        Personal service oriented                      S
                        Alcohol sales oriented                          
Retail uses             Repair oriented                                 
                        Hospitality oriented                      PR    PR
                        retail
                        Outdoor storage and                             
                        display oriented
Institutional and civic                                                
uses:
                        General community service S     S     S      S     S
Community service uses  Community service -       S     S     S      S     S
                        shelter
Daycare uses                                     PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
Educational facilities  General                   PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
                        Specialized                                    PR
Parks and open space                             PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
uses
Religious/private group                          PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
assembly uses1
Other uses:                                                            
Communication
transmission facility                            PR    PR    PR     PR    PR
uses
 
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See
chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements for provisional uses and
special exceptions.)
Note:
    1.    Any establishment that is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or
alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth
in subsection
14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-
2013; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-2B-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a
permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter
3 of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Planned development overlay: See
chapter 3, article A of this title.
      2.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See
chapter 3, article B of this title.
      3.   Design review: See
chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See
chapter 4, article C of this title.
      3.   Temporary uses: See
chapter 4, article D of this title.
      4.   Nonconforming situations: See
chapter 4, article E of this title.
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: See
chapter 5, article A of this title.
      2.   Sign regulations: See
chapter 5, article B of this title.
      3.   Access management standards: See
chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See
chapter 5, article D of this title.
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: See
chapter 5, article E of this title.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See
chapter 5, article F of this title.
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See
chapter 5, article G of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See
chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See
chapter 5, article I of this title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See
chapter 5, article J of this title.
      11.   Neighborhood open space requirements: See
chapter 5, article K of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2B-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the multi-family residential zones are stated
in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Each of the following
subsections describes in more detail the regulations for each of the
dimensional requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed
by special exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified
in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional
requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the
planned development process (see chapter 3, article A, “Planned Development
Overlay Zone (OPD)”, of this title) or through minor adjustments in PRM Zones
as outlined in section
14-2B-7, “PRM Zone bonus And Minor Adjustment Provisions” or the historic
preservation exception as outlined in section
14-2B-8, “Special Provisions”, of this article.
   A.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to
ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the
other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure
consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for
the various multi-family residential zones and for specific residential uses
are stated in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section.
      3.   Minimum Lot Requirements For Specific Land Uses:
         a.   Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific lot size requirements not specified in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular
land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special
exception, that use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot,
even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as
permitted under chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this
title.
         c.   The single-family density bonus options for the RS-12 zone, as
specified in section
 14-2A-7 of this title, may be applied to detached single-family dwellings and
detached zero lot line dwellings located in the RM-12 and RM-20 zones. If the
single- family density bonus options have been applied, the minimum lot area,
lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements may be reduced
accordingly.
   B.   Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
         a.   Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access
for firefighting;
         b.   Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
         c.   Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in
the city's neighborhoods;
         d.   Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings; and
         e.   Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible
with buildings in the vicinity.
      2.   General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings in multi-family residential zones are stated
in
 table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for
principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal
buildings are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in
this subsection.
      3.   Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain
principal building setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
         a.   Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
            (1)   On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot
(40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial
street or future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map,
located in
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot is located along an arterial street that is
substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way as specified in
title 15, "Land Subdivisions", of this code, then the minimum forty foot (40')
front setback along said street is increased by the number of additional feet
that will be required for future upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots
platted prior to December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement. In
addition, setback averaging may apply in certain circumstances. (See subsection
B3e of this section.)
         b.   Lots With Multiple Frontages:
            (1)   On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless
specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth
in
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to
have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback
must be provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front
setback for purposes of this title.
         c.   Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot
must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10').
Buildings containing residential uses must be designed to preserve privacy.
This can be achieved by placement of windows to prevent direct views into the
windows of adjacent residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air
conditioning units may not be located along a building wall that is within
twenty feet (20') of a building wall of an adjacent principal building on the
same lot, if the wall of the adjacent building contains window or door openings
into dwelling units. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current
building code fire protection requirements.
         d.   Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have
been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development,
or in the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback
requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to
chapter 3, article B of this title and also the applicable setback provisions
in the Iowa City historic preservation handbook. For a property located in a
planned development overlay zone, refer to the approved planned development
overlay plan for the subject property. For two-family uses, multi-family uses,
group living uses, and institutional/civic uses located on property in the
central planning district, refer to the applicable setback provisions in
section
14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this article.
         e.   Setback Averaging:
            (1)   Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a
frontage have been developed and all of these developed lots are occupied by
principal buildings that are located at least five feet (5') further from the
street than the required front setback, the required front setback along the
frontage is increased to the equivalent of the setback of the building closest
to the street. However, this averaging provision does not apply to frontages
that contain three (3) or fewer lots.
Figure 2B.1 - Setback Averaging (1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2550.png]
 
            (2)   Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a
frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located closer to the
street than the required front setback, the front setback may be reduced to the
average of the respective setbacks on the abutting lots. Only the setbacks on
the lots that abut each side of the subject property along the same street may
be used to calculate the average. Setbacks across the street or along a
different street frontage may not be used. When one abutting lot is vacant or
if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is based on the setback of the
principal building on the nonvacant lot and the required setback for the zone
in which the lot is located. (See
 figure 2B.2 of this section.)
Figure 2B.2 - Setback Averaging (2)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2552.png]
 
      4.   Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The
following building features may extend into the required principal building
setback area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of
such a feature does not violate the provisions of
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The
setback regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not
considered part of the principal building are addressed in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         a.   Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses,
buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features
that extend beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet
(6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay
windows, and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to
three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet
(2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal building
must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
         b.   Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building
setbacks of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area.
Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non- habitable space) may extend up to
fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least
twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered decks and
patios are specified in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. Enclosed
porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to an accessory
building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as specified in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not
extend more than three feet (3') into any side setback.
         d.   Stairways that function as the principal means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not
extend into any required setback.
         e.   Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to
the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback,
provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp
cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested according to
the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      5.   Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce principal building setback
requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures
for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building
setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board of
Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a
property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria set
forth in chapter 4, article B of this title and the following specific approval
criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The subject building will be located no closer than three
feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property
line abuts a public right of way or permanent open space.
   C.   Building Bulk Standards:
      1.   Maximum Height:
         a.   Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options
for light, air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate
other buildings in the vicinity.
         b.   General Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for
structures in multi-family residential zones are stated in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. Height standards for accessory
buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Specific Standards:
            (1)   In the multi-family zones, if any portion of a building is
within fifteen feet (15') of a single-family residential zone boundary, then
the portion of the building located within fifteen feet (15') of said zone may
not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories in height.
            (2)   In the RM-12, RM-20, and RNS-20 zones, if any portion of a
two-family use, multi-family use, group living use, or nonresidential use is
located within fifteen feet (15') of a property that contains an existing
single-family use, then the portion of the building located within fifteen feet
(15') of said property may not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories in
height.
         d.   Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following
structures or parts thereof are exempt from the height limitations set forth in
the zones indicated, provided an increase in height does not conflict with
chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
            (1)   Chimneys or flues.
            (2)   Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
            (3)   Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions
not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
            (4)   Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and
similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
            (5)   Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the
height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the
roof, whichever is less.
            (6)   Parapet or fire walls.
            (7)   Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic
utility use, such as street lights and utility poles.
            (8)   If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and
communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height
standards, but are subject to any limitations placed by the board of
adjustment.
            (9)   Roof structures, including solar energy systems, elevator
bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary
mechanical and electrical appurtenances required to operate and maintain the
building.
            (10)   Television antennas and similar apparatus.
         e.   Adjustment Of Height Standards:
            (1)   The maximum height for a principal building may be increased;
provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet
(2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
            (2)   A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the
maximum height for a particular building or property according to the
procedures and approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter
4, article B of this title.
      2.   Minimum Building Width:
         a.   Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
         b.   Standards: The minimum building width requirements for principal
structures in multi-family residential zones are stated in
 table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. A building must be in
compliance with the specified minimum building width for at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the building's length. (See
 figure 2B.3 below.)
Figure 2B.3 - Minimum Building Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2554.png]
 
   D.   Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
      1.   Total Building Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the
character of multi-family residential zones by limiting the land area that can
be covered by buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum
lot requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built up a
neighborhood appears.
         b.   Standards: The total building coverage standards for the various
multi-family residential zones are stated in
table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. The maximum building coverage
standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be
covered by buildings. The total building area of all buildings on the property,
including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the
building coverage.
      2.   Front Setback Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a
certain portion of the front setback remains free of impervious surface, which
helps to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along neighborhood
streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing excessive front
yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the principal dwelling and
the main entrance from view of the street. In addition, this standard helps to
prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front yard pavement,
particularly along frontages with narrow residential lots.
         b.   Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the
multi-family residential zones is stated in
 table 2B-2, located at the end of this section. The table lists the maximum
percentage of the required front setback that may be covered by impervious
surface, including driveways, walkways, patios, decks, and other paved areas.
Front setback coverage may not exceed the percentage indicated in
 table 2B-2, located at the end of this section.
         c.   Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the
allowed front setback coverage. The board of adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property
demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and the
following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe
topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback
coverage standard.
            (2)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the
front setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of
driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing alternative
means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or
private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage standard may not be
increased.
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the front setback coverage regulations.
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent practical.
   E.   Minimum Open Space Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure
a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support the
health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent
of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses,
usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square
feet per bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in
one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet
(15').
         b.   On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of
five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
         c.   On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided,
located in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
         d.   On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred
(300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less
than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than twelve feet
(12').
      3.   Standards:
         a.   For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall
meet the standards as set forth in subsections
14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this chapter.
         b.   For single family uses and two family uses open space shall be
located behind the principal dwelling in an area visible and easily accessible
from the principal dwelling and shall consist of open planted green space,
which may include trees, planters, gardens, and other amenities that support
passive recreation or leisure activities. Paved areas shall not be counted
toward usable open space. For attached single family uses, rooftop or upper
floor open air terraces or rear yard-facing porches, including screened-in
porches (non-habitable space only) may count toward the open space requirement.
      4.   Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according
to the provisions and approval criteria of section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open
space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances,
provided the additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this
section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the
allowed occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code):
         a.   In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces
(surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2)
off-street parking spaces; or
         b.   If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in
size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that
there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         c.   The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/
dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         d.   The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the
side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
         e.   Approval criteria:
            (1)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the
width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new buildings or
additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property;
and
            (2)   The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent
possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
            (3)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent possible.
Table 2B-2: Dimensional Requirements For Multi-Family Residential Zones
      Minimum Lot Requirements   Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk   Maximum Lot
                                                                   Coverage          Maximum  Minimum
Zone/ Total Area/                                                                    Number   Open
Use   Area  Unit  Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Height Minimum  Total    Front    Of       Space12
      (Sq.  (Sq.  (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)  Building Building Setback  Bedrooms (Sq.
      Ft.)  Ft.)        (Ft.)                             Width    Coverage Coverage Per Unit Ft.)
                  Minimum Lot Requirements      Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk   Maximum Lot
                                                                                  Coverage          Maximum  Minimum
                  Total  Area/                                                                      Number   Open
Zone/Use          Area   Unit    Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Height Minimum  Total    Front    Of       Space12
                  (Sq.   (Sq.    (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)  Building Building Setback  Bedrooms (Sq.
                  Ft.)   Ft.)          (Ft.)                             Width    Coverage Coverage Per Unit Ft.)

     Detached
     single-                                                See
     family and   5,0007 5,0007  457   407      155   5+22  note  358    203      50%      50%      n/a      500
     detached                                               10
     zero lot
     line
                                                            See                                              300/
     Duplex       6,000  3,000   55    40       155   5+22  note  358    203      50%      50%      413      unit
                                                            10
     Attached                    20/
     single-      3,000  3,000   286   20       155   0/104 20    358    n/a      50%      50%      413      150
     family
RM-                      See                                                                                 10/bed-
12                        table                                                                              room,
     Multi-family 8,175  2B-3 of 60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      313      but no
                         this                                                                                less
                         section                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                             10/bed-
                         See                                                                        See      room,
     Group living 8,175  article 60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      article  but no
                         14-4B                                                                      14-4B    less
                                                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
     Non-         5,000  5,000   60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      n/a      n/a
     residential1
     Detached
     single-                                                See
     family and   5,0007 5,0007  457   407      155   5+22  note  358    203      50%      50%      n/a      500
     detached                                               10
     zero lot
     line
                                                            See                                              300/
     Duplex       3,600  1,800   45    35       155   5+22  note  358    203      50%      50%      413      unit
                                                            10
     Attached                    20/
     single-      1,800  1,800   286   20       155   0/104 20    358    n/a      50%      50%      413      150
     family
RM-                      See                                                                                 10/bed-
20                       table                                                                               room,
     Multi-family 5,000  2B-3 of 60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      313      but no
                         this                                                                                less
                         section                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                             10/bed-
                         See                                                                        See      room,
     Group living 5,000  article 60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      article  but no
                         14-4B                                                                      14-4B    less
                                                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
     Non-         5,000  n/a     60    40       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      n/a      n/a
     residential1
     Detached
     single-                                                See
     family and   5,0007 5,0007  407   257      155   5+22  note  358    203      45%      50%      n/a      500
     detached                                               10
     zero lot
     line
                                                            See                                              300/
     Duplex       5,000  2,500   40    25       155   5+22  note  358    203      45%      50%      413      unit
                                                            10
     Attached                    20/
     single-      2,500  2,500   286   20       155   0/104 20    358    n/a      45%      50%      413      150
     family
RNS-                     See                                                                                 10/bed-
20                        table                                                                              room,
                         2B-3 of                                                                             but no
     Multi-family 5,000  this    40    25       20    10    20    358    203      45%      50%      313      less
                         section                                                                             than
                         and                                                                                 400
                         note 9
                                                                                                             10/bed-
                         See                                                                        See      room,
     Group living 5,000  article 40    25       20    10    20    358    203      45%      50%      article  but no
                         14-4B                                                                      14-4B    less
                                                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
     Non-         5,000  n/a     40    25       20    10    20    358    203      45%      50%      n/a      n/a
     residential1
                         See                                                                                 10/bed-
                         table                                                                               room,
     Multi-family 5,000  2B-3 of None  35       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      313      but no
                         this                                                                                less
                         section                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
RM-                                                                                                          10/bed-
44                       See                                                                        See      room,
     Group living 5,000  article None  35       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      article  but no
                         14-4B                                                                      14-4B    less
                                                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
     Non-         5,000  n/a     None  35       20    10    20    358    203      50%      50%      n/a      n/a
     residential1
                         See                                                                                 10/bed-
                         table                                                                               room,
     Multi-family 5,000  2B-3 of None  35       20    10    1011  358    203      50%      50%      313      but no
                         this                                                                                less
                         section                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
PRM                                                                                                          10/bed-
                         See                                                                        See      room,
     Group living 5,000  article None  35       20    10    1011  358    203      50%      50%      article  but no
                         14-4B                                                                      14-4B    less
                                                                                                             than
                                                                                                             400
     Non-         5,000  n/a     None  35       20    10    1011  358    203      50%      50%      n/a      n/a
     residential1
 
n/a = not applicable
Notes:
   1.    Non-residential uses must comply with the standards listed in this
table unless specified otherwise in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
   2.    Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories plus 2 feet for
each additional story. Detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the
applicable side setback standards in chapter 4, article B of this title.
   3.    A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building
width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
   4.    See applicable side setbacks for attached single-family as provided in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
   5.    The principal dwelling must be set back at least 15 feet, except on
lots located around the bulb of a cul-de-sac; on such lots the principal
dwelling must be set back at least 25 feet. On all lots, garages, both attached
and detached, must be set back as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory
Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   6.    Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and
28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are
attached, lots must be 28 feet wide.
   7.    If the single family density bonus options have been applied, the
minimum lot area, lot area per unit, lot width and lot frontage requirements
may be reduced accordingly. (See subsection
14-2B-4A, "Minimum Lot Requirements", of this section.)
   8.    Additional height restrictions may apply on properties adjacent to
single family zones or single family uses. (See subsection
14-2B-4C, "Building Bulk Standards", of this section.)
   9.    See the special provisions of this article regarding minimum lot area
per unit requirements in the RNS-20 Zone.
   10.    The principal building rear setback is 20 feet, except in the Central
Planning District and Downtown Planning District, where the rear setback is
dependent on the depth of the lot. For lots equal to or less than 100 feet in
depth: minimum rear setback = 20 feet. For lots greater than 100 feet in depth:
minimum rear setback = lot depth less 80 feet. For purposes of this provision,
garages located in the rear yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a
(non-habitable) breezeway (8 feet or narrower in width) will be considered
detached accessory buildings and, therefore, are subject to the setback
requirements for detached accessory buildings, rather than principal building
setback requirements. Similarly, subject breezeways shall be treated as
detached accessory structures/buildings.
   11.    May be reduced to 5 feet if rear lot line abuts an alley.
   12.    Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection
14-2B-4E of this section.
   13.    Outside of the University Impact Area (see map 2B.1 in Section 14-2B-
6), the maximum number of bedrooms may be increased by one (1). Any bedroom
within a multi-family, attached single family, or duplex that exceeds 225
square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet shall
count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum number of
bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of the title 17, chapter
5, “Housing Code”, of this Code.
Table 2B-3: Maximum Density Standards For Multi-Family Dwellings In Multi-
Family Zone
 
                                            Zone
                                            RM-12 RM-20 And RNS-20 RM-44 PRM
Minimum lot area per unit (in square feet):                            
Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit                2,725 1,800            500   435
2-bedroom unit                              2,725 1,800            1,000 875
3-bedroom unit                              2,725 2,700            1,500 1,315
Minimum bedroom size1 (square feet)         100   100              100   100
 
Note:
   1.    New bedrooms must be a minimum of 100 square feet in size. However,
for purposes of the provisions within this table, any existing habitable room
that is larger than 70 square feet in size with a horizontal dimension of at
least 7 feet, that meets the egress requirements as specified in the Building
Code, and is not a typical shared living space, such as a living room, dining
area, kitchen, or bathroom will be considered a bedroom.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009; Ord. 12-4488, 8-21-
2012; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; amd. Ord. 21-4844, 1-19-2021; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-
2023; Ord. 43-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-2B-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one
"household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A,
"General Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household
living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with
the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection
17-5-18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744,
4-2-2018)
14-2B-6: MULTI-FAMILY SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The multi-family site development standards promote safe,
attractive, pedestrian friendly neighborhoods by preventing expanses of
concrete, blank walls and parking lots along street frontages; controlling the
building bulk; screening unsightly features; ensuring that pedestrian entrances
are visible and clearly identifiable from the street; and minimizing potential
conflicts between pedestrians and automobiles.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The standards of this section apply to all multi-family uses, group
living uses, and institutional/civic uses located in residential zones and in
the Central Planning District. (See Central Planning District map of this
section.)
      2.   Single-family uses and two-family uses located in a multi- family
zone must comply with the single-family site development standards specified in
chapter 2, article A, "Single-Family Residential Zones", of this title. Two-
family uses located in the Central Planning District must also comply with the
provisions of subsection I, "Additional Standards In Central Planning
District", of this section, which will be administered through the design
review process, as set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title.
      3.   For properties subject to these standards located outside the
Central Planning District, the standards in this section will be administered
through the site plan review process, as set forth in title 18 of this Code.
For properties located in the Central Planning District and the PRM Zone, the
regulations of this section will be administered through the design review
process as set forth in chapter 8, article B, “Administrative Approval
Procedures”, of this title.
      4.   For properties located in a Historic or Conservation District
Overlay Zone, the standards of this section will be administered concurrently
with review of the proposed development by the Historic Preservation
Commission. If the provisions of the Historic or Conservation District Overlay
Zone conflict with the provisions of this section, the provisions of the
Historic or Conservation District Overlay Zone will supersede the provisions of
this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2556.png]
 
   Map 2B.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2558.png]
 
   C.   Location And Design Standards For Surface Parking And Detached Garages:
      1.   Location: Surface parking, parking within accessory structures, and
loading areas must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from
view of fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located directly
between a principal building and the street or within the required side setback
area. Any portion of a parking or loading area that is not completely concealed
from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2 standard. (See
figures 2B.4 and 2B.5 below.) (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Figure 2B.4 - Location Of Surface Parking For Properties With A Single Building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2560.png]
 
Figure 2B.5 - Location Of Parking For Properties With Multiple Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2562.png]
 
      2.   Aisles And Drives: Drives that are internal to a parking area,
including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of the parking
area are considered part of the parking area and must meet the location
standards for parking areas as stated in subsection C1 of this section, and the
landscape buffering standard as stated in subsection C3 of this section. A
nonhard surfaced drive or aisle that is external to a parking area may not be
located closer than three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of
access with a street, alley, or private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives that
are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet (3') from
any side or rear lot line, except under the following circumstances:
         a.   The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to
prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
         b.   A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle
storm water runoff; or
         c.   Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive
is shared with an abutting lot; or
         d.   At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane.
      3.   Landscape Buffering:
         a.   A buffer area at least ten feet (10') in width and landscaped to
at least the S2 standard must be provided between any parking area and adjacent
properties and between any parking area and street rights of way. (See chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The city may
exempt from this requirement any specific location along a side or rear lot
line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot. The
city may also waive the landscape screening requirement where the view from
adjacent properties is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or
by natural or humanmade features, such that the screening is effectively
provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by the building
official.
         b.   A buffer area at least five feet (5') in width and landscaped to
the S1 standard must be provided between any parking area containing more than
eight (8) parking spaces and an adjacent alley.
         c.   No parking area or drive shall be closer than ten feet (10') to
any portion of a building other than a garage entrance or loading area apron.
This ten foot (10') area must be used for walkways and landscaping consisting
of at least fifty percent (50%) vegetative coverage. If parking spaces are
located where headlights of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground level
windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at
least the S2 standard.
   D.   Building Entrances For Multi-Family And Group Living Uses:
      1.   For residential uses, buildings must have at least one door on the
exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units
within the building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a
parking garage.
      2.   When a lot contains one principal building, the building must be
oriented such that at least one facade faces a public or private street. The
street facing facade must have at least one main entrance to the building, or
may contain separate main entrances to ground level dwelling units. If the
building is located on a corner lot, only one wall must meet this requirement.
      3.   When a lot contains two (2) or more principal buildings, the
buildings must be oriented towards a public street, private street, or interior
courtyard. Any building with a street facing facade must have at least one main
entrance oriented toward the street. Buildings located interior to a lot must
have main entrances that are clearly visible from interior private streets/
drives or surface parking areas.
      4.   Main entrances to a building, including main entrances to ground
level individual dwelling units, must be clearly demarcated by one of the
following means: (See
 figure 2B.6, located at the end of this subsection D4.)
         a.   Covered porch or canopy.
         b.   Transom and sidelight windows.
         c.   Pilasters and pediment.
         d.   Other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main
entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does not meet this standard.
Figure 2B.6 - Main Entrances
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2564.png]
 
      5.   Patio style doors, such as sliding glass doors, may not be used for
main entrance doors.
      6.   To provide for the safety of residents, access to entrance doors of
any individual dwelling units located above the ground level must be provided
from an enclosed lobby or corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially
enclosed exterior stairways may not be used as the primary means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground level floor of the building. This
provision does not preclude the use of fire egress structures.
      7.   (Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
      8.   A pedestrian circulation system must be provided that connects
residential entrances to adjacent public rights of way, and to parking areas
and other on site facilities.
   E.   Building Scale:
      1.   Outside the Central Planning District: Street-facing walls that are
greater than fifty feet (50') in length must be articulated with bays,
projections, or recesses (see
figure 2B.7 of this section) according to the following standards:
         a.   Bays and projections must be at least six feet (6') in width and
at least sixteen inches (16") but not more than six feet (6') in depth.
Recesses must be at least six feet (6') in width and have a depth of at least
sixteen inches (16").
         b.   The bays, projections, and recesses must have corresponding
changes in the roofline or, alternatively, must be distinguished by a
corresponding change in some other architectural element(s) of the building,
such as a change in exterior wall materials, a change in window pattern, the
addition of balconies, variation in the building and/or parapet height; or
variation in architectural details, such as decorative banding, reveals, stone
or tile accents.
Figure 2B.7 - Building Articulation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2566.png]
 
      2.   Central Planning District: The width of the front facade of new
buildings must be no more than forty feet (40'). Buildings may exceed this
limitation if the horizontal plane of any street- facing facade of the building
is broken into modules that give the appearance of smaller, individual
buildings. (See
 figure 2B.8 of this section.) Each module must meet the following standards:
         a.   Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no less
than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent modules by
a variation in the wall plane of at least sixteen inches (16") in depth. For
buildings that are three (3) or more stories in height, the width of the module
may be increased to forty feet (40').
         b.   Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
         c.   Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at
least one of the following means:
            (1)   Variation in material colors, types or textures;
            (2)   Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
            (3)   Variation in the architectural details such as decorative
banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
            (4)   Variation in window pattern;
            (5)   Variation in the use of balconies and recesses.
Figure 2B.8 - Building Modules That Break Up The Horizontal Plane
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2568.png]
 
   F.   Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors, And Lifts: For purposes of
this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead
to floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a
building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the
first or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways,
exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
      1.   Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are
prohibited in the PRM zone; however, the city may allow exterior fire egress
structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code
requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a
building that faces a street. In other zones, exterior stairways, exterior
corridors, and exterior lifts must be covered with a roof similar in design and
materials to the roof over the rest of the structure. Said roof should be
incorporated into the overall roof plan of the structure. Alternatively, such
features may be recessed into the facade of the building. Exterior corridors
may not be located on a street facing wall of the building or within twenty
feet (20') of a street facing wall.
      2.   Unenclosed or partially enclosed stairways may not be used as the
primary means of access to dwelling units located above the ground level floor
of the building (see subsection
14-2B-6D6 of this section).
      3.   Balconies, exterior stairways, exterior lifts and exterior corridors
may not be located on any side of a building that is adjacent to a property
that is zoned single-family residential or that contains an existing single-
family use. Buildings that are set back at least forty feet (40') from any such
property are exempt from this standard.
      4.   The design of any balcony, exterior stairway, exterior lift and
exterior corridor must utilize columns, piers, supports, walls, and railings
that are designed and constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the building.
Figure 2B.9 - Balconies, Exterior Corridors
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2570.png]
 
   G.   Building Materials:
      1.   In the central planning district, the exterior wall material of a
building must consist of clapboard style siding, wall shingles, brick, stone,
or stucco.
      2.   In the PRM zone, the exterior walls of the ground level floor of a
building must be constructed with a masonry finish, such as fired brick, stone,
or similar material, not including concrete blocks and undressed poured
concrete. Masonry may include stucco or like material when used in combination
with other masonry finish.
      3.   In the central planning district and in the PRM zone, buildings not
constructed of masonry or stucco must have the following trim elements
incorporated into the exterior design and construction of the building:
         a.   Window and door trim that is not less than three inches (3")
wide.
         b.   Corner boards that are not less than three inches (3") wide,
unless wood clapboards are used and mitered at the corners.
         c.   Frieze boards, not less than five inches (5") wide, located below
the eaves.
Figure 2B.10 - Building Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2572.png]
 
      4.   Any portion of a building that is clearly visible from the street
must be constructed using similar materials and design as the front facade.
      5.   Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any
facade that faces a street side lot line.
      6.   Where an exterior wall material changes along the horizontal plane
of a building, the change must occur on an inside corner of the building.
      7.   Where an exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of
the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a
belt course, soldier course, band board or other trim to provide a transition
from one material to the other.
Figure 2B.11 - Changes In Exterior Wall Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2574.png]
 
   H.   Mechanical Equipment/Utility Meters: In no case shall mechanical
equipment or utility meters be located along the street side of a building.
Mechanical structures must be set back and screened according to the applicable
provisions set forth in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings",
of this title.
   I.   Additional Standards In Central Planning District:
      1.   Front Setbacks: The front setback for new buildings must not deviate
more than five feet (5') from the average setback of existing principal
buildings along the same frontage. Alternatively, for frontages that contain
more than six (6) lots, the average may be calculated based on the principal
building setbacks on the four (4) closest lots along the same frontage to the
lot containing the new building. However, a new building shall not be located
closer to the street than the existing principal building that is closest to
the street along the same frontage. This setback standard supersedes the
setback standards of the base zone. Frontages that contain three (3) or fewer
lots are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph.
      2.   Windows And Fenestration: Individual window units that are visible
from a public or private street and that are located in primary living spaces,
such as living rooms, dining areas, and bedrooms, must have a height that is at
least one and one-half (1.5) times greater than the width of the window unit.
Individual window units may be located side by side in a wider window opening.
Bathroom, kitchen, skylights, and decorative windows, such as stained glass and
ocular windows, are not required to meet this standard.
Figure 2B.12 - Windows
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2576.png]
 
      3.   Architectural Style: The purpose of requiring an architectural style
is to ensure that the mass, roof form, window style and configuration, and the
basic architectural details of a building are generally compatible with the
historic character of the central planning district. New buildings should
appear similar to a large house or a small historic apartment building.
         a.   Any building elevation that is within public view (see definition
of "public view, within" in section
14-9A-1 of this title), must be designed in a manner that is consistent with a
historic architectural style typical of residential buildings in the central
planning district. However, building facades that are visible only from public
alleys are not subject to these standards. The applicable architectural styles
are as follows: Italianate; Queen Anne; colonial revival; craftsman; craftsman
bungalow; American foursquare; prairie school; period revival; and eclectic.
The applicant must indicate in detail how each of the following architectural
elements in the proposed building are consistent with one of these
architectural styles as described in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation
Handbook", as amended:
            (1)   Form and mass of the building;
            (2)   Roof configuration and pitch;
            (3)   Style and placement of windows and doors;
            (4)   Window and door trim, eave boards, frieze boards, and other
trim;
            (5)   Porch and entrance features;
            (6)   Building details and ornamentation.
         b.   Detailed information regarding historic residential building
styles is available in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook". The
design review committee and the historic preservation commission will use this
information as a means to evaluate new buildings in the central planning
district.
         c.   Alternative designs that have been prepared by a licensed
architect may be acceptable and will be reviewed on a case by case basis.
   J.   Minor Modifications: A minor modification to adjust specific provisions
of this section may be requested in either of the qualifying situations listed
below. Such requests will be reviewed by the design review committee, the
director of planning and community development, and the building official
according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8,
article B of this title and must meet the following approval criteria. The
following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval
criteria listed in section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title:
      1.   Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing
physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard
impractical. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following
approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the
lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard of this section impractical. Examples of
situations that may qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped
lots, and steeply sloping lots.
         b.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative
design is not contrary to the intent of the multi-family site development
standards.
         c.   The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design
that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         d.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         e.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         f.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
      2.   Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely
designed to fit the site and the surrounding neighborhood. In such a situation,
the applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that
equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         b.   The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit
the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood such that it
equally or better meets the purpose of the multi-family site development
standards.
         c.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         d.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         e.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
   K.   Exceptions and Minor Adjustments: A special exception to waive or
modify specific provisions of this section may be requested through the
historic preservation exception as outlined in section
14-2B-8, “Special Provisions”, of this article. A minor adjustment to modify
specific provisions of this section may be requested as specified in Minor
Adjustments in PRM Zones” as found in section
14-2B-7, “PRM Zone Bonus and Minor Adjustment Provisions”. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006; Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 12-4483,
5-15-2012; Ord. 12-4488, 8-21-2012; Ord. 13-4534, 6-4-2013; Ord. 21-4844, 1-19-
2021; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-2B-7: PRM ZONE BONUS AND MINOR ADJUSTMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The PRM zone bonus provisions provide an incentive for
developments to incorporate features that provide a public benefit and
encourage excellence in architectural design. The PRM zone minor adjustment
provisions allow flexibility to a project in a PRM zone which involves new
construction in conjunction with the preservation of adjacent historic
properties.
   B.   Application: The bonus and minor adjustment provisions will be
administered through the design review process as set forth in chapter 8,
article B, “Administrative Approval Procedures”, of this title. Decisions of
the Design Review Committee may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. A
project may use either the provisions in C. “Bonus Provisions” or the
provisions in D. “Minor Adjustments” below, but not both.
      1.   Bonus Provisions include allowance of dwelling units in excess of
the density otherwise achievable under the provisions of the base zone,
additional building bulk, and/or reductions of the required setback area.
Bonuses are based on a point system. Points may be awarded for public benefit
features that the design review committee determines are appropriate in design
and location. Bonuses will not be granted for site development features or
standards already required by this title. The number of points allowed for
public benefit features and the number of points required per bonus item are
set forth in C. “Bonus Provisions” below.
      2.   Minor adjustments to dimensional and site development standards may
be allowed for a newly constructed building where the project also preserves a
historic property as set forth in D. “Minor Adjustments” below.
   C.   Bonus Provisions: Development that includes the following public
benefit features may qualify for the bonuses listed in the Bonus Menu below.
      1.   Public Benefit Features:
         a.   Materials: Masonry finish on all nonfenestrated areas of walls
visible from a public street. For purposes of this provision, “masonry” is
defined as fired brick, stone or similar such materials, not including concrete
blocks and undressed poured concrete. “Masonry” may include stucco or like
material when used in combination with other masonry finish. Points allowed: 5
         b.   Open Space: The provision of usable open space of a size and at a
grade that, at a minimum, allows passive recreational uses and is accessible to
all residential occupants of the building. Such space may include yards, other
than required setback areas, terraces and rooftop gardens designed and approved
for outdoor activities. Balconies serving individual dwelling units are not
eligible for this bonus. Points allowed: 1 per 250 square feet
         c.   Historic Buildings: Rehabilitation of a historically significant
building as determined by the survey of the historic and architectural
resources for the vicinity. Points allowed: 7
         d.   Assisted Housing: Dwelling units committed to the city’s assisted
housing program or some other affordable housing program approved by the city,
provided such units do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total units
contained within a building. Points allowed: 3 per unit
         e.   Streetscape Amenities: The provision of funds for all street
furniture, lighting and landscaping improvements along adjacent street rights
of way in accordance with an approved city streetscape plan. Points allowed: 5
         f.   Landscaping: The provision of additional landscaped areas that
are visible from a public street. Required setback areas and required landscape
buffers do not qualify for bonus points. Points allowed: 1 per 250 square feet
         g.   Windows: Installing individual window units that have a height
that is at least one and one-half (1.5) times greater than the width of the
window unit in all primary living spaces, such as living rooms, dining rooms
and bedrooms. Individual window units may be located side by side in a wider
window opening. Skylights, windows in bathrooms and kitchens, and decorative
windows, such as stained glass and ocular windows, are not required to meet
this standard for the building to qualify for bonus points. Points allowed: 3
      2.   Bonus Menu:
         a.   Setback Reduction: The front setback may be reduced by a maximum
of fifty percent (50%). When determining the appropriateness of such a
reduction, the character of adjacent development and setbacks will be
considered. Points required: 7
         b.   Height Increase: The maximum allowed building height may be
increased from thirty five feet (35') up to a maximum of sixty five feet (65'),
provided the portion of building exceeding thirty five feet (35') is stepped
back a minimum of five feet (5') for each story located above thirty five feet
(35') to reduce the appearance of the bulk of the building. Points required: 7
         c.   Density Bonus: For efficiency apartments, the minimum lot area
per unit may be reduced to four hundred twenty (420) square feet. Points
required: 12
         d.   Building Coverage Increase: The maximum building coverage may be
increased to sixty five percent (65%). Points required: 7
   D.   Minor Adjustments:
      1.   Minor Adjustments: Through a Level I Design Review, the Design
Review Committee may approve a minor adjustment from any standard found in
14-2B-4 “Dimensional Requirements”,
14-2B-6 “Multi-Family Site Development Standards,” or 14-5 “Site Development
Standards”, except for those in 14-5I “Sensitive Lands and Features” and 14-5J
“Floodplain Management Standards”. Historic properties may have standards
waived through the
14-2B-8A “Historic Preservation Exceptions” process.
      2.   Applicability: The minor adjustment provides flexibility for new
construction projects which involve preservation of a separate historic
structure provided the following circumstances are met:
         a.   The property for which a minor adjustment is requested abuts a
property in any zone that is eligible to be designated as an Iowa City Historic
Landmark (herein “historic property”);
         b.   The historic property is not designated as an Iowa City Historic
Landmark prior to receipt of an application for a minor adjustment; and
         c.   The Owners of all impacted property, including the historic
property, shall provide a written acknowledgment in a form acceptable to the
City of Iowa City, stating that any required plans submitted are done so with
their free consent and are in accordance with their desires.
      3.   Approval Criteria: The request for a minor adjustment shall meet the
following approval criteria to the satisfaction of the Design Review Committee:
         a.   Documentation that the historic property is pursuing designation
as an Iowa City Historic Landmark in conjunction with the minor adjustment. The
City shall not issue a building permit for the project seeking the minor
adjustment until the City Council has approved the Iowa City Historic Landmark
designation of the historic property;
         b.   Submittal of a rehabilitation plan approved by the Historic
Preservation Commission that details how the project preserves the abutting
historic property and a timeline for completion. Rehabilitation shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new
construction project;
         c.   If the project involves demolition of (an) existing buildings,
submittal of a demolition waste landfill diversion plan as required by the
Design Review Committee;
         d.   The proposed building height shall not exceed five (5) stories
and sixty feet (60'), and its design shall be sensitive to preserving the
historic property and shall fit the characteristics of the site and the
existing neighborhood context;
         e.   The project shall not detract from or be injurious to other
property or improvements in the vicinity; and
         f.   The requested adjustment shall be consistent with the goals of
the Comprehensive Plan, District Plans, and Historic Preservation Plan, as
applicable. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 21-4844, 1-19-2021)
14-2B-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Historic Preservation Exceptions:
      1.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or
modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or
in chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4,
article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property
located in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) or registered on the national
register of historic places. In addition to the general special exception
approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, the
following approval criteria must be met:
         a.   The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic,
aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property;
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
      2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a
property located in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) or registered on the
national register of historic places to be adapted and reused as a community
service use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail
use. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in
chapter 4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following
criteria in order for the Board to grant this exception:
         a.   The exception will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or
cultural attributes of the property;
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
   B.   Special Provisions In Neighborhood Stabilization Residential Zone:
      1.   At the time a property is rezoned to neighborhood stabilization
residential (RNS-20), any uses that were conforming with regard to use and
minimum lot area per unit requirements under the previous zoning designation
shall be considered conforming with regard to use and minimum lot area per unit
requirements under the neighborhood stabilization residential zone. Any
building containing a conforming use may be torn down and rebuilt to its
present density or to the allowed density in the neighborhood stabilization
residential zone; provided, that it conforms to all other provisions of this
title.
      2.   The special provision described in subsection B1 of this section
does not exempt a property from compliance with other relevant dimensional
standards, site development standards, use regulations, or any subsequent
amendments to this title that pertain to the property.
   C.   Elder Apartment Housing Density Bonus Option:
      1.   In the RM-12, RM-20, RM-44 or PRM zones, “elder apartment housing”,
as defined in this title, may be granted a density bonus not to exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the maximum number of units otherwise permitted in the
applicable zone, provided that:
         a.   The development is intended for use and occupancy by elders and/
or persons with disabilities;
         b.   All individual dwelling units and any communal space must be
handicap accessible, as defined in the Iowa administrative code section 661-
302.20;
         c.   No more than ten percent (10%) of all individual dwelling units
can contain more than two (2) bedrooms;
         d.   Prior to issuance of the building permit, the owner must submit
an affidavit to the city that all individual dwelling units will be reserved
for and occupied by elders and/or persons with disabilities; and
         e.   Owners shall maintain a valid rental permit, unless the use is
licensed by the state of Iowa.
      2.   The city reserves the right to inspect the elder apartment housing
to verify compliance with these provisions.
   D.   Sustainability Density Bonus: The minimum lot size or minimum lot area
per unit may be reduced by ten percent (10%) of the applicable requirement for
each of the following provisions that is met, up to a maximum of twenty-five
percent (25%). This bonus may be used in conjunction with subsection
14-5A-4F10 (Sustainability Parking Reduction).
      1.   A solar energy system is installed onsite where the size is equal to
forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the roofs of all buildings.
      2.   All uses within the development utilize electricity for one hundred
percent (100%) of their regular energy consumption after construction.
      3.   All buildings within the development are constructed to the most
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code standards
published by the International Code Council.
   E.   Affordable Housing Bonus: Residential uses are eligible to utilize
affordable housing bonuses pursuant to Article 14-4F, "Affordable Housing".
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4456, 11-22-2011; Ord. 22-4884, 8-2-
2022; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
ARTICLE C. COMMERCIAL ZONES
SECTION:
14-2C-1: Establishment And Intent Of Commercial Zones
14-2C-2: Land Uses Allowed
14-2C-3: General Provisions
14-2C-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2C-5: Maximum Occupancy For Household Living Uses
14-2C-6: Commercial Site Development Standards
14-2C-7: CN-1 Zone Site Development Standards
14-2C-8: Central Business Site Development Standards
14-2C-9: Site Development Standards In MU Zone
14-2C-10: Special Exceptions And Minor Modifications To Site Development
Standards
14-2C-11: Special Provisions
14-2C-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF COMMERCIAL ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established commercial
zones are listed below. When this title refers to the commercial zones, it is
referring to the zones listed below:
   A.   Mixed Use Zone (MU): The purpose of the mixed use zone (MU) is to
provide a transition from commercial and employment centers to less intensive
residential zones. The MU zone permits a mix of uses, including lower scale
retail and office uses, and a variety of residential uses. This mix of uses
requires special consideration of building and site design.
   B.   Commercial Office Zone (CO-1): The purpose of the commercial office
zone (CO-1) is to provide specific areas where office functions, compatible
businesses, apartments and certain public and semipublic uses may be developed
in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The CO-1 zone can serve as a buffer
between residential and more intensive commercial or industrial areas.
   C.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (CN-1): The purpose of the neighborhood
commercial zone (CN-1) is to promote a unified grouping of small scale retail
sales and personal service uses in a neighborhood shopping area; encourage
neighborhood shopping areas that are conveniently located and that primarily
serve nearby residential neighborhoods; promote pedestrian oriented development
at an intensity level that is compatible with surrounding residential areas;
and promote principles of site design, building articulation, scale and
proportion that are typical of traditional main street design. Allowed uses are
restricted in size to promote smaller, neighborhood serving businesses and to
limit adverse impacts on nearby residential areas. CN-1 zones are generally
located with direct access to an arterial street.
   D.   Highway Commercial Zone (CH-1): The purpose of the highway commercial
zone (CH-1) is to permit development of service uses relating to expressways or
along arterial roadways. At certain access points, food, lodging, motor vehicle
service and fuel can be made conveniently available to the thoroughfare user.
   E.   Intensive Commercial Zone (CI-1): The purpose of the intensive
commercial zone (CI-1) is to provide areas for those sales and service
functions and businesses whose operations are typically characterized by
outdoor display and storage of merchandise, by repair and sales of large
equipment or motor vehicles, by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational
activities or by activities or operations conducted in buildings or structures
not completely enclosed. The types of retail trade in this zone are limited in
order to provide opportunities for more land intensive commercial operations
and also to prevent conflicts between retail and industrial truck traffic.
Special attention must be directed toward buffering the negative aspects of
allowed uses from adjacent residential zones.
   F.   Community Commercial Zone (CC-2): The purpose of the community
commercial zone (CC-2) is to provide for major business districts to serve a
significant segment of the total community population. In addition to a variety
of retail goods and services, these centers may typically feature a number of
large traffic generators requiring access from major thoroughfares. While these
centers are usually characterized by indoor operations, uses may have limited
outdoor activities; provided, that outdoor operations are screened or buffered
to remain compatible with surrounding uses.
   G.   Central Business Service Zone (CB-2): The central business service zone
(CB-2) is intended to allow for the orderly expansion of the central business
district of Iowa City, to serve as a transition between the intense land uses
located in the central business district and adjoining areas, to enhance the
pedestrian orientation of the central area of the city, and to provide
suitable, peripheral locations for auto oriented commercial and service uses.
This zone is intended to accommodate mixed land uses but at a lower intensity
than permitted in the other central business zones.
   H.   Central Business Support Zone (CB-5): The purpose of the central
business support zone (CB-5) is to allow for the orderly expansion of the
central business district in accordance with the comprehensive plan; to serve
as a transition between the intense land uses located in the central business
district and adjoining areas; and to enhance the pedestrian orientation of the
central area of the city. This zone is intended to accommodate mixed land uses,
but at a lower intensity than permitted in the CB-10 district. The mixture of
land uses permitted in this zone requires special consideration of building and
site design. To control traffic and provide for the most efficient use of land
and parking facilities, special consideration of the amount and location of
parking areas is also required. To encourage developments that contain features
providing a public benefit, a bonus in floor area ratio or dwelling unit
density may be granted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   I.   Central Business Zone (CB-10): The purpose of the central business zone
(CB-10) is to be the high density, compact, pedestrian oriented shopping,
office, service and entertainment area in Iowa City. Development and
redevelopment in this zone should occur in compact groupings, in order to
intensify the density of usable commercial spaces, while increasing the
availability of open spaces, plazas or pedestrianways. This zone is intended to
accommodate a wide range of retail, service, office and residential uses. Auto
oriented uses are not permitted, except as specifically provided. Consolidated
off street loading and service facilities should be provided wherever practical
with access provided from public service alleys or courts. Private, off street
parking is strictly regulated in order to preserve valuable land for active
building uses and to maintain a pedestrian oriented streetscape. To support a
healthy and vibrant commercial core, development of mixed use buildings with
residential uses located above storefront commercial uses is encouraged. (Ord.
08-4326, 12-22-2008)
14-2C-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2C-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in a particular commercial zone. A number in superscript
indicates that a special provision applies. See table notes for more
information.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in the table. For example, a florist shop is classified as a sales
oriented retail use. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for
special exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title, along with
specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
   B.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are
stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2C-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Commercial Zones
 
P  = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S  = Special exception (see chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements
     for provisional uses and special exceptions)
 
Use Categories Subgroups CO-1 CN-1 CH-1 CI-1 CC-2 CB-2 CB-5 CB-10 MU
Use Categories  Subgroups     CO-1 CN-1 CH-1       CI-1 CC-2 CB-2 CB-5 CB-10 MU
Residential                                                          
uses:
                Assisted      PR   PR                   PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
                group living
Group living    Fraternal
uses            group living
                Independent
                group living
                Attached
                single-family                                                PR
                dwellings
                Detached
                single-family                                                P
                dwellings
Household       Detached zero
living uses     lot line                                                     PR
                dwellings
                Duplexes                                                     PR
                Group         PR   PR                   PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
                households
                Multi-family  PR/S PR/S                 PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S  P
                dwellings
Commercial                                                           
uses:
Adult business                                   PR
uses
Animal related  General       S    PR   PR         PR   PR   PR   PR
commercial uses Intensive                          PR
Building trade                                    P    PR
uses
Commercial                                                  PR   PR   PR
parking uses
Commercial      Indoor        PR/S PR   P          P    P    P    P    P
recreational    Outdoor                 P          P    S
uses1
Drinking                         PR/S PR         PR   PR   PR   PR   PR     
establishments1
Eating                       S    PR/S P          P    P    P    P    P     S
establishments1
                General       P    PR   P          P    P    P    P    P     P
Office uses     office
                Medical/      P    PR   P          P    P    P    P    P     P
                dental office
Quick vehicle                    S    PR         PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S       
servicing uses1
Redemption                    PR   PR   P          P    PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
center
                Alcohol sales
                oriented          PR   PR         P    P    PR   PR   PR    PR
                retail
                Delayed
                deposit                             PR                 
                service uses
                Hospitality
                oriented      PR   PR   P          P    P    P    P    P     PR
                retail
Retail uses1    Outdoor
                storage and                     P    PR                 
                display
                oriented
                Personal
                service       P    PR             P    P    P    P    P     PR
                oriented
                Repair                          P    P    P    P    P      
                oriented
                Sales             PR   PR         P    P    P    P    P     PR
                oriented
                Tobacco sales      PR   PR         PR   PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
                oriented
Surface
passenger                            P          P    P    P    P          
service uses
Vehicle repair                       PR         PR   S    PR             
uses
Industrial                                                           
uses:
Industrial                                     P                      
service uses
                General               See note 2 PR   PR   PR   PR   PR     
                manufacturing
Manufacturing   Heavy                           S                      
and production  manufacturing
uses            Technical/
                light                           PR   PR   PR   PR   PR     
                manufacturing
Salvage                                                              
operations
Self-service                                   P    S                  
storage uses
Warehouse and
freight                                        P                      
movement uses
Waste related                                                        
uses
Wholesale sales                                P        PR   PR   PR     
uses
Institutional                                                        
and civic uses:
Basic utility                PR/S PR/S PR/S       PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S   
uses
                Community
                service -     S                  S    S    PR   PR   S     S
Community       shelter
service uses    General
                community     P    S              S    P    P    P    P     S
                service
Daycare uses                 PR   PR   PR         PR   PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
Detention                                      S                      
facilities
Educational     General       PR                     S    P    P    P     PR
facilities      Specialized   P    PR             S    P    P    P    P     PR
Hospitals                    PR                                       
Parks and open               PR   PR                 PR   PR   PR   PR    PR
space uses
Religious/
private group                PR                 P    P    P    P    P     PR
assembly uses1
Utility-scale
ground-mounted               S    S    S          S    S    S    S    S      
solar energy
systems
Other uses:                                                          
Communication
transmission                 PR/S PR/S PR/S       PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S PR/S  PR
facility uses
 
Notes:
    1.    Any establishment that is licensed by the State to sell alcohol or
alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth
in subsection
14-4A-2G of this title.
    2.    Special provisions apply to dairy products processing and packaging
facilities established in the Highway Commercial Zone prior to January 1983.
See subsection
14-2C-11B of this article.
(Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-2020; Ord. 20-4820, 3-3-2020;
Ord. 21-4864, 9-21-2021; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 24-4940, 11-4-2024; Ord.
24-4941, 12-10-2024)
14-2C-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a
permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title, and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in
chapter 3 of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
      2.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3,
article B of this title.
      3.   Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this
title.
      3.   Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
      4.   Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A
of this title.
      2.   Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
      3.   Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this
title.
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this
title.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this
title.
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this
title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this
title.
      11.   Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2C-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2
(a) and 2C-2(b) of this section. The following subsections describe in more
detail the regulations for each of the dimensional requirements listed in the
tables. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific dimensional requirements not specified in
tables 2C-2(a) and
2C-2(b) of this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in
chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional requirements may be waived or
modified for developments approved through the planned development process (see
chapter 3, article A, “Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)”, of this title)
or through the commercial reuse or historic preservation exception as outlined
in section
14-2C-11, “Special Provisions”, of this article.
   A.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to
ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the
other site development standards of this title can be met. The lot area per
dwelling unit standards control the intensity of use on a lot to ensure
consistency and compatibility of new dwellings with the surrounding
development.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for
the various commercial zones are stated in
tables 2C-2(a) and
2C-2(b) of this section. Most commercial zones do not have minimum lot size or
width requirements. However, for mixed commercial/residential buildings, the
number of dwelling units allowed is based on the residential density formulas
as stated in
 table 2C-2(c) of this section.
      3.   Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
         a.   Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific lot size requirements not specified in
tables 2C-2(a) and
2C-2(b) of this section. Approval criteria for these uses are addressed in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
         b.   If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular
land use or dwelling type, whether permitted, provisional or a special
exception, that use or dwelling type may not be established on a smaller lot,
even if smaller lots are permitted in the subject base zone, except as
permitted under chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this
title.
   B.   Minimum Setback Requirements For Principal Buildings:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
         a.   Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access
for firefighting;
         b.   Provide opportunities for privacy between dwellings;
         c.   Reflect the general building scale and placement of structures in
the city's neighborhoods and commercial areas;
         d.   Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings and
between residences; and
         e.   Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible
with buildings in the vicinity.
      2.   General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings in commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2
(a) and 2C-2(b) of this section. The minimum setbacks for principal buildings
create required setback areas within which principal buildings are not allowed,
except for certain building features as specified in this subsection.
      3.   Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain
setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
         a.   Side And Rear Setbacks: (Rep. by Ord. 11-4449, 10-18-2011)
         b.   Lots With Multiple Frontages:
            (1)   On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless
specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth
in chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to
have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback
must be provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front
setback for purposes of this title.
         c.   Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot
must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10').
Buildings containing residential uses must be designed to preserve privacy.
This can be achieved by placement of windows to prevent direct views into the
windows of adjacent residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air
conditioning units may not be located along a building wall that is within
twenty feet (20') of a building wall of an adjacent principal building on the
same lot, if the wall of the adjacent building contains window or door openings
into dwelling units. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current
building code fire protection requirements.
         d.   Lots Adjacent To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot line
for a lot in a commercial zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at least
equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided
along the residential zone boundary.
         e.   Overlay Zones And Special Districts: If specific setbacks have
been established in a historic or conservation district, a planned development,
or in the central planning district, those setbacks supersede the setback
requirements of the base zone. For properties located in a historic or
conservation district, refer to chapter 3, article B of this title and also the
applicable setback provisions in the Iowa City historic preservation handbook.
For a property located in a planned development overlay zone, refer to the
approved planned development overlay plan for the subject property. For two-
family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses, and institutional/civic uses
located on property in the central planning district, refer to the applicable
setback provisions in section
14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this chapter.
         f.   Setback Averaging: Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the lots
along a frontage are occupied by principal buildings that are located at least
five feet (5') closer to the street than the required front setback, the front
setback may be reduced to the average of the respective setbacks on the
abutting lots. Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the subject
property along the same street may be used to calculate the average. Setbacks
across the street or along a different street frontage may not be used. When
one abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is
based on the setback of the principal building on the nonvacant lot and the
required front setback for the zone in which the lot is located. (See
figure 2C.1 of this section.)
Figure 2C.1 - Setback Averaging
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2578.png]
 
      4.   Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The
following building features may extend into the required principal building
setback area, subject to the conditions indicated and provided that location of
such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback regulations for
detached accessory structures and structures not considered part of the
principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
         a.   Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses,
buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features
that extend beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet
(6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay
windows, and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to
three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet
(2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal building
must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
         b.   Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building
setbacks of the base zone and may not extend into the required setback area.
Unenclosed and screened-in porches (non-habitable space) may extend up to
fifteen feet (15') into the rear setback, provided they are set back at least
twenty feet (20') from the rear lot line. The standards for uncovered decks and
patios are specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings",
of this title. Enclosed porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory
buildings as specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings",
of this title.
         c.   Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not
extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback.
         d.   Stairways that function as the principal means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not
extend into any required setback.
         e.   Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to
the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback,
provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp
cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested according to
the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      5.   Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce principal building setback
requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures
for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building
setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The Board of
Adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a
property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and
the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The subject building will be located no closer than three
feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property
line abuts a public right of way or permanent open space.
   C.   Building Bulk Standards:
      1.   Height Standards:
         a.   Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options
for light, air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate
other buildings in the vicinity. In the central business zones, there is a
minimum height standard that ensures that buildings are compatible in scale and
that land is used efficiently.
         b.   Standards: Generally, the maximum and minimum height standards
for principal structures in commercial zones are stated in tables 2C-2(a) and
2C-2(b), located at the end of this section. Height standards for accessory
buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following
structures or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standards,
provided an increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport
Zoning", of this title:
            (1)   Chimneys or flues.
            (2)   Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
            (3)   Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions
not used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
            (4)   Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and
similar structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
            (5)   Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the
height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the
roof, whichever is less.
            (6)   Grain elevators.
            (7)   Parapet or fire walls.
            (8)   Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic
utility use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
            (9)   If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and
communication transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height
standards, but are subject to any limitations set forth in chapter 4, article
B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses",
of this title.
            (10)   Roof structures, including solar energy systems, elevator
bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary
mechanical and electrical appurtenances required to operate and maintain the
building.
            (11)   Stacks.
            (12)   Storage tanks and water towers.
            (13)   Television antennas and similar apparatus.
         d.   Adjustment Of Maximum Height Standards:
            (1)   The maximum height for a principal building may be increased;
provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet
(2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
            (2)   In the CO-1 zone, principal buildings on lots across the
street from RM, C, or I zones may be increased in height according to
subsection C1d(1) of this section; except, that an additional front setback
need not be provided. The requirement for additional side and rear setbacks
apply. However, the minimum separation between the building and the front lot
line of the lot across the street must be two feet (2') for each foot of
height.
            (3)   A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the
maximum height for a particular building or property according to the
procedures and approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter
4, article B of this title.
            (4)   In the CO-1 zone, hospitals are exempt from the FAR limit and
may exceed the height limit up to a maximum of sixty five feet (65'), provided
that along lot lines that abut or are across the street from a single-family
residential zone, building facades above the third story shall be stepped back
at least twenty feet (20') from the third story facade. This required upper
story facade stepback may be established at a lower story, provided that it is
established at least twenty five feet (25') in height above grade.
      2.   Maximum Floor Area Ratio:
         a.   Purpose: The floor area ratio or FAR regulates how intensely a
site may be used. The FAR provides a means to match the potential amount of use
with the desired character of the area and the provision of public services.
The FAR, along with the height and setback standards, control the overall bulk
of development on a site.
         b.   Standards: The floor area ratio or FAR listed in
 table 2C-2(a) of this section, is the amount of floor area within the building
or buildings on a lot in relation to the amount of lot area, expressed in
square feet. For example, if the maximum FAR is 2, then a lot may contain up to
two (2) square feet of building floor area for every one square foot of lot
area. Basement and cellar floor area is not included in this calculation.
   D.   Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
      1.   Total Building Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The total building coverage standard helps to define the
character of the mixed use zone by limiting the land area that can be covered
by buildings. These standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot
requirements and building bulk standards to determine how built up a
neighborhood appears.
         b.   Standard: The total building coverage standard for the MU zone is
stated in
 table 2C-2(b) of this section. The maximum building coverage standard
establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be covered by
buildings. The total building area of all buildings on the property, including
both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the building
coverage.
      2.   Front Setback Coverage:
         a.   Purpose: The front setback coverage standard ensures that a
certain portion of the front setback remains free of impervious surface, which
helps to maintain a consistent and pleasant environment along neighborhood
streets. These standards increase public safety by preventing excessive front
yard paving and vehicular storage that may obscure the principal dwelling and
the main entrance from view of the street. In addition, this standard helps to
prevent neighborhood streets that are dominated by front yard pavement,
particularly along frontages with narrow residential lots.
         b.   Standard: The maximum front setback coverage standard for the
mixed use zone is stated in
 table 2C-2(b) of this section. The standard applies only to residential uses
in the MU zone. The table lists the maximum percentage of the required front
setback that may be covered by impervious surface, including driveways, patios,
decks, and other paved areas. Front setback coverage may not exceed the
percentage indicated in
table 2C-2(b) of this section.
         c.   Exception: A special exception may be requested to increase the
allowed front setback coverage. The board of adjustment may adjust the front
setback coverage standard if the owner or lawful occupant of a property
demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and the
following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The lot is of an irregular shape or contains severe
topography, such that there is practical difficulty meeting the front setback
coverage standard.
            (2)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the
front setback coverage standard. Such efforts include reducing the width of
driveways, reducing paved areas and size of garages and providing alternative
means of vehicular access to the property. If vehicular access to an alley or
private rear lane is available, the front setback coverage standard may not be
increased.
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the front setback coverage regulations.
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent practical.
   E.   Minimum Open Space Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum open space requirements are intended to ensure
a minimum amount of private, usable open space is provided to support the
health, well-being and enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling. The intent
of the open space is to support passive recreation, leisure activities,
informal gathering, and opportunities for interaction with nature.
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   On lots that contain multi-family uses or group living uses,
usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square
feet per bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, located in
one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less than two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet with no dimension less than fifteen feet
(15').
         b.   On lots that contain detached single family uses, a minimum of
five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space shall be provided, located
in the rear yard with no dimension less than twenty feet (20').
         c.   On lots that contain attached single family uses, a minimum of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space shall be provided,
located in the rear yard with no dimension less than ten feet (10').
         d.   On lots that contain two family uses, a minimum of three hundred
(300) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided,
located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each area not less
than three hundred (300) square feet with no dimension less than twelve feet
(12').
      3.   Standards:
         a.   For multi-family uses and group living uses, open space shall
meet the standards as set forth in subsections
14-2G-7E1 through E7 of this chapter.
         b.   For single family uses and two family uses open space shall be
located behind the principal dwelling in an area visible and easily accessible
from the principal dwelling and shall consist of open planted green space,
which may include trees, planters, gardens, and other amenities that support
passive recreation or leisure activities. Paved areas shall not be counted
toward usable open space. For attached single family uses, rooftop or upper
floor open air terraces or rear yard-facing porches, including screened-in
porches (non-habitable space only) may count toward the open space requirement.
      4.   Minor Modification: A minor modification may be requested according
to the provisions and approval criteria of section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title, to reduce the required open
space for single family and two family uses in the following circumstances,
provided the additional approval criteria stated in subsection E4e of this
section, are satisfied. Note that reducing the open space may reduce the
allowed occupancy of a rental property (see title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code):
         a.   In order to establish up to two (2) off-street parking spaces
(surface parking or in a garage) on a lot that currently has fewer than two (2)
off-street parking spaces; or
         b.   If the lot is a corner lot, is irregular in shape, substandard in
size, or contains severe topography, or other unique circumstance, such that
there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         c.   The lot contains a manufactured home, where due to the shape/
dimensions of the home there is practical difficulty meeting the standard; or
         d.   The lot contains a detached zero lot line dwelling, where the
side yard is designed to serve as usable open space for the dwelling;
         e.   Approval criteria:
            (1)   The applicant has demonstrated that every effort has been
made to design buildings, paved areas, and vehicular use areas to meet the open
space requirement. Such efforts may include but are not limited to reducing the
width of driveways, reducing paved areas and size of new buildings or
additions, and providing alternative means of vehicular access to the property;
and
            (2)   The open space requirement will be satisfied to the extent
possible in another location on the lot, such as a side yard; and
            (3)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the exception
are mitigated to the extent possible.
Table 2C-2(a): Dimensional Requirements For All Commercial Zones, Except The MU
Zone9
     Minimum Lot Requirements      Minimum Setbacks  Maximum  Building Bulk
                                                     Setbacks
     Total Area/                                                                  Maximum
Zone Area  Dwelling Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Front    Maximum Minimum     Number
     (Sq.  Unit     (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)    Height  Height  FAR of
     Ft.)  (Sq.           (Ft.)                               (Ft.)   (Ft.)       Bedrooms
           Ft.)                                                                   per Unit
     Minimum Lot Requirements      Minimum Setbacks  Maximum    Building Bulk
                                                     Setbacks
     Total Area/                                                                    Maximum
Zone Area  Dwelling Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Front      Maximum Minimum     Number
     (Sq.  Unit     (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)      Height  Height  FAR of
     Ft.)  (Sq.           (Ft.)                                 (Ft.)   (Ft.)       Bedrooms
           Ft.)                                                                     per Unit
           See
            table                                                               1
CO-1 None  2C-2(c)  None  None     10    01    01    None       258     None    or  310
           of this                                                              33
           section
           See                                       See
            table                                    subsection 22 or
CN-1 None  2C-2(c)  None  None     5     01    01    14-2C-7E   352     18      1   310
           of this                                   of this
           section                                   article
CH-1 None  n/a      100   None     10    01    01    None       None    None    1   n/a
CI-1 None  n/a      None  None     10    01    01    None       35      None    1   n/a
           See
           table
CC-2 None  2C-2(c)  None  None     10    01    01    None       35      None    2   310
           of this
           section
           See
            table
CB-2 None  2C-2(c)  None  None     0     01    01    12         45      None    27  310
           of this
           section
           See
           table                   0 or
CB-5 None  2C-2(c)  None  None     104   01    01    12         75      25      35  310
           of this
           section
           See
CB-        table                   0 or
10   None  2C-2(c)  None  None     104   01    01    12         None    25      106 310
           of this
           section
 
n/a = Not applicable
Notes:
   1.    A side setback or rear setback is not required where the side lot line
or rear lot line abuts a nonresidential zone. However, where a side lot line or
rear lot line abuts a residential zone, a setback at least equal to the
required setback in the abutting residential zone must be provided along the
residential zone boundary.
   2.    Maximum height is 22 feet for one-story buildings, with the following
exception: One-story buildings may exceed 22 feet in height if there are
clerestory windows facing the street that give the appearance of second floor
space. The maximum height for all other buildings is 35 feet.
   3.    Maximum FAR is 3, except for lots that abut or are across the street
from a single-family residential zone, in which case the maximum FAR is 1.
Hospitals are exempt from the FAR limit in the CO-1 Zone.
   4.    A front setback is not required, except for buildings that front on
Burlington Street. Buildings must be set back at least 10 feet from the
Burlington Street right- of-way. Building columns supporting upper stories may
be located within this 10 foot setback, provided an adequate pedestrian
passageway is maintained.
   5.    Maximum FAR is 3, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For lots
with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a maximum of 5.
   6.    Maximum FAR is 10, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For
lots with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a maximum of 15.
   7.    Maximum FAR is 2, except for lots with an approved FAR bonus. For lots
with approved FAR bonuses, the FAR may be increased up to a maximum of 3.
   8.    Additional height is allowed under certain circumstances. See
subsection C1d(2) of this section.
   9.    Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection
14-2C-4E of this section.
   10.   Outside of the University Impact Area (see map 2B.1 in Section
14-2B-6), the maximum number of bedrooms may be increased by one (1). Any
bedroom within a multi-family, attached single family, or duplex that exceeds
225 square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet
shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum
number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of the title
17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
 
Table 2C-2(b): Dimensional Requirements For The Mixed Use Zone (MU)7
         Minimum Lot Requirements   Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk
         Total Area/                                                           Maximum
Zone Use Area  Unit  Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Height Total    Front    Number
         (Sq.  (Sq.  (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)  Building Setback  of
         Ft.)  Ft.)        (Ft.)                             Coverage Coverage Bedrooms
                                                                               per Unit
                     Minimum Lot Requirements     Minimum Setbacks  Building Bulk
                     Total Area/                                                             Maximum
Zone Use             Area  Unit    Width Minimum  Front Side  Rear  Height Total    Front    Number
                     (Sq.  (Sq.    (Ft.) Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)  Building Setback  of
                     Ft.)  Ft.)          (Ft.)                             Coverage Coverage Bedrooms
                                                                                             per Unit
     Detached
     single-family   3,000 3,000   30    20       5/156 5+22  20    35     50%      50%      n/a
     and detached
     zero lot line
     Two-family      3,600 1,800   45    20       5/156 5+22  20    355    50%      50%      48
     (duplex)
     Attached        1,800 1,800   20/   20       5/156 0/103 20    35     50%      50%      48
     single-family                 284
                           See
                            table
MU   Multi-family    5,000 2C-2(c) 45    20       5/156 5+22  5+22  355    50%      50%      38
                           of this
                           section
                           See
                           chapter
                           4,                                                                See
     Group living    5,000 article 45    20       5/156 5+22  5+22  355    50%      50%      article
                           B of                                                              14-4B
                           this
                           title
     Nonresidential1 None  n/a     None  20       5/156 5+22  5+22  355    50%      n/a      n/a
 
n/a = Not applicable
Notes:
   1.    Nonresidential uses must comply with the standards listed in this
table unless specified otherwise in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications,
Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
   2.    Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories, plus 2 feet
for each additional story. For detached zero lot line dwellings, see applicable
setback regulations in chapter 4, article B of this title.
   3.    See applicable setback requirements in chapter 4, article B, "Minor
Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this
title.
   4.    Minimum lot width is 20 feet for attached units on interior lots and
28 feet for end lots in a row of attached units. When only 2 units are
attached, lots must be 28 feet wide.
   5.    Maximum height is 35 feet. However, if any portion of a two-family
use, multi-family use, group living use, or a nonresidential use is located
within 15 feet of a property that contains an existing single-family use or
within 15 feet of a single-family zone boundary, then the portion of the
building located within 15 feet of said property or boundary may not exceed 21/
2 stories in height.
   6.    Minimum principal building setback is 5 feet. Maximum principal
building setback is 15 feet. See subsection
14-2C-9D, "Maximum Setback", of this article.
   7.    Open space must comply with standards set forth in subsection
14-2C-4E of this section.
   8.   Outside of the University Impact Area (see map 2B.1 in Section
14-2B-6), the maximum number of bedrooms may be increased by one (1). Any
bedroom within a multi-family, attached single family, or duplex that exceeds
225 square feet in size or has any horizontal dimension greater than 16 feet
shall count as 2 or more bedrooms, as determined by the City. The maximum
number of bedrooms may be further constrained by the provisions of the title
17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of this Code.
Table 2C-2(c): Maximum Density Standards For Multi-Family Dwellings In
Commercial Zones
 
                        Zone
                        CO-1, CC-2, CN-1 And MU CB-2  CB-5 And CB-10
Minimum lot area per                                 
unit (in square feet):
Efficiency or 1-bedroom 2,725                   435
unit                                                  There is no minimum lot
2-bedroom unit          2,725                   875   area per unit standard.
                                                      However, the number of 3-
                                                      and 4-bedroom units per
3-bedroom unit          2,725                   1,315 lot may not exceed 30% of
                                                      the total number of units
                                                      on the lot

Minimum bedroom size1   100                     100   100
(square feet)
 
Note:
   1.    New bedrooms must be a minimum of 100 square feet in size. However,
for purposes of the provisions within this table, any existing habitable room
that is larger than 70 square feet in size with a horizontal dimension of at
least 7 feet, that meets the egress requirements as specified in the Building
Code, and is not a typical shared living space, such as a living room, dining
area, kitchen, or bathroom will be considered a bedroom.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-
2009; Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4479, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4482, 5-15-
2012; Ord. 15-4626, 6-16-2015; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-
2020; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-2C-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one
"household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A,
"General Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household
living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with
the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection
17-5-18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744,
4-2-2018)
14-2C-6: COMMERCIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The commercial site development standards ensure that
commercial development is compatible in scale and intensity to the surrounding
development, unsightly elements are screened from public view, and that safe
pedestrian and vehicular circulation is established. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The standards of this section apply to all development in the CO-1,
CC-2, CI-1, and CH-1 Zones, unless specifically exempted. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-
2011)
      2.   Development in the CN-1 Zone is subject to the CN-1 site development
standards specified in section
14-2C-7 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      3.   Development in the CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 Zones is subject to the
Central Business site development standards specified in section
14-2C-8 of this article. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
      4.   Development in the MU Zone is subject to the MU Zone site
development standards specified in section
14-2C-9 of this article.
   C.   Site Plan Review Procedure: Review for compliance with the standards
and requirements of this section will occur as a part of the site plan review
process. (See title 18 of this Code.)
   D.   Surface Parking Lot Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street-side lot lines. However,
any loading area, parking spaces or aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a
residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the
front or street-side lot line.
      2.   Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must
be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet- side) side or rear lot
line. However, parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a property zoned residential.
The City may exempt from these setback regulations any specific locations along
a lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot.
      3.   Drives:
         a.   Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that
provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part
of the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above.
Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet
(3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive
is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining
property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to
handle stormwater runoff. Any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these
standards.
         b.   Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at
least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
   E.   Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are regulated as an
accessory use and are only allowed in certain zones according to the provisions
specified for drive-through facilities in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses
And Buildings", of this title.
   F.   Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation: The site must be
designed to promote safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
circulation according to the following standards:
      1.   Pedestrian walkways must be provided between principal buildings and
abutting rights-of-way. The walkways provided on site must connect to adjacent
public sidewalks and trails.
      2.   On commercial sites with multiple buildings, sidewalks or other
approved pedestrian routes must be provided between the principal buildings on
the site. The City may exempt commercial sites where pedestrian traffic between
buildings is rare or unlikely.
      3.   Pedestrian routes must be provided on site that connect parking
areas to building entrances. Pedestrian routes from and through parking areas
to principal building entrances must be identified on the site plan and
integrated into the parking lot design.
      4.   Pedestrian routes must be continuous, clear of obstructions, and
easily identifiable as protected pedestrian routes. Landscaping, curbing,
raised paving, bollards, distinctive paving materials, and other similar means
may be used to separate and protect pedestrian routes from vehicular traffic.
      5.   Bicycle parking facilities must be located in areas convenient to
building entrances, but must be located so as not to impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   G.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking,
vehicular and pedestrian use areas, sidewalk cafes and plazas must be
landscaped with trees and/or plant materials. A landscaping plan must be
submitted for site plan review.
      2.   Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened
from view of public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
      3.   Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened
from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional
screening is required for properties that abut properties zoned residential.
Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any
abutting property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may
exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking or loading area, aisle or drive is shared with an
abutting lot.
      4.   Where a lot occupied by a commercial or industrial use abuts or is
across a street or railroad right of way from a residential zone, daycare use,
educational facility, parks and open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking
and loading areas and outdoor work and storage areas must be located behind
buildings or screened from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3
standard. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      5.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is
or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that the screening is effectively provided and the intent of the
standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
   H.   Mechanical Structures: All mechanical structures must be set back and
screened from public view according to the applicable provisions set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
   I.   Outdoor Storage And Display:
      1.   CO-1 And CC-2 Zones: Outdoor storage and display of materials is not
permitted in the CO-1 or CC-2 zone, except for the following: (Ord. 11-4450,
10-18-2011)
         a.   Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in
areas immediately adjacent to a principal building. However, the display area
may not be located along any building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of
a public street and may not be located in a manner that obstructs building
entrances and exits, sidewalks, bicycle parking areas, pedestrian routes, or
vehicular use areas.
         b.   An approved temporary use. A temporary use permit is required.
(See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
         c.   In the CC-2 zone, an approved outdoor storage and display
oriented retail use.
      2.   CH-1 And CI-1 Zones:
         a.   Outdoor storage of materials in the CH-1 and CI-1 zones is
permitted, provided it is concealed from public view to the extent possible. If
it is not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage
areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right of way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from view to at least the
S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of
this title.) If a fence is built around the storage area, the required
screening must be located between the fence and the public right of way.
         b.   All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear
lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten
feet (10') from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property
to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the
required screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
         c.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may
be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence
that a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade,
soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape
screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to the
S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
         d.   Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in
the CH-1 and CI-1 zones, provided it is set back at least ten feet (10') from
public rights of way and landscaped to at least the S1 standard.
         e.   Any outdoor display area located along a side or rear lot line
that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from said lot line and screened from view of abutting properties to at
least the S2 standard. If the display area is adjacent to a residential zone
boundary, it has to be screened to the S3 standard.
         f.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor display may be
waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil
conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement,
by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
         g.   Screening for outdoor storage and display areas may be waived by
the building official where the view is or will be blocked by a significant
change in grade or by natural or humanmade features, such that screening is
effectively provided and the intent of the standard is met, as determined by
the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
      3.   All Commercial Zones: The storage of combustible or flammable
materials or liquids is strictly regulated according to the provisions of
chapter 5, article H, "Performance Standards", of this title, and the
international fire code, as amended.
   J.   Balconies:
      1.   Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is
adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
      2.   The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4')
from a side lot line.
      3.   The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports,
walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are
similar or complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the
building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted.
   K.   Standards For Large Retail Uses:
      1.   Applicability: The provisions of this subsection apply to retail
uses over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in size. The intent of these
standards is to facilitate adaptive reuse of large retail commercial
structures, to moderate scale of large buildings, and to ensure consistent
appearance with other shopping center developments.
      2.   Facades And Exterior Walls:
         a.   Facades over one hundred feet (100') in length that are visible
from public streets and/or include public entrances shall incorporate wall
projections or recesses a minimum of three feet (3') in depth for a minimum of
twenty (20) contiguous feet within each one hundred feet (100') of facade
length. Such recesses and/or projections shall extend over a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of the length of the facade, and no uninterrupted facade may
exceed one hundred feet (100') in length.
         b.   For facades that face public streets or include public entrances,
features that provide visual interest such as arcades, storefront windows that
allow views into the interior of the building, display windows that are set
into the building wall, entry areas, awnings or similar features must be
incorporated along at least sixty percent (60%) of the facade. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
      3.   Building Details: Buildings must include details and features that
provide visual interest, reduce the perception of the mass of the building, and
provide a cohesive pattern to the building. Any building facade that faces a
public street or includes a public entrance shall include no less than three
(3) of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall occur
along the vertical plane of the building. An example of a change that occurs on
the vertical plane would be a change from stone on the lower portion of the
building to stucco on the upper portion. All elements that occur along the
horizontal plane of the building shall repeat at intervals of no more than
fifty feet (50'). These visual patterns must be cohesive with the articulation
of the facade.
         a.   Color change.
         b.   Texture change.
         c.   Material module change.
         d.   Expression of an architectural or structural bay through a change
in plane no less than twelve inches (12") in width, such as an offset, reveal
or projection. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
      4.   Roof Details:
         a.   Flat roofs must incorporate parapets that conceal rooftop
equipment such as HVAC units from public view. The average height of such
parapets shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the height of the supporting
wall and at no point shall exceed one- third (1/3) of the height of the
supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature a three-dimensional cornice
treatment.
         b.   Sloping roofs must not exceed the average height of the
supporting walls and must include overhanging eaves that extend no less than
three feet (3') past the supporting walls.
         c.   The roof of the building must be designed with three (3) or more
roof slope planes. It is encouraged that changes in the roof correspond with
articulation of the building facade. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      5.   Building Materials:
         a.   The building materials shall be predominantly quality exterior
building materials, including brick, masonry, stone, stucco, or textured
concrete masonry units. Concrete panels with a veneer of brick or masonry may
be approved provided the material gives the appearance of one or more of the
high quality building materials listed above. Stamped concrete panels will only
be considered if they are finished with patterns and colors such that they
appear to be brick or masonry. "Predominantly" is defined as at least seventy
five percent (75%) of the exterior of the entire building, but not necessarily
of each building wall. For example, use of such materials should be
concentrated along building walls that are visible from public streets or that
contain public entrances.
         b.   Use of smooth faced concrete block, unadorned tilt-up concrete
panels, prefabricated steel or vinyl panels or sheets should be minimized. If
used, these materials may cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
exterior of the entire building and should be reserved for building walls that
are less visible to the public. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
      6.   Entryways: Each principal building shall have a clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrance with no less than three (3) of the features
listed below. Where additional stores are located within the principal
building, each store shall have at least one exterior customer entrance with no
less than three (3) of the following features:
         a.   Canopy or portico.
         b.   Overhang.
         c.   Recess/projection.
         d.   Arcade.
         e.   Raised cornice parapet over the door.
         f.   Archway.
         g.   Outdoor patio.
         h.   Display windows.
         i.   Storefront windows that allow views into the interior of the
store.
         j.   Tile work and moldings that are integrated into the building
structure and design.
         k.   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas
and/or places for sitting. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2C-7: CN-1 ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The CN-1 zone site development standards ensure that
commercial development is compatible in scale and intensity to the surrounding
residential neighborhoods. These standards also ensure that neighborhood
commercial areas are carefully designed to be inviting for pedestrians by
requiring buildings to be located close to and oriented toward streets or
pedestrian plazas; ensuring that pedestrian routes are clearly separated from
driveways and parking areas; requiring that buildings be constructed with
street level storefront windows and clearly demarcated pedestrian entrances;
and by requiring that parking be located away from the street in well
landscaped areas.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The standards of this section apply to all new development in a CN-
1 zone.
      2.   Exceptions to the standards and requirements of this section may be
approved during the site plan review process in CN-1 zones that were in
existence and at least partially developed by June 7, 2002, if the city
determines that compliance with the subject standard or requirement is not
feasible. However, all proposed development must meet the standards of this
section to the extent possible.
      3.   Alternative design solutions may be approved during the site plan
review process if it is demonstrated that the alternative design solution meets
the intent of this section.
   C.   CN-1 Site Plan Review Procedure:
      1.   Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer
must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning
and community development or designee to discuss the application of the CN-
1 zone site development standards to the subject property.
      2.   Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this
section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
   D.   Rezoning To CN-1:
      1.   A CN-1 zoning district may not exceed ten (10) acres in size.
      2.   A plan showing the general design of the proposed development must
be submitted with any CN-1 rezoning application. The plan must include
provisions for landscaping, screening and buffering between the proposed
commercial development and adjacent residential zones.
   E.   Build-To Line: The required build-to line in the CN-1 zone is an
imaginary line running parallel to and located five feet (5') back from the
street-side lot line along the subject lot's primary street frontage. The
primary street frontage is the frontage to which the street address is
assigned.
      1.   Requirement: All new buildings must be located such that at least
sixty five percent (65%) of the primary street frontage of the subject lot
contains buildings set back no further than the build-to line.
      2.   Exceptions: Exceptions to the build-to line requirement may be
approved during the site plan review process for the following site elements:
         a.   Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the
articulation standard in subsection M of this section.
         b.   Building entrances, including stoops, stairways, and ramps.
         c.   Trees and landscaping.
         d.   Pedestrian plazas.
         e.   Arcades.
         f.   Public art.
         g.   Sidewalk cafes.
   F.   Location Of Parking, Loading, Drives, And Aisles:
      1.   No more than thirty five percent (35%) of the street frontage of a
lot may be comprised of off street parking spaces, drives, and aisles located
in front of a building. Loading areas are not permitted in front of the
building. For purposes of this provision, "in front of the building" means
between the street right of way line and the building.
      2.   On corner lots, no off street parking spaces may be located in front
of a building within one hundred feet (100') of the point of intersection of
street right of way lines.
      3.   Parking and loading areas must be set back at least twenty feet
(20') from any street-side lot line and at least five feet (5') from any
nonstreet-side or rear lot line, unless the lot abuts a residential zone.
Parking areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any rear or side
lot line that abuts a residential zone.
      4.   Loading spaces must be located so that trucks or vans loading or
unloading do not back onto or out of a street.
      5.   Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that
provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part
of the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above.
Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet
(3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive
is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining
property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to
handle storm water runoff. Any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these
standards.
      6.   Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least
twenty feet (20') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
   G.   Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are regulated as an
accessory use and are only allowed according to the provisions specified for
drive-through facilities in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
   H.   Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation:
      1.   Pedestrian access must be provided to adjacent residential areas and
to abutting rights of way. The sidewalks provided on site must connect to
adjacent public sidewalks and trails.
      2.   Each commercial tenant space must be accessible from other tenant
spaces by sidewalks or other approved pedestrian routes. Pedestrian routes must
be continuous, clear of obstructions, and easily identifiable as a protected
pedestrian route.
      3.   Pedestrian routes must be separated from parking and vehicular use
areas by curbs, landscaping or other physical barriers. When pedestrian paths
cross drives, aisles, and vehicle travel lanes, they must be clearly identified
with materials such as textured or brick paving, and must be integrated into
the wider network of pedestrian walkways. Pavement textures are encouraged
elsewhere in the parking lot as surface materials or as accents.
      4.   Parking lot layout and design must promote safe and convenient
pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Protected pedestrian walkways, leading to
sidewalks that abut store entrances, must be provided within parking lots.
      5.   Bicycle parking facilities must be located in convenient areas of
the development and must be located so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   I.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking,
vehicular and pedestrian access, sidewalk cafes and plazas must be landscaped
with trees and plant materials. A landscaping plan must be submitted for site
plan review.
      2.   Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from
public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
      3.   Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view
of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening is
required for properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas,
loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting property
zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from this
landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
      4.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is
or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the
standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
   J.   Mechanical Structures: All mechanical structures must be set back and
screened from public view according to the applicable provisions set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   K.   Outdoor Storage And Display:
      1.   Outdoor storage of materials is not permitted in the CN-1 zone.
      2.   Outdoor display of materials is not permitted, except in the
following situations:
         a.   Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale is permitted in
areas immediately adjacent to a principal building. However, the display area
may not be located along any building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of
a public street and may not be located in a manner that obstructs building
entrances and exits, sidewalks, bicycle parking areas, pedestrian routes, or
vehicular use areas.
         b.   A temporary use permit is required. (See chapter 4, article D of
this title.)
      3.   The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is
strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H,
"Performance Standards", of this title and according to the international fire
code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   L.   Street Level Windows: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the building
facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height from the adjacent exterior
grade must be comprised of clear and highly transparent windows and doors.
Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Such windows must
allow views into the interior space or be storefront display windows that are
set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside building wall do not
qualify. The bottom of such windows must be no more than four feet (4') above
the level of the adjacent sidewalk (see
figure 2C.2 of this section). (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
Figure 2C.2 - Storefront Window Example
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2580.png]
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   M.   Building Bulk And Articulation:
      1.   The maximum length of any building wall is two hundred seventy feet
(270'). This standard applies whether the building contains a single business
or multiple businesses or storefronts.
      2.   For buildings greater than fifty feet (50') in width, the horizontal
plane of any street-facing facade of the building must be broken into modules
that give the appearance of smaller, individual storefronts. These modules must
meet the following standards:
         a.   Each module must be no greater than fifty feet (50') in width.
         b.   Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at
least three (3) of the following means:
            (1)   Variation in the wall plane by recessing a building module
from the adjacent building module;
            (2)   Variation in material colors, types or textures;
            (3)   Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
            (4)   Variation in the architectural details such as decorative
banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
            (5)   Break or variation in window pattern;
            (6)   Variation in the use of upper floor balconies and recesses.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
      3.   For buildings that are fifty feet (50') or less in width, at least
every twelve feet (12') in length of the street-facing wall must be articulated
by a window, doorway, perceptible change in the wall plane, setback, artwork,
or a change in building material. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4253,
2-20-2007)
   N.   Building Entrances:
      1.   Primary building entries must be distinguished by at least two (2)
of the following means:
         a.   Canopies or awnings.
         b.   Recesses.
         c.   Raised cornice or similar architectural features.
         d.   Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings, that are
integrated in the building structure and design. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
      2.   To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to
storefronts and the ground level floor height should be no more than one foot
(1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping
building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust this
requirement. However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level
floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1')
above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor
height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than three
feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza
at any point along a street-facing building facade.
   O.   Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors And Lifts: For purposes of
this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead
to floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a
building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the
first or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways,
exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
      1.   Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are
prohibited. The city may allow exterior fire egress structures on existing
buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the
fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a building that faces a
street.
      2.   Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is
adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
      3.   The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4')
from a side lot line.
      4.   The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports,
walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are
similar or complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the
building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-
2006)
14-2C-8: CENTRAL BUSINESS SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The following site development standards are intended to help
ensure that the city's central business district develops as an attractive,
compact urban area. The standards ensure that parking facilities are integrated
into the design of developments so that streets are safe and attractive for
pedestrians. Particular attention is focused on street level building facades
in order to prevent fortresslike facades, monotonous streetscapes, and to
enhance public safety by providing opportunities for surveillance of the street
from the interior of buildings. Excellence in design is encouraged in order to
enhance and maintain economic development opportunities in the downtown area.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   B.   Applicability And Procedure: The standards of this section apply to all
development in the CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones, unless otherwise noted herein.
   C.   Site Plan Review Procedure:
      1.   Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer
must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning
and community development or designee to discuss the application of the central
business site development standards to the subject property. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-
18-2011)
      2.   Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this
section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
      3.   Alternative design solutions may be approved if it is demonstrated
that the alternatives meet the intent of this section.
   D.   Minimum Setback:
      1.   A setback is not required, except for buildings that abut Burlington
Street.
      2.   The first story of buildings that abut Burlington Street must be set
back ten feet (10') from the right of way line. Building columns supporting
upper stories may be located within this ten foot (10') setback; provided, that
an adequate pedestrian passageway is maintained.
      3.   Doorways adjacent to a right of way must be set back so that doors
do not swing into a right of way. Similarly, stairways and ramps must not be
located in a right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   E.   Maximum Setback:
      1.   No portion of the first story of a building shall be set back more
than twelve feet (12') from a front or street-side lot line, or a lot line that
abuts City Plaza. If a setback is provided, the setback area must be used for
one or more of the following purposes: (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
         a.   Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the
articulation standard in subsection O of this section.
         b.   Building entrances, including stoops, stairways and ramps.
         c.   Trees and landscaping.
         d.   Pedestrian plazas.
         e.   Arcades.
         f.   Public art.
         g.   Sidewalk cafes. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-
18-2011)
      2.   In the CB-10 zone, to prevent unsafe, unkempt spaces between
buildings, the first two (2) stories of a building must be built to the side
lot line, unless the subject building wall abuts an alley or usable outdoor
space, such as a plaza, green, courtyard, or midblock pedestrian passage. Minor
adjustments to this standard may be approved by the building official to
account for irregular lot lines or to accommodate structural requirements, such
as installing footings or foundations, or to maintain the structural integrity
of an adjacent building, as long as the intent of this standard is achieved.
(Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
   F.   Parking In CB-10 Zone: Off street parking is strictly regulated in the
CB-10 zone according to the procedures and standards listed in chapter 5,
article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title. (Ord. 08-
4326, 12-22-2008)
   G.   Surface Parking Location Standards In The CB-2 And CB-5 Zones: If
surface parking and loading areas are provided on the street level, they must
be subordinate to a principal use allowed in the zone. Therefore, the following
standards apply: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      1.   Location:
         a.   Parking and loading are not permitted for the first thirty feet
(30') of lot depth as measured from the front building line. Surface parking,
parking within accessory structures, and all loading and unloading facilities
must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from view of
fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located between the
building and the street or within any side setback area. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-
2011)
         b.   Parking and loading areas must be set back at least five feet
(5') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a nonresidential zone. Any
specific locations along a side or rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or
drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from this standard.
         c.   Parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from any rear or side lot line that abuts a residential zone. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
      2.   Drives:
         a.   Vehicular access to parking should be located and designed to
minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians and to preserve street
frontages for active building uses. If available, alley or rear lane access is
preferred. If alley access is not feasible due to topographical limitations or
other unique circumstances, driveway access from a street may be allowed, but
must be designed in a manner that will best meet the objectives listed in this
subsection G2a. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
         b.   Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that
provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area are considered part
of the parking area and must meet the location standards for parking areas as
specified above. Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at
least three feet (3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential,
unless the drive is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water
onto adjoining property or unless a drainage course has been established along
lot lines to handle stormwater runoff. Any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from
these standards.
         c.   Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at
least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      3.   Landscape Screening:
         a.   Any portion of a parking area that is not completely concealed
from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of abutting
properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional screening is required for
properties that abut properties zoned residential. Parking areas, loading
areas, and drives must be screened from view of any abutting property zoned
residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may exempt from this
landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
         b.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view
is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or
humanmade features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent
of the standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245,
12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
   H.   Landscaping: All areas of the site that are not used for buildings,
parking, vehicular and pedestrian use areas, sidewalk cafes, and plazas, must
be landscaped with trees and/or plant materials. A landscaping plan for such
areas must be submitted for site plan review.
   I.   Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are not permitted in
the CB-5 and CB-10 zones.
   J.   Mechanical Equipment, Utility Meters, And Dumpsters:
      1.   In no case shall mechanical equipment or utility meters be located
along the street side of a building. Mechanical equipment and meters must be
placed at the rear of the property whenever possible. If this cannot be
achieved, such equipment may be located along the side of the building,
provided that the equipment is screened and set back according to the
provisions for mechanical structures set forth in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
      2.   Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are not
visible from public streets and may not be located in a right of way.
   K.   Outdoor Storage And Display:
      1.   Outdoor storage and display areas are not permitted in the CB-2, CB-
5 and CB-10 zones, except for approved temporary uses (see chapter 4, article D
of this title) and special exceptions (see chapter 4, article B of this title).
      2.   The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is
strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H,
"Performance Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire
code, as amended.
   L.   Commercial Space:
      1.   On the ground level floor of a building, the floor to structural
ceiling height must be at least fourteen feet (14').
      2.   In the CB-10 zone, on the second floor of a building, the floor to
structural ceiling height must be at least eleven feet (11').
      3.   In the CB-2 and CB-5 zones, the first floor of a building must meet
the building code specifications for commercial uses. In the CB-10 zone, for
the first two (2) floors of a building, construction must meet the building
code specifications for commercial uses.
   M.   Building Entrances:
      1.   Primary building entries must be distinguished by at least two (2)
of the following means:
         a.   Canopies or awnings;
         b.   Recesses;
         c.   Raised cornice or similar architectural features;
         d.   Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings that are
integrated in the building structure and design.
      2.   To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to
storefronts must be at grade and the ground level floor height should be no
more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian
plaza. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings, the city may
adjust this requirement. However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the
ground level floor height of any new building must be located no more than one
foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the
floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than
three feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian
plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
      3.   To provide safe access for residents within a mixed use building,
any building containing a residential use must have at least one door located
on the exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to the dwelling
units within the building. Said entrance must be located on a building wall
that faces a street, public sidewalk, or pedestrian plaza and is visible from
and easily accessed from said street, sidewalk, or plaza. Access to dwelling
units must not be solely through a parking garage or from an alley. (Ord. 11-
4450, 10-18-2011)
   N.   Minimum Fenestration:
      1.   Along any street-facing building facade and along any portion of a
storefront facade that abuts a pedestrian plaza, a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) of the building facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height from
the adjacent exterior grade must be comprised of clear and highly transparent
windows and doors. Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted.
Such windows must allow views into the interior space or be storefront display
windows that are set into the wall. Display cases attached to the outside
building wall do not qualify. Where possible, the bottom of such storefront
windows should be no more than two feet (2') above the level of the adjacent
exterior grade. However, on sloping sites where it is difficult to meet this
two foot (2') standard, the height above grade may vary, but shall not exceed
four feet (4') above the adjacent exterior grade (see section
14-2C-7,
figure 2C.2 of this article). (Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
      2.   In the CB-10 zone, to encourage office and other commercial uses on
the second floor of a building, no less than thirty percent (30%) of any second
floor facade that faces a public street or pedestrian plaza shall be comprised
of windows. Glazing shall not be reflective (mirrored).
   O.   Building Articulation:
      1.   For buildings greater than fifty feet (50') in width, the horizontal
plane of any street-facing facade of the building must be broken into modules
that give the appearance of smaller, individual storefronts. These modules must
meet the following standards:
         a.   Each module must be no greater than fifty feet (50') in width.
         b.   Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at
least three (3) of the following means:
            (1)   Variation in the wall plane by recessing a building module
from the adjacent building module;
            (2)   Variation in material colors, types or textures;
            (3)   Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
            (4)   Variation in the architectural details such as decorative
pilasters, banding, reveals, stone or tile accents;
            (5)   Break or variation in window pattern;
            (6)   Variation in the use of upper floor balconies and recesses.
      2.   For buildings that are fifty feet (50') or less in width, at least
every twelve feet (12') in length of the street-facing wall must be articulated
by a window, doorway, perceptible change in the wall plane, setback, artwork,
or a change in building material. (Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
   P.   Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors, And Lifts: For purposes of
this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead
to floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a
building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the
first or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways,
exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
      1.   Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are
prohibited, with the following exceptions: The city will allow exterior lifts
on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet accessibility
requirements, provided the lift is not located on a wall of a building that
faces a street or the city plaza. The city may allow exterior fire egress
structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code
requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a
building that faces a street or the city plaza.
      2.   Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is
adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential.
      3.   The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4')
from a side lot line.
      4.   The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports,
walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are
similar or complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the
building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-
2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011)
   Q.   Bonus Provisions: The following bonus provisions are intended to
provide an incentive for developments to incorporate features that provide a
public benefit and to encourage excellence in architectural design. Floor area
in excess of that allowed by the permitted base floor area or dwelling units in
excess of the density otherwise achievable under the provisions of this article
may be granted. The director of planning and community development will
determine whether the proposed features are appropriate in design and location.
Decisions of the director may be appealed to the board of adjustment. Bonuses
allowed are enumerated in
table 2C-4 of this section: (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-
18-2011)
Table 2C-4: Bonus Provisions
Public Benefit Bonus Allowed
Public Benefit                          Bonus Allowed
CB-2 and CB-5 zones:                     
Masonry finish or architectural metal,
not including metal siding, on all
nonfenestrated areas of walls visible
from a public street. For purposes of
this provision, "masonry" shall be
defined as fired brick, stone, or       0.75 floor area ratio.
similar such material, not including
concrete blocks and undressed poured
concrete. Masonry may include stucco or
like material when used in combination
with other masonry finish.
The provision of a theater.             5 square feet of floor area for every 1
                                        square foot of theater area.
The provision of funds for all street
furniture, lighting and landscaping
improvements along adjacent street      0.25 floor area ratio.
right of way in accordance with any
streetscape plan approved by the city.
Provision of pedestrian activity areas,
such as sidewalk cafes, adjacent to but 3 square feet of floor area for every 1
not in the public right of way,         square foot of pedestrian activity
provided such areas do not exceed a     area.
depth of 12 feet from the front lot
line.
Usable open space of size and at a
grade that, at a minimum, allows
passive recreational uses and is
accessible to all residential occupants
of a building. Such space may include   2 square feet of floor area for every 1
areas such as yards, courtyards,        square foot of usable open space.
terraces, and rooftop gardens designed
and improved for outdoor activities.
Balconies serving individual dwelling
units and required setback areas are
not eligible for this bonus.
Adaptive reuse of any property
designated as an Iowa City landmark,    Up to 3 square feet of floor area for
eligible for landmark designation,      every 1 square foot of floor area
registered on the national register of  reused. Additional floor area may be
historic places, or listed as a         constructed on the vacant portions of
historically significant building as    the property that is being reused or on
determined by the survey and evaluation abutting properties.
of the historic and architectural
resources for the vicinity.
CB-10 zone:                              
Provision of an off street loading area
that meets the requirements set forth   An additional 2.0 floor area ratio, not
in chapter 5, article A, "Off Street    to exceed 12.
Parking And Loading Standards", of this
title.
Provision of class A office space on
floors above the ground level floor of
the building. To qualify for this
bonus, only nonresidential uses shall
be allowed in the class A office space.
As defined by the Building Owners And   Up to 2 square feet of floor area for
Managers Association International      every 1 square foot of class A office
(BOMA), class A office space is space   space provided on floors above the
that is of a quality that is attractive ground level floor of the building.
for premier office users with rents
above average for the area. Class A
office buildings have high quality
standard finishes, state of the art
systems, exceptional accessibility and
a definite market presence.
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4479, 5-1-
2012)
   R.   Alternative Dimensional And Site Development Standards For CB-
2 Properties In The Riverfront Crossings District: As envisioned in the
downtown and riverfront crossings master plan, properties zoned CB-2 that are
located in the riverfront crossings district shall be allowed additional
building height and floor area, and alternative minimum fenestration standards,
building articulation standards, and lower parking requirements as set forth
below:
      1.   Maximum building height: Six (6) stories, not to exceed eighty five
feet (85').
      2.   Maximum FAR: Five (5).
      3.   Along any building facade that faces a primary street, as designated
in the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings master plan, seventy percent
(70%) of the ground level building facade must be comprised of transparent
windows and doors (with no more than 10 percent daylight reduction).
      4.   Along any building facade that faces a street that is not designated
a primary street in the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings master plan,
a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the ground level building facade must be
comprised of transparent windows and doors (with no more than 10 percent
daylight reduction).
      5.   Alternative building articulation methods may be allowed by design
review to accommodate midrise and high rise buildings that have a more
contemporary architectural style, provided the building is designed in a manner
that provides a similar or greater level of visual interest or relief as would
be achieved under subsection O, "Building Articulation", of this section.
Design review may consider elements that provide visual interest or relief,
such as variations in building materials, glazing or window patterns; extensive
building transparency that allows for exceptional daylighting of interior
spaces and views into the interior of the building; canopies or awnings;
entranceway features; unique signage, artwork, or other architectural features.
      6.   Private, off street parking shall be required at the same ratios as
required in the CB-10 zone, as specified in section
14-5A-4,
 table 5A-1 of this title. (Ord. 13-4556, 10-1-2013)
14-2C-9: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN MU ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The following site development standards help commercial and
residential uses coexist in a mixed use zone by ensuring that buildings are
similar in scale and are designed in a manner that will allow buildings to be
used for a variety of land uses over time. These standards ensure that building
sites are designed to be inviting for pedestrians by requiring buildings to be
located close to and oriented toward streets or pedestrian plazas; requiring
that buildings be constructed with street level storefront windows and clearly
demarcated pedestrian entrances; and by requiring that parking be located away
from the street and screened by landscaping.
   B.   Applicability And Procedure: The standards of this section apply to all
development in the mixed use zone.
   C.   MU Zone Site Plan Review Procedure:
      1.   Prior to submitting a request for site plan review, the developer
must participate in a preapplication conference with the director of planning
and community development or designee to discuss the application of the MU site
development standards to the subject property.
      2.   Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this
section will occur concurrently and as a part of the site plan review process.
      3.   Alternative design solutions may be approved if it is demonstrated
that the alternatives meet the intent of this section.
   D.   Maximum Setback: For new multi-family, group living, commercial, and
civic/institutional buildings, no portion of the first story of a principal
building shall be set back more than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot
line. Buildings constructed prior to December 28, 2005, are exempt from this
maximum. The setback area must be used for one or more of the following
purposes:
      1.   Building facades that are recessed in accordance with the building
standard in subsection G of this section.
      2.   Building entrances, including stoops, stairways and ramps.
      3.   Trees and landscaping.
      4.   Pedestrian plazas.
      5.   Arcades.
      6.   Public art.
      7.   Sidewalk cafes.
   E.   Location And Design Standards For Surface Parking And Detached Garages
For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Uses:
      1.   Location: Surface parking, parking within accessory structures, and
loading areas must be located behind principal building(s) and concealed from
view of fronting streets. Parking and loading areas may not be located directly
between a principal building and the street or within the required side setback
area. Any portion of a parking or loading area that is not completely concealed
from view of a fronting street must be screened to the S2 standard. (See
figures 2C.3 and 2C.4 below.)
Figure 2C.3 - Location Of Surface Parking For Properties With A Single Building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2582.png]
 
Figure 2C.4 - Location Of Parking For Properties With Multiple Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2584.png]
 
      2.   Aisles And Drives: Drives that are internal to a parking area,
including drives that provide circulation around the perimeter of the parking
area are considered part of the parking area and must meet the location
standards for parking areas as stated in subsection E1 of this section, and the
landscape buffering standard as stated in subsection E3 of this section. A
nonhard surfaced drive or aisle that is external to a parking area may not be
located closer than three feet (3') to a lot line, except at the point of
access with a street, alley, or private rear lane. Hard surfaced drives that
are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet (3') from
any side or rear lot line, except under the following circumstances:
         a.   The drives and aisles are pitched or curbed and drained to
prevent the flow of water onto adjoining property; or
         b.   A drainage course has been established along lot lines to handle
storm water runoff; or
         c.   Any specific location along a side or rear lot line where a drive
is shared with an abutting lot; or
         d.   At the point of access with an alley or private rear lane.
      3.   Landscape Buffering:
         a.   A buffer area at least ten feet (10') in width and landscaped to
at least the S2 standard must be provided between any parking area and adjacent
properties and between any parking area and street rights of way. (See chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The city may
exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting
lot.
         b.   A buffer area at least five feet (5') in width and landscaped to
the S1 standard must be provided between any parking area containing more than
eight (8) parking spaces and an adjacent alley.
         c.   No parking area or drive shall be closer than ten feet (10') to
any portion of a building other than a garage entrance or loading area apron.
This ten foot (10') area must be used for walkways and landscaping consisting
of at least fifty percent (50%) vegetative coverage. If parking spaces are
located where headlights of vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground level
windows, said parking spaces must be screened from view of the windows to at
least the S2 standard.
         d.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view
is or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or
humanmade features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent
of the standard is met, as determined by the building official.
   F.   Building Entrances For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And
Civic/Institutional Buildings:
      1.   For residential uses, buildings must have at least one door on the
exterior of the building that provides pedestrian access to dwelling units
within the building. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a
parking garage.
      2.   When a lot contains one principal building, the building must be
oriented such that at least one facade faces a public or private street. The
street-facing facade must have at least one main entrance to the building, or
may contain separate main entrances to ground level dwelling units. If the
building is located on a corner lot, only one wall must meet this requirement.
      3.   When a lot contains two (2) or more principal buildings, the
buildings must be oriented towards a public street, private street, or interior
courtyard. Any building with a street-facing facade must have at least one main
entrance oriented toward the street. Buildings located interior to a lot must
have main entrances that are clearly visible from interior private streets/
drives or surface parking areas.
      4.   Main entrances to a building, including main entrances to ground
level individual dwelling units, must be clearly demarcated by at least one of
the following means:
         a.   Recesses.
         b.   Raised cornice or similar architectural features.
         c.   Covered porch, canopy, or awning.
         d.   Transom and sidelight windows.
         e.   Pilasters and pediment.
         f.   Other significant architectural treatment that emphasizes main
entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does not meet this standard.
      5.   Patio style doors, such as sliding glass doors, may not be used for
main entrance doors.
      6.   To provide for the safety of residents, access to entrance doors of
any individual dwelling units located above the ground level floor of a
building must be provided from an enclosed lobby or corridor and stairway.
Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways may not be used as the
primary means of access to upper level units. This provision does not preclude
the use of fire egress structures.
      7.   A pedestrian circulation system must be provided that connects
residential entrances to adjacent public rights of way, and to parking areas
and other on site facilities.
   G.   Building Scale For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/
Institutional Buildings: The width of the front facade of new buildings must be
no more than forty feet (40'). Buildings may exceed this limitation if the
horizontal plane of any street- facing facade of the building is broken into
modules that give the appearance of smaller, individual buildings. Each module
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no less
than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent modules by
a variation in the wall plane of at least sixteen inches (16") in depth. For
buildings that are three (3) or more stories in height, the width of the module
may be increased to forty feet (40').
      2.   Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
      3.   Each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at
least one of the following means:
         a.   Variation in material colors, types or textures;
         b.   Variation in the building and/or parapet height;
         c.   Variation in the architectural details such as decorative
banding, reveals, stone, or tile accents;
         d.   Variation in window pattern;
         e.   Variation in the use of balconies and recesses.
   H.   Balconies And Exterior Stairways, Corridors And Lifts For Multi-Family,
Group Living, Commercial, And Civic/Institutional Buildings: For purposes of
this subsection the term, "exterior stairways", refers to stairways that lead
to floors of a building that are above the first or ground level floor of a
building. "Exterior corridors" refers to unenclosed corridors located above the
first or ground level floor of a building. Balconies and exterior stairways,
exterior corridors and exterior lifts must comply with the following standards:
      1.   Exterior stairways, exterior corridors, and exterior lifts are
prohibited, with the following exceptions: The city will allow exterior lifts
on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet accessibility
requirements, provided the lift is not located on a wall of a building that
faces a street. The city may allow exterior fire egress structures on existing
buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet code requirements, provided the
fire egress structure is not located on a wall of a building that faces a
street.
      2.   Balconies may not be located on any side of a building that is
adjacent to a property that is zoned single-family residential or that contains
an existing single-family use. Buildings that are set back at least forty feet
(40') from any such property are exempt from this standard.
      3.   The outer edge of a balcony shall not be closer than four feet (4')
from a side lot line.
      4.   The design of any balcony must utilize columns, piers, supports,
walls, and railings that are designed and constructed of materials that are
similar or complementary to the design and materials used for the rest of the
building. Unpainted and unstained lumber is not permitted.
   I.   Building Materials For Multi-Family, Group Living, Commercial, And
Civic/Institutional Buildings:
      1.   Buildings not constructed of masonry or stucco must have the
following trim elements incorporated into the exterior design and construction
of the building:
         a.   Window and door trim that is not less than three inches (3")
wide.
         b.   Corner boards that are not less than three inches (3") wide,
unless wood clapboards are used and mitered at the corners.
         c.   Frieze boards, not less than five inches (5") wide, located below
the eaves.
Figure 2C.5 - Building Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2586.png]
 
      2.   Any portion of a building that is clearly visible from the street
must be constructed using similar materials and design as the front facade.
      3.   Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along any
facade that faces a street-side lot line.
      4.   Where an exterior wall material changes along the horizontal plane
of a building, the change must occur on an inside corner of the building.
      5.   Where an exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of
the building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a
belt course, soldier course, band board or other trim, to provide a transition
from one material to the other.
Figure 2C.6 - Changes In Exterior Wall Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2590.png]
 
   J.   Mechanical Equipment/Utility Meters:
      1.   In no case shall mechanical equipment or utility meters be located
along the street side of a building. Mechanical structures must be set back and
screened according to the applicable provisions set forth in chapter 4, article
C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
      2.   Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are not
visible from public streets and may not be located in a right of way.
   K.   Ground Floor Commercial Space: The following provisions apply to new
buildings constructed for multi-family, group living, or commercial uses. These
provisions provide the opportunity for ground level commercial uses by
requiring buildings to be constructed in a way that is conducive for commercial
uses. These provisions do not apply to buildings that are constructed for
single-family and two-family uses and are not intended to prevent buildings
constructed originally for single-family and two-family uses from being
converted over time to other uses allowed in the MU zone.
      1.   On the ground level floor, the floor to ceiling height must be at
least fourteen feet (14').
      2.   For the ground level floor of the building, construction must meet
the building code specifications for commercial uses.
      3.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the building facade between two
(2) and ten feet (10') in height from the adjacent exterior grade must be
comprised of clear and highly transparent windows and doors. Reflective
(mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Such windows must allow views
into the interior space or be storefront display windows that are set into the
wall. Display cases attached to the outside building wall do not qualify. The
bottom of such windows must be no more than four feet (4') above the level of
the adjacent sidewalk (see section
14-2C-7,
 figure 2C.2 of this article).
      4.   To encourage commercial activity at the street level, entrances to
the ground level floor of a building that fronts on a public street or
pedestrian plaza should be no more than one foot (1') above the level of the
abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. In addition, the ground level floor
height for buildings that front on a street should be no more than one foot
(1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. On sloping
building sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust these
requirements. However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level
floor height of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1')
above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor
height of the ground level floor of the building must be no more than three
feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza
at any point along a street-facing building facade.
   L.   Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are not permitted in
the MU zone.
   M.   Outdoor Storage And Display:
      1.   Outdoor storage and display areas are not permitted in the MU zone,
except for approved temporary uses. (See chapter 4, article D of this title.)
      2.   The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is
strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H,
"Performance Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire
code, as amended.
   N.   Single-Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone: The following provisions
apply to single-family uses and two-family uses in the MU zone. Two-family uses
and attached single-family dwellings are also subject to the applicable
provisions contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances,
Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title. If provisions of this
subsection conflict with provisions in chapter 4, article B of this title, the
provisions of this subsection will apply.
      1.   Garage entrances and/or off street parking must be oriented toward
and accessed from a rear alley or private rear lane, if available. If an alley
or private rear lane is not available, then driveway access is permitted from
the street, provided the driveway does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width
and any street-facing garage entrance is set back at least twenty feet (20')
further than the street-facing facade of the dwelling. The length of any
street-facing garage wall that is visible from the street may not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the length of the street-facing building facade, as measured
along the same street frontage. On corner lots, only one street-facing garage
wall must meet this standard. (See
figure 2C.7 of this section for some examples of acceptable garage placement.)
Figure 2C.7 - Examples Of Garage Placement In The MU Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2588.png]
 
      2.   Each dwelling unit must have a main entrance that is visible from
and oriented toward the street. To meet this standard, the main entrance must
face the street, be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the
street, or open onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an alley.
      3.   At least fifteen percent (15%) of any street-facing facade must be
windows or pedestrian entryway doors. Windows in garage doors do not count
toward meeting this standard, but windows in a garage wall do count toward
meeting this standard. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006; Ord.
06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-2C-10: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS TO SITE DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS:
A special exception may be granted to waive or modify certain provisions of
section
14-2C-6,
14-2C-7,
14-2C-8, or
14-2C-9 of this article through the commercial reuse or historic preservation
exceptions in accordance with section
14-2C-11, “Special Provisions.” A minor modification to adjust specific
provisions of section
14-2C-6,
14-2C-7,
14-2C-8, or
14-2C-9 of this article, may be requested in either of the qualifying
situations listed below. Such requests will be reviewed by the design review
committee, the director of planning and community development, and the building
official according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in
chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following approval
criteria. The following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the
general approval criteria listed in section
14-4B-1, “Minor Modifications”, of this title:
   A.   Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing
physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard
impractical. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following
approval criteria are met:
      1.   The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the
lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may
qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and steeply
sloping lots.
      2.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative design
is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
      3.   The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design
that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
      4.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
      5.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
      6.   The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes,
ordinances, laws and regulations.
   B.   Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely
designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the
applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
      1.   The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that equally
or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
      2.   The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit the
characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally or
better meets the purpose of the site development standards.
      3.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
      4.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
      5.   The requested modification complies with other applicable statutes,
ordinances, laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
14-2C-11: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Historic Preservation Exception: The Board of Adjustment may grant a
special exception to waive or modify any dimensional or site development
standards listed in this article or in chapter 5 of this title or any approval
criteria listed in chapter 4, article B of this title that would prevent use or
occupancy of a property located in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) or
registered on the National Register of Historic Places. In addition to the
general special exception approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B
of this title, the following approval criteria must be met:
      1.   The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic,
aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
      2.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Preservation Commission.
   B.   Highway Commercial Zone Exemption:
      1.   Dairy products processing and packaging facilities established in
the highway commercial zone prior to January 1983 are to be treated as a
conforming use and as such may continue. Such a facility must otherwise comply
with all the requirements and regulations of the highway commercial zone and
other applicable regulations of this title.
      2.   If an existing dairy products processing and packaging facility, as
described in subsection B1 of this section, is discontinued for a period of one
year, such facility will lose the conforming rights granted in said subsection
B1 of this section and must be converted to a use that is allowed in the CH-
1 zone according to section
14-2C-2,
table 2C-1, of this article. The dairy products processing and packaging
facility will be deemed “converted” when the existing use is terminated and a
new use commences and continues for a period of seven (7) consecutive days.
   C.   Riverfront Crossings District:
FIGURE 2C.8
RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2592.png]
   D.   Commercial Reuse Exception
      1.   Purpose. The commercial reuse exception allows the alteration of
existing buildings for which the constraints of the building and/or site make
it difficult to meet certain zoning code standards. It is intended primarily
for use in less intense commercial areas in or near developed residential
neighborhoods.
      2.   Applicability. The exception provides flexibility in the design and
use of existing structures provided the following circumstances are met:
         a.   The exception is requested for an alteration or expansion of an
existing building;
         b.   The project does not result in the demolition of any existing
principal structures;
         c.   The property is not designated as an Iowa City landmark or
registered in the National Register of Historic Places; and
         d.   The property is not in a CI-1, CH-1, or CB-10 zone.
      3.   Waivers. The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to
waive or modify any approval criteria listed in
14-4B-4 “Specific Approval Criteria for Provisional Uses and Special
Exceptions” or
14-4C-2 “Specific Approval Criteria,” or any standard in
14-2C-4 “Dimensional Requirements”,
14-2C-6 “Commercial Site Development Standards”,
14-2C-7 “Central Business Site Development Standards”,
14-2C-8 “CN-1 Zone Site Development Standards”,
14-2C-9 “Site Development Standards in MU Zone”, or 14-5 “Site Development
Standards. However, waivers and modifications cannot be requested for required
minimum distances separating land uses or standards in 14-5I “Sensitive Lands
and Features” and 14-5J “Floodplain Management Standards”.
      4.   Approval Criteria. In addition to the general special exception
approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, the
following approval criteria must be met:
         a.   The exception is necessary due to existing building or site
constraints that make it difficult to meet that standard.
         b.   The exception will be compatible with and/or complementary to
adjacent development in terms of building mass and scale, relative amount of
open space, traffic circulation, general layout, and lighting.
         c.   The exception will not adversely affect views, noise, stormwater
runoff, light and air, and privacy of neighboring properties any more than
would a development that satisfies the applicable standard.
         d.   The exception is not contrary to the intent of the standard.
         e.   The exception will be in the public interest.
   E.   Sustainability Density Bonus: The minimum lot size or minimum lot area
per unit may be reduced by ten percent (10%) of the applicable requirement for
each of the following provisions that is met, up to a maximum of twenty-five
percent (25%). This bonus may be used in conjunction with subsection
14-5A-4F10 (Sustainability Parking Reduction).
      1.   A solar energy system is installed onsite where the size is equal to
forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the roofs of all buildings.
      2.   All uses within the development utilize electricity for one hundred
percent (100%) of their regular energy consumption after construction.
      3.   All buildings within the development are constructed to the most
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code standards
published by the International Code Council.
   F.   Affordable Housing Bonus: Residential uses are eligible to utilize
affordable housing bonuses pursuant to Article 14-4F, "Affordable Housing".
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006; Ord. 13-4520, 4-9-
2013; Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020; Ord. 22-4884, 8-2-2022; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-
2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
ARTICLE D. INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONES
SECTION:
14-2D-1: Establishment And Intent Of Industrial And Research Zones
14-2D-2: Land Uses Allowed
14-2D-3: General Provisions
14-2D-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2D-5: Industrial And Research Zone Site Development Standards
14-2D-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established industrial and
research zones are listed below. When this title refers to industrial zones it
is referring to the general industrial zone (I-1) and the heavy industrial zone
(I-2) listed below. When this title refers to the research zones, it is
referring to the research development park zone (RDP) and the office research
park zone (ORP) listed below.
   A.   General Industrial Zone (I-1): The purpose of the general industrial
zone (I-1) is to provide the opportunity for the development of most types of
industrial firms. Regulations are designed to protect adjacent development.
   B.   Heavy Industrial Zone (I-2): The purpose of the heavy industrial zone
(I-2) is to provide for heavy or intense industries. The zone is designed
primarily for manufacturing and fabrication activities, including large scale
or specialized operations having external effects that could impact adjacent
less intense commercial or industrial uses.
   C.   Research Development Park Zone (RDP): The purpose of the research
development park zone (RDP) is to provide areas for the development of office,
research, production or assembly firms and other complementary uses. Office and
research uses should predominate in the zone. The requirements of this zone
protect uses in this zone from adverse impacts of uses on adjacent land.
Hotels, motels and similar uses should be located along the periphery of the
zone or in locations that do not adversely affect the setting and quality of
other development for the uses permitted in the zone.
   D.   Office Research Park Zone (ORP): The purpose of the office and research
park zone (ORP) is to provide areas for the development of large office and
research firms and other complementary uses. The requirements of this zone
protect uses in the zone from adverse impact of uses on adjacent land and
protect adjacent more restrictive uses. Hotels, motels and similar uses should
be located along the periphery of the zone or in such other locations that do
not adversely affect the setting and quality of development for the permitted
uses of this zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2D-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2D-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in a particular industrial or research park zone. A number in
superscript indicates that a special provision applies. See table notes for
more information.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in the table. For example, a firm that specializes in developing
computer software is classified as technical/light manufacturing. To find out
how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use
Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for
special exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with
specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
   B.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are
stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 2D-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Industrial And Research Zones
Use Categories Subgroups I-1 I-2 RDP ORP
Use Categories                 Subgroups                     I-1 I-2 RDP  ORP
Commercial uses:                                                       
Building trade                                              P   P
Commercial recreational1       Outdoor
                               Indoor                                S    S
Office                         General office                        P    P
                               Medical/dental office                 P    P
Redemption center                                            P   P   P    P
                               Sales oriented
                               Personal service oriented
                               Alcohol sales oriented
Retail                         Repair oriented
                               Hospitality oriented retail           S    S
                               Outdoor storage and display
                               oriented
                              Tobacco sales oriented                   
Industrial uses:                                                       
Industrial service                                          P   P
                               Technical/light manufacturing P   P   P    P
Manufacturing and production   General manufacturing         PR  P
                               Heavy manufacturing           S   P
Salvage operations                                              S
Self-service storage                                        P   P
Warehouse and freight movement                              P   P   PR   PR
Waste related                                               PR  PR
Wholesale sales                                             P   P   PR   PR
Institutional and civic uses:                                          
Basic utility                                               PR  PR  PR/S PR/S
Colleges and universities      Public
                               Private                               S    S
Community service              General community service     S
                               Community service - shelter
Daycare                                                             PR   PR
Parks and open space                                                PR   PR
Utility-scale ground-mounted                                PR  PR  S    S
solar energy systems
Other uses:                     
Aviation related               Airports
                               Helicopter landing facilities S   S   S    S
Extraction                                                      PR
Communication transmission                                  PR  PR  PR/S PR/S
facility
Consumer fireworks sales                                    PR  PR
 
 
P  = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S  = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements
     for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
 
Note:
    1.    Any establishment that is licensed by the State to sell alcohol or
alcoholic beverages is subject to the use classification process as set forth
in subsection
14-4A-2G of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-
2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-
2020; Ord. 24-4940, 11-4-2024; Ord. 24-4941, 12-10-2024)
14-2D-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a
permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title and, if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter
3 of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Planned development overlay: See chapter 3, article A of this title.
      2.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3,
article B of this title.
      3.   Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this
title.
      3.   Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
      4.   Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A
of this title.
      2.   Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
      3.   Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this
title.
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this
title.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this
title.
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this
title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this
title.
      11.   Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2D-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the industrial and research zones are stated
in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The following subsections
describe in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional
requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special
exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in
 table 2D-2, located at the end of this section.
   A.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to
ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the
other site development standards of this title can be met.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for
the various industrial and research zones are stated in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The industrial zones do not
have minimum lot size, width, or frontage requirements in order to provide
opportunities for industrial businesses of all types and sizes to find
appropriate locations within the city. The research zones have large minimum
lot sizes in order to provide the opportunity for land intensive industrial/
research firms to locate within the city, and, in the case of the ORP zone, to
preserve a campus like setting.
      3.   Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses:
         a.   Provisional uses and uses allowed by special exception may have
specific lot size requirements not specified in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances,
Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
         b.   If a minimum lot size is specified within a zone for a particular
land use, whether permitted, provisional or a special exception, that use may
not be established on a smaller lot, even if smaller lots are permitted in the
subject base zone, except as permitted under chapter 4, article E,
"Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
   B.   Minimum Setback Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum setback requirements are intended to:
         a.   Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access
for firefighting;
         b.   Provide opportunities for privacy between buildings;
         c.   Promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings; and
         d.   Provide flexibility to site a building so that it is compatible
with buildings in the vicinity.
      2.   General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings in the industrial and research zones are
stated in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for
principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal
buildings are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in
this subsection.
      3.   Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain
setback requirements for the industrial and research zones that apply in
specific situations:
         a.   Side And Rear Setbacks: If a side or rear setback is provided
where not required, the side or rear setback must be at least five feet (5').
Additional setbacks may apply if the property is in proximity to a residential
zone. See subsection B3d of this section.
         b.   Lots With Multiple Frontages:
            (1)   On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless
specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth
in chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to
have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback
must be provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front
setback for purposes of this title.
         c.   Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on a lot
must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least ten feet (10').
Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire
protection requirements.
         d.   Lots In Proximity To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot
line for a lot in an industrial zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at
least equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be
provided along the residential zone boundary. In addition, any building
containing an industrial use must be set back at least one hundred feet (100')
from any residential zone boundary.
      4.   Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The
following building features may extend into the required principal building
setback area specified, subject to the conditions indicated, and provided that
location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5,
article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback
regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered
part of the principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         a.   Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses,
buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features
that extend beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet
(6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay
windows, and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to
three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet
(2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal building
must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
         b.   Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building
setbacks of the base zone. The standards for uncovered decks and patios are
specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
title. Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to
an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as
specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
title.
         c.   Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not
extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback.
         d.   Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to
the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback,
provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp
cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested according to
the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
      5.   Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce principal building setback
requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures
for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building
setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The board of
adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a
property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and
the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The subject building will be located no closer than three
feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property
line abuts a public right of way or permanent open space.
   C.   Height Standards:
      1.   Purpose: The height regulations are intended to promote a reasonable
building scale and relationship between buildings; provide options for light,
air, and privacy; and discourage buildings that visually dominate other
buildings in the vicinity.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the maximum height standards for principal
structures in the industrial and research zones are stated in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. Height standards for accessory
buildings are addressed in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this title.
      3.   Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures
or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standards, provided an
increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this
title:
         a.   Chimneys or flues.
         b.   Spires on religious or other institutional buildings.
         c.   Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not
used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
         d.   Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar
structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
         e.   Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the
height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the
roof, whichever is less.
         f.   Grain elevators.
         g.   Parapet or fire walls.
         h.   Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility
use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
         i.   If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication
transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         j.   Roof structures, including solar energy systems, elevator
bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary
mechanical and electrical appurtenances required to operate and maintain the
building.
         k.   Stacks.
         l.   Storage tanks and water towers.
         m.   Television antennas and similar apparatus.
      4.   Adjustment Of Maximum Height Standards:
         a.   The maximum height for a principal building may be increased;
provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet
(2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
         b.   A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum
height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of
this title.
   D.   Maximum Lot Coverage Standards:
      1.   Purpose: The maximum lot coverage standard helps to define the
character of zone by limiting the land area that can be covered by buildings.
These standards work in conjunction with the minimum lot requirements and
height standards to determine how built up an area appears.
      2.   Standards: The maximum lot coverage standards for the industrial and
research zones are stated in
table 2D-2, located at the end of this section. The maximum lot coverage
standard establishes the percentage of the total area of a lot that can be
covered by buildings. The total footprint of all buildings on the property,
including both principal and accessory buildings, is used to calculate the lot
coverage.
Table 2D-2: Dimensional Requirements For Industrial And Research Zones
 
    Minimum Lot Requirements    Minimum Setbacks                     Maximum
                       Minimum                                Maximum Lot
Zone Total Area Width  Frontage  Front  Side (ft.) Rear (ft.) Height  Coverage
     (s.f.)     (ft.)  (ft.)     (ft.)                        (ft.)   (percent)

I-1  none       none   none      201    01         01         45      none
I-2  none       none   none      100    01         01         45      none
RDP  1 acre     none   none      201    01         01         45      50
ORP  7 acres    none   none      150    100        100        none    none
 
Note to
table 2D-2:
   1.   A setback is not required where a side or rear lot line abuts a
nonresidential zone. However, where a side or rear lot line abuts a residential
zone, a setback at least equal to the required setback in the abutting
residential zone must be provided along the residential zone boundary. In
addition, any building containing an industrial use must be set back at least
100 feet from any residential zone boundary.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-
2023)
14-2D-5: INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The industrial and research zone site development standards
ensure that industrial uses and parking areas are set back and screened from
view of dissimilar uses and that on site storage of materials is handled in a
safe manner.
   B.   Applicability: The standards of this section apply to all development
in the I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones, unless specifically exempted.
   C.   Site Plan Review Procedure: Review for compliance with the standards
and requirements of this section will occur as a part of the site plan review
process.
   D.   Setback Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
      1.   Front Setback Requirements:
         a.   In the ORP zone, parking and loading areas must be set back at
least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any front or street-side lot line.
However, up to ten percent (10%) of the required parking spaces may encroach
within that setback, but may be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to a
street.
         b.   In the I-1, I-2, and RDP zones, parking and loading areas must be
set back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street- side lot lines.
However, any parking spaces and aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a
residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
front and street- side lot lines.
      2.   Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking areas and loading areas
must be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet-side) side or rear
lot line. However, parking areas, loading areas, aisles and drives must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a
property zoned residential. The city may exempt from these setback regulations
any specific locations along a lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is
shared with an abutting lot.
      3.   Drives:
         a.   Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that
provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area are considered part
of the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above.
Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet
(3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive
is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining
property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to
handle storm water runoff. Any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these
standards.
         b.   Drives must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any abutting
property that is zoned residential.
   E.   Screening Requirements:
      1.   Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view
along arterial street rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
      2.   Where a lot occupied by a commercial or industrial use abuts or is
across a street or railroad right of way from a residential zone, daycare use,
educational facility, parks and open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking
and loading areas and outdoor work and storage areas must be located behind
buildings or screened from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3
standard.
      3.   Any aboveground storage tanks must be screened from public view to
at least the S3 standard.
      4.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is
or will be blocked by a change in grade or by the natural or humanmade features
as determined by the building official.
      5.   Screening requirements may be waived by the building official upon
presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be expected
to thrive in a particular location because of intense shade, soil conditions,
or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself,
shall not constitute convincing evidence. If a landscape screening requirement
is waived by the building official because plantings cannot be expected to
survive, a fence or wall built to the S5 standard must be substituted for the
landscape screening.
   F.   Outdoor Storage:
      1.   Outdoor storage of materials and equipment is allowed in all
industrial and research zones, provided it is concealed from public view to the
extent possible. If it is not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind
buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from
any public right of way, including public trails and open space, and screened
from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening
And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built around the
storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and the
public right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      2.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is
or will be blocked by a significant change in grade or by natural or humanmade
features, such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the
standard is met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-
2006)
      3.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be
waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil
conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement,
by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening
requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to the S5
standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
      4.   The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is
strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 4, article H,
"Performance Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire
code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   G.   Minor Modifications To Site Development Standards: A minor modification
to adjust specific provisions of this section may be requested in either of the
qualifying situations listed below. Such requests will be reviewed by the
director of planning and community development and the building official
according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in chapter 8,
article B of this title and must meet the following approval criteria. The
following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the general approval
criteria listed in section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title:
      1.   Qualifying Situation: The configuration of the lot or other existing
physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific standard
impractical. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the following
approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the
lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may
qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and steeply
sloping lots.
         b.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative
design is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
         c.   The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design
that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         d.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         e.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         f.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
      2.   Qualifying Situation: The proposed site or building is uniquely
designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the
applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that
equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         b.   The proposed site or building design is uniquely designed to fit
the characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally
or better meets the purpose of the site development standards.
         c.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         d.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         e.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations. (Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006)
ARTICLE E. INTERIM DEVELOPMENT ZONES
SECTION:
14-2E-1: Establishment And Intent Of Interim Development Zones
14-2E-2: Determining Principal Uses Allowed
14-2E-3: General Provisions
14-2E-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2E-5: Maximum Occupancy For Household Living Uses
14-2E-6: Special Provisions
14-2E-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF INTERIM DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established interim
development zones are listed below. When this title refers to interim
development zones, it is referring the zones listed below.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the interim development zone (ID) is to provide
for areas of managed growth in which agricultural and other nonurban uses of
land may continue until such time as the city is able to provide city services
and urban development can occur. The interim development zone is the default
zoning district to which all undeveloped areas should be classified until city
services are provided. Upon provision of city services, the city or the
property owner may initiate rezoning to zones consistent with the comprehensive
plan, as amended.
   B.   Zone Designations: ID designations consist of interim development
single-family residential (ID-RS), interim development multi-family residential
(ID-RM), interim development commercial (ID-C), interim development industrial
(ID-I) and interim development research park (ID-RP), to reflect the intended
future use of the property according to the comprehensive plan, as amended.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2E-2: DETERMINING PRINCIPAL USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2E-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in the interim development zones.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in the table. For example, a kennel is classified as an intensive animal
related commercial use. To find out how a specific land use is categorized, see
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for
special exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with
specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
   B.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are
stated in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
Table 2E-1: Principal Uses Allowed In Interim Development Zones
USE CATEGORIES SUBGROUPS ID-RS ID-RM ID-C ID-I ID-RP
USE CATEGORIES               SUBGROUPS              ID-RS ID-RM ID-C ID-I ID-RP
Residential Uses
Household living uses        Detached single-family PR    PR    PR   PR   PR
                             dwellings
Commercial Uses
Animal related commercial    General                PR    PR    PR   PR   PR
uses
                            Intensive              PR    PR    PR   PR   PR
Commercial recreational uses Outdoor oriented       S     S     S    S    S
Institutional And Civic Uses  
Basic utility uses                                             PR/S PR   PR/S
Parks and open space uses                          PR    PR    PR   PR   PR
Religious/private group                            S     PR    PR
assembly uses
Utility-scale ground-mounted                                   S    PR   S
solar energy systems
Other Uses                    
Agricultural uses            Plant related          P     P     P    P    P
                             Animal related         PR    PR    PR   PR   PR
Communication transmission                         PR/S  PR/S  PR/S PR   PR/S
facility uses
 
P = Permitted
PR = Provisional
S = Special exception (See chapter 4, article B of this title for requirements
for provisional uses and special exceptions.)
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-2009; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-
2020)
14-2E-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in this zone, whether allowed as a
permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to the use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title, and if applicable, the overlay zone provisions contained in chapter
3 of this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3,
article B of this title.
      2.   Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title.
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this
title.
      3.   Temporary uses: See chapter 4, article D of this title.
      4.   Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: See chapter 5, article A
of this title.
      2.   Sign regulations: See chapter 5, article B of this title.
      3.   Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this
title.
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: Not applicable.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this
title.
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this
title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this
title.
      11.   Neighborhood open space requirements: See chapter 5, article K of
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2E-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dimensional requirements for the interim development zones are stated in
table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. The following subsections
describe in more detail the regulations for each of the dimensional
requirements listed in the table. Provisional uses and uses allowed by special
exception may have specific dimensional requirements not specified in
table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B of this title. Dimensional
requirements may be waived or modified for developments approved through the
planned development process (see chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development
Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title) or through the historic preservation
exception as outlined in section
14-2E-6, "Special Provisions", of this article.
   A.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum lot area and width requirements are intended to
ensure that a lot is of a size, width, and frontage that is appropriate for the
uses permitted in the subject zone and will ensure, in most cases, that the
other site development standards of this title can be met.
      2.   Standards: Generally, the minimum lot area and width standards for
the interim development zones are stated in
table 2E-2, located at the end of this section.
      3.   Minimum Lot Sizes For Specific Land Uses: Provisional uses and uses
allowed by special exception may have specific lot size requirements not
specified in
table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. Approval criteria for these
uses are addressed in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances,
Special Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
   B.   Minimum Setback Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum setback requirements in the interim development
zones are intended to ensure that any development that occurs in the interim
will be compatible with the setbacks for future development of the property
once city services are provided and the property is rezoned according to the
comprehensive plan. The setback requirements also promote a reasonable physical
relationship between development in the interim development zone and other
adjacent zones.
      2.   General Setback Requirements: Generally, the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings in interim development zones are stated in
table 2E-2, located at the end of this section. The minimum setbacks for
principal buildings create required setback areas within which principal
buildings are not allowed, except for certain building features as specified in
this subsection.
      3.   Specific Setback Requirements: The following provisions contain
setback requirements that apply in specific situations:
         a.   Setbacks Along Arterial Streets:
            (1)   On lots platted after December 31, 1983, a minimum forty foot
(40') front setback is required along any lot line that abuts an arterial
street or future arterial street as shown on the Iowa City arterial street map,
located in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot is located along an arterial street that is
substandard with regard to the width of the public right of way, as specified
in title 15 of this code, then the minimum forty foot (40') front setback along
said street is increased by the number of additional feet that will be required
for future upgrade of said street to city standards. Lots platted prior to
December 31, 1983, are exempt from this requirement.
         b.   Side And Rear Setbacks In All Zones: In all interim development
zones, if a side or rear setback is provided where not required, the side or
rear setback must be at least five feet (5').
         c.   Lots With Multiple Frontages:
            (1)   On corner lots, no building, structure or planting, unless
specifically exempted, may be located within the vision triangle, as set forth
in chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
            (2)   If a lot fronting on two (2) or more streets is required to
have a front setback, a minimum setback equal to the required front setback
must be provided along all streets, and such setback will be considered a front
setback for purposes of this title.
         d.   Lots With Multiple Buildings: The principal buildings on the lot
must be separated by a horizontal distance that is equal to the height of the
highest building. Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current
building code fire protection requirements.
         e.   Lots Adjacent To Residential Zone: Where a side or rear lot line
for a lot in an interim development zone abuts a residential zone, a setback at
least equal to the required setback in the abutting residential zone must be
provided along the residential zone boundary.
      4.   Building Features Permitted Within Required Setback Area: The
following building features may extend into the required principal building
setback area specified, subject to the conditions indicated, and provided, that
location of such a feature does not violate the provisions of chapter 5,
article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The setback
regulations for detached accessory structures and structures not considered
part of the principal building are addressed in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         a.   Awnings, uncovered balconies, bay windows, belt courses,
buttresses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, sills, and other similar features
that extend beyond the wall of a principal building may project up to six feet
(6') into the required front or rear setbacks. Except for balconies, bay
windows, and chimneys, all such projecting building features may extend up to
three feet (3') into the required side setback. Balconies and bay windows may
not extend into the required side setback. Chimneys may extend up to two feet
(2') into the required side setback. Projections from the principal building
must in all cases be at least two feet (2') from any side lot line.
         b.   Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are
attached to the principal building must comply with the principal building
setbacks of the base zone. The standards for uncovered decks and patios are
specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
title. Covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios that are attached to
an accessory building must comply with the standards for accessory buildings as
specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
title.
         c.   Fire escapes may extend into any setback, provided they do not
extend more than three and one-half feet (31/2') into any side setback.
         d.   Stairways that function as the principal means of access to
dwelling units located above the ground or first floor of a building may not
extend into any required setback. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
         e.   Stoops and wheelchair ramps that function as a means of access to
the ground or first floor of a building may extend into the rear setback, up to
eight feet (8') into the required front setback, and into the side setback,
provided they are set back at least three feet (3') from any side lot line. In
cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a wheelchair ramp
cannot meet this standard, a minor modification may be requested according to
the approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 09-4365, 12-1-2009)
      5.   Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce principal building setback
requirements may be requested according to the approval criteria and procedures
for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce principal building
setback requirements beyond what is allowed by minor modification. The board of
adjustment may adjust setback requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a
property demonstrates that the general special exception approval criteria and
the following specific approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The subject building will be located no closer than three
feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or rear property
line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
   C.   Minimum Building Width:
      1.   Purpose: The minimum building width requirements promote a
reasonable building scale and relationship between dwellings in a neighborhood.
      2.   Standards: The minimum building width requirements for residential
structures in the interim development zones are stated in
table 2E-2 below. A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum
building width for at least seventy five percent (75%) of the building's
length.
Table 2E-2: Dimensional Requirements For The Interim Development Zones
 
                                                                   Building
Minimum Lot Requirements         Minimum Setbacks                  Bulk
                                                                   Standards
                       Minimum                                     Minimum
Total Area Width (Ft.) Frontage  Front (Ft.) Side (Ft.) Rear (Ft.) Building
                       (Ft.)                                       Width (Ft.)
10 acres 1 80          40        25          5+22       20         203
 
Notes:
   1.    In areas designated ID-RS, detached single-family dwellings may be
developed on minimum lot areas of 5 acres according to the applicable
provisions in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
   2.    Minimum side setback is 5 feet for the first 2 stories, plus 2 feet
for each additional story.
   3.    A building must be in compliance with the specified minimum building
width for at least 75 percent of the building's length.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-2E-5: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR HOUSEHOLD LIVING USES:
The residential occupancy of a household living use is limited to one
"household" per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A,
"General Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household
living use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing
Code", of this Code. Occupancy of properties that are not in compliance with
the minimum Zoning Code requirements may be limited as set forth in subsection
17-5-18S, "Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations", of this Code. (Ord. 18-4744,
4-2-2018)
14-2E-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Water And Sewer Facilities: All uses must provide approved private
water and sanitary sewer facilities until such time as the City extends
services to the area.
   B.   Historic Preservation Exceptions:
      1.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to waive or
modify any dimensional or site development standards listed in this article or
in chapter 5 of this title or any approval criteria listed in chapter 4,
article B of this title that would prevent use or occupancy of a property
designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the National Register of
Historic Places. In addition to the general special exception approval criteria
set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, the following approval
criteria must be met:
         a.   The modification or waiver will help preserve the historic,
aesthetic, or cultural attributes of the property.
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
      2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a
property designated as an Iowa City landmark or registered on the National
Register of Historic Places to be adapted and reused as a community service
use, specialized educational facility, or hospitality oriented retail use. In
addition to the general special exception approval criteria listed in chapter
4, article B of this title, the applicant must also meet the following criteria
in order for the board to grant this exception:
         a.   The exception will help preserve the historic, aesthetic, or
cultural attributes of the property.
         b.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE F. PUBLIC ZONES
SECTION:
14-2F-1: Establishment And Intent Of Public Zones
14-2F-2: Land Uses Allowed
14-2F-3: General Provisions
14-2F-4: Dimensional Requirements
14-2F-5: Public Zone Site Development Standards
14-2F-6: Special Provisions
14-2F-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT OF PUBLIC ZONES:
The full names, short names, and map symbols of the established public zones
are listed below. When this title refers to public zones, it is referring to
the zones listed below.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the public zones is to provide reference to
public ownership and use of land, or to use of the land for infrastructure
services that need to be located in or near the area where the service is
provided.
   B.   Zone Designations:
      1.   Neighborhood Public Zone (P-1): Uses such as schools, parks, police
and fire stations, and other civic buildings owned or otherwise controlled by
the County, the City, or the Iowa City Community School District, and necessary
infrastructure, may be designated as P-1, neighborhood public zone. These uses
are subject to certain development standards to create a consonant transition
between public and private uses.
      2.   Institutional Public Zone (P-2): The institutional public zone (P-2)
provides reference to public uses of land owned or otherwise controlled by the
state or federal government, or their subdivisions, such as university
campuses, regional medical facilities, or post offices. The following standards
serve as minimum guidelines for state and federal government entities to use to
help create a consonant transition between public and private uses. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 22-4880, 6-6-2022)
14-2F-2: LAND USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Determining Principal Uses Allowed:
      1.   
Table 2F-1, located at the end of this section, indicates whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S) in the public zone.
      2.   Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups. To
find out how a specific land use is categorized, see chapter 4, article A, "Use
Categories", of this title.
      3.   Provisional uses are allowed, subject to the additional requirements
contained in chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special
Exceptions, And Provisional Uses", of this title.
      4.   Uses listed as special exceptions are allowed only after approval
from the Iowa City board of adjustment. The general approval criteria for
special exceptions are stated in chapter 4, article B of this title along with
specific approval criteria for most special exception uses.
   B.   Regulations pertaining to accessory uses are stated in chapter 4,
article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
Table 2F-1: Principal Uses Allowed in Public Zones
Use Categories Subgroups P-1 P-2
Use Categories    Subgroups                                        P-1  P-2
Land, buildings, or structures used for public or governmental
purposes and owned by the federal, state, or local governments, or P    P
political subdivisions thereof, or the Iowa City Community School
District
Institutional and civic uses:
Basic utility uses                                                 PR/S  
Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems                  PR   PR
Other Uses:
Agricultural Uses Planted related                                  P    P
                  Animal related                                        
Communication transmission facility uses                           PR/S PR/S
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-
4358, 10-20-2009; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-2020; Ord. 22-4880, 6-6-2022)
14-2F-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All principal and accessory uses allowed in the public zone, whether allowed as
a permitted, provisional or special exception use, are subject to certain use
regulations and site development standards contained in chapters 3, 4 and 5 of
this title. Said chapters are indicated as follows:
   A.   Overlay Zones:
      1.   Historic district and conservation district overlay: See chapter 3,
article B of this title.
      2.   Design review: See chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Minor modifications, variances, special exceptions and provisional
uses: See chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      2.   Accessory uses and buildings: See chapter 4, article C of this
title. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
      3.   Nonconforming situations: See chapter 4, article E of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
   C.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Off street parking and loading standards: Section
14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title is applicable to
uses within the public zone. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
      2.   Sign regulations: Sections
14-5B-3 and
14-5B-4 of this title are applicable to uses within the public zones. (Ord. 06-
4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
      3.   Access management standards: See chapter 5, article C of this title.
      4.   Intersection visibility standards: See chapter 5, article D of this
title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4352,
7-6-2009)
      5.   Landscaping and tree standards: See chapter 5, article E of this
title.
      6.   Screening and buffering standards: See chapter 5, article F of this
title. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
      7.   Outdoor lighting standards: See chapter 5, article G of this title;
except, that uses in the public zone are exempt from section
14-5G-5, "Total Outdoor Light Output Standards", of this title.
      8.   Performance standards: See chapter 5, article H of this title.
      9.   Sensitive lands and features: See chapter 5, article I of this
title.
      10.   Floodplain management standards: See chapter 5, article J of this
title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4352,
7-6-2009)
14-2F-4: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Setbacks For Lots Adjacent To A Residential Zone: Where a lot in a
public zone abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, principal
building setbacks and setbacks for accessory uses, structures, and buildings at
least equal to the required principal building setbacks and required setbacks
for accessory uses, structures, and buildings in the abutting residential zone
must be provided along the residential zone boundary.
   B.   Maximum Height Standard:
      1.   Standard: Where a lot in a public zone abuts or is across the street
from a residential zone, the height for buildings and structures on the lot
zoned public must not exceed the maximum height standard specified for the
abutting residential zone.
      2.   Exemptions: If allowed in the subject zone, the following structures
or parts thereof are exempt from the maximum height standard, provided an
increase in height does not conflict with chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this
title.
         a.   Chimneys, flues, and stacks.
         b.   Spires on religious and other institutional buildings.
         c.   Cupolas, domes, skylights and other similar roof protrusions not
used for the purpose of obtaining habitable floor space.
         d.   Farm structures, including barns, silos, storage bins and similar
structures when accessory to an allowed agriculture use.
         e.   Flagpoles that extend not more than ten feet (10') above the
height limit or not more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the
roof, whichever is less.
         f.   Parapet and fire walls.
         g.   Poles, towers and other structures accessory to a basic utility
use, such as streetlights and utility poles.
         h.   If allowed in the subject zone, basic utilities and communication
transmission facilities are exempt from the base zone height standards, but are
subject to any limitations placed by the board of adjustment.
         i.   Roof structures, including solar energy systems, elevator
bulkheads, stairways, ventilating fans, cooling towers and similar necessary
mechanical and electrical appurtenances required to operate and maintain the
building.
         j.   Television antennas and similar apparatus.
         k.   Grain elevators.
         l.   Storage tanks and water towers.
      3.   Adjustment Of Height Standards:
         a.   The maximum height for a principal building may be increased;
provided, that for each foot of height increase above the height standard, the
front, side, and rear setbacks are each increased by an additional two feet
(2'); and provided, that an increase in height does not conflict with the
provisions of chapter 6, "Airport Zoning", of this title.
         b.   A minor modification may also be requested to adjust the maximum
height for a particular building or property according to the procedures and
approval criteria for minor modifications contained in chapter 4, article B of
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023)
14-2F-5: PUBLIC ZONE SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Surface Parking Lot Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any front and street side lot line. However,
any loading area, parking spaces or aisles located within fifty feet (50') of a
residential zone boundary must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
front and street side lot line.
      2.   Side And Rear Setback Requirements: Parking and loading areas must
be set back at least five feet (5') from any (nonstreet side) side or rear lot
line. However, parking and loading areas must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from any side or rear lot line that abuts a property zoned residential.
The city may exempt from these setback regulations any specific locations along
a lot line where a parking area, aisle or drive is shared with an abutting lot.
      3.   Drives:
         a.   Drives that are internal to a parking area, including drives that
provide circulation around the perimeter of a parking area, are considered part
of the parking area and must meet the setback standards as specified above.
Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at least three feet
(3') from any abutting property that is zoned nonresidential, unless the drive
is pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of water onto adjoining
property or unless a drainage course has been established along lot lines to
handle stormwater runoff. Any specific locations along a side or rear lot line
where a drive is shared with an abutting lot may be exempted from these
standards.
         b.   Drives that are external to a parking area must be set back at
least ten feet (10') from any abutting property that is zoned residential.
   B.   Landscaping And Tree Requirements For Parking Areas: Parking areas that
contain more than eighteen (18) parking spaces must be designed to include
trees and planting areas according to the provisions of chapter 5, article A,
"Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
   C.   Screening Requirements:
      1.   Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened
from public rights of way to at least the S2 standard. (See chapter 5, article
F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
      2.   Surface parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened
from view of abutting properties to at least the S2 standard. Additional
screening is required for properties that abut properties zoned residential.
Parking areas, loading areas, and drives must be screened from view of any
abutting property zoned residential to at least the S3 standard. The city may
exempt from this landscaping requirement any specific locations along a side or
rear lot line where a parking area, loading area, aisle or drive is shared with
an abutting lot.
      3.   Where a lot in a public zone abuts or is across a street or railroad
right of way from a residential zone, daycare use, educational facility, parks
and open space use, or the Iowa River, any parking and loading areas and
outdoor work and storage areas must be located behind buildings or screened
from view of said uses and zones to at least the S3 standard.
      4.   All ground level mechanical and utility equipment, such as heat
pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps, must be
screened from public view to at least the S2 standard. If it is not feasible to
use landscape screening, the mechanical equipment must be screened using wall
or fencing materials complementary to the principal structure.
      5.   Screening requirements may be waived by the building official upon
presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be expected
to thrive in a particular location because of intense shade, soil conditions,
or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself,
shall not constitute convincing evidence. If a landscape screening requirement
is waived by the building official because plantings cannot be expected to
survive, a fence or wall built to the S5 standard must be substituted for the
landscape screening. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      6.   Screening may be waived by the building official where the view is
or will be blocked by a change in grade or by natural or humanmade features,
such that screening is effectively provided and the intent of the standard is
met, as determined by the building official. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
   D.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
      1.   Outdoor storage of materials and equipment is allowed in all public
zones, provided it is concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it
is not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage
areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right of way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from view to at least the
S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of
this title.) If a fence is built around the storage area, the required
screening must be located between the fence and the public right of way.
      2.   All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear lot
line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten
feet (10') from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property
to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the
required screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
      3.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may be
waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil
conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement,
by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape screening
requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to the S5
standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
      4.   The storage of combustible or flammable materials or liquids is
strictly regulated according to the provisions of chapter 5, article H,
"Performance Standards", of this title, and according to the international fire
code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   E.   Minor Modifications To Site Development Standards: A minor modification
to adjust specific provisions of this section may be requested in either of the
qualifying situations listed in the subsections below. Such requests will be
reviewed by the director of planning and community development and the building
official according to the procedures for minor modifications as set forth in
chapter 8, article B of this title and must meet the following approval
criteria. The following approval criteria are to be applied in lieu of the
general approval criteria listed in section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title.
      1.   Qualifying situation one: The configuration of the lot or other
existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of a specific
standard impractical. In such a case, the applicant must demonstrate that the
following approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant must provide evidence that the configuration of the
lot, the topography, or other physical characteristic of the property makes the
application of a specific standard impractical. Examples of situations that may
qualify include double fronting lots, triangular shaped lots, and steeply
sloping lots.
         b.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed alternative
design is not contrary to the intent of the site development standards.
         c.   The applicant must propose an alternative site or building design
that best meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         d.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         e.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         f.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
      2.   Qualifying situation two: The proposed site or building is uniquely
designed to fit the site and the surrounding area. In such a situation, the
applicant must demonstrate that the following approval criteria are met:
         a.   The applicant proposes an alternative design solution that
equally or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified.
         b.   The proposed site and building design is uniquely designed to fit
the characteristics of the site and the surrounding area such that it equally
or better meets the purpose of the site development standards.
         c.   The requested modification will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
         d.   The requested modification does not allow a use or activity not
otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject
property.
         e.   The requested modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws, and regulations. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
14-2F-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the federal, state, or local government, or political subdivisions
thereof, or the Iowa City Community School District, conveys a leasehold
interest in any land zoned public for a use other than those allowed in the
public zone, the land must be zoned to an appropriate zone in which the use is
allowed. The use shall be subject to all requirements of the new zone. Further,
the zone may be established as a dual zone, retaining the public zone
designation. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 22-4880, 6-6-2022)
ARTICLE G. RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS AND EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICTS FORM BASED
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-2G-1: Intent, Applicability, And Administration
14-2G-2: Regulating Plan
14-2G-3: Subdistrict Standards
14-2G-4: Frontage Type Standards
14-2G-5: Building Type Standards
14-2G-6: Parking Type Standards
14-2G-7: General Requirements
14-2G-8: Affordable Housing Requirement
14-2G-1: INTENT, APPLICABILITY, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Regulating Plan: The form based development standards in the following
sections are intended to shape development and redevelopment in certain
districts of the City. The standards are designed to promote the creation of
economically vital, mixed use, pedestrian friendly districts. The form based
standards describe required development patterns, building and frontage types,
and parking locations and treatments. The standards are organized in sections
with each section defining building and site development conditions affecting
the quality of the built environment and ensuring projects are consistent with
the goals, objectives, and guidelines in the downtown and riverfront crossings
master plan and the central district plan.
   B.   Subdistricts:
      1.   The Riverfront Crossings District is divided into subdistricts,
which are listed below with the corresponding zoning map symbol.
         a.   South Downtown Subdistrict (RFC-SD).
         b.   University Subdistrict (RFC-U).
         c.   Central Crossings Subdistrict (RFC-CX).
         d.   Gilbert Subdistrict (RFC-G).
         e.   Park Subdistrict (RFC-P).
         f.   South Gilbert Subdistrict (RFC-SG).
         g.   West Riverfront Subdistrict (RFC-WR). (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
         h.   Orchard Subdistrict (RFC-O). (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
      2.   The Eastside Mixed Use District, which is located in the Central
Planning District is designated with the following zoning map symbol:
         a.   Eastside Mixed Use District (EMU).
   C.   Applicability: All development within the Riverfront Crossings District
and Eastside Mixed Use District as designated on the zoning map shall be
subject to the provisions of this article and to the use regulations and site
development standards contained in chapters 4 and 5 of this title and, if
applicable, the overlay zone provision of chapter 3 of this title. In the case
of any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this article, the
provision that is more specific to the situation will control. When regulations
are equally specific or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the more
restrictive provision will control.
For purposes of this article, "grade" shall be defined as the average point of
elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the
area between the building and the streetside property line(s), or when the
streetside property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between
the building and a line five feet (5') from the building. Grade shall be
calculated measuring the level of the surface of the ground at least every
twenty feet (20') along the entire frontage of the property. If due to
unavoidable site conditions, the finished surface of the ground has been or is
proposed to be raised by adding fill, the slope of the fill within twenty feet
(20') of the building shall not exceed four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) or
twenty five percent (25%). Any story that has more than three feet (3') of its
floor to ceiling height above grade along one (1) or more frontages shall be
counted as a story for purposes of measuring height. Streetside property lines
shall include those abutting approved pedestrian streets. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016)
   D.   Design Review: Any exterior alterations to, additions to, or new
construction of buildings and structures, or alterations or additions to site
development, including, but not limited to, parking areas, landscaping,
screening, lighting, and access on property zoned to a Riverfront Crossings or
Eastside Mixed Use designation shall be subject to design review. Design review
shall be conducted by the Form Based Code Committee (FBC Committee), as
designated by the City Manager. The FBC Committee shall review the proposed
development for compliance with the applicable provisions of this article and
the goals and objectives of the adopted downtown and riverfront crossings
master plan and central district plan. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 16-
4685, 11-15-2016)
14-2G-2: REGULATING PLAN:
   A.   Regulating Plan: The Riverfront Crossings District regulating plan (see
 figure 2G-1 of this section) and Eastside Mixed Use District regulating plan
(see
 figure 2G-1B of this section) indicate the location and extent of any
subdistricts, primary street designations, required retail storefront
locations, and required Ralston Creek frontage locations. The regulating plan
identifies public parks and open spaces as well as proposed green space within
subdistricts, which includes publicly accessible parks, plazas, and trails and
open spaces along the Iowa River and Ralston Creek. Reference to the regulating
plan is required to determine the applicability of standards included in the
subdistrict standards, frontage types, building types, parking types, and
general requirements. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
FIGURE 2G-1
REGULATING PLAN FOR THE RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3283.png]
 
FIGURE 2G-1B
REGULATING PLAN FOR THE EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3205.png]
 
   B.   Building Height Diagram: The building height diagram (see
figure 2G-2 of this section) indicates the building heights permitted in the
Riverfront Crossings District. Specific building height standards can be found
in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article. The diagram only indicates
the base heights allowed in the respective subdistrict standards, bonus height
provisions may be applicable (see subsection
14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article). (Ord. 16-4675,
9-20-2016)
FIGURE 2G-2
BUILDING HEIGHT DIAGRAM FOR THE RIVERFRONT CROSSINGS DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3285.png]
 
(Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017; amd. Ord. 20-4840, 12-15-2020)
14-2G-3: SUBDISTRICT STANDARDS:
   A.   South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, And University Subdistricts:
      1.   Intent: The South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University
Subdistricts of the Riverfront Crossings District (shaded in dark in
 figure 2G-3 of this section) are intended for high intensity mixed use
development in buildings with active ground floor uses opening onto pedestrian
friendly streetscapes. Buildings are designed with facades aligned along public
sidewalks with parking and service areas located behind buildings in rear lot
and midblock locations.
The University Subdistrict is intended for continued use by the University Of
Iowa. While not subject to these standards, new and renovated university
facilities should adhere to the standards to the extent feasible. Properties
within the University Subdistrict that are not owned by the University of Iowa,
however, must fully comply with all applicable standards below.
Figure 2G-3
Subdistrict Locator - South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, University
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2600.png]
 
      2.   Uses: The principal uses allowed in the South Downtown, Park, South
Gilbert, and University Subdistricts are the same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone,
as specified in section
14-2C-2,
table 2C-1 of this chapter, except as noted below. Provisions and special
exception approval criteria that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in the South
Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University Subdistricts, as set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In addition, the
following restrictions and allowances shall apply:
         a.   In the South Downtown and Park Subdistricts, quick vehicle
servicing uses are not allowed on any frontage designated as a primary street
frontage, as specified on the regulating plan. In the South Gilbert
Subdistrict, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed on any frontage
designated as a required retail storefront, as specified on the regulating
plan. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
         b.   Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building
types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the provisions in section
14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article, and
therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is limited to one "household"
per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living
use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of
this Code. The maximum number of bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3).
Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, in the South
Downtown and University Subdistricts for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling
buildings and mixed use buildings the number of three bedroom units per lot may
not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of units on the lot. In the
South Gilbert and Park Subdistricts for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling
buildings, and mixed use buildings, the number of three bedroom units per lot
may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number of units on the lot.
(Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
         c.   Residential uses are not allowed within required retail
storefronts, as specified on the applicable regulating plan, except in midblock
locations along South Gilbert Street, where storefront spaces may be configured
as live-work units.
         d.   Independent and fraternal group living uses are allowed by
special exception in the South Downtown and University Subdistricts according
to the approval criteria set forth in section
14-4B-4 of this title. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within a
garage or structured parking area. These uses shall be allowed within permitted
building types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article.
         e.   Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted
building types as specified in section
 14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within
a garage or structured parking area.
         f.   In the Park and South Gilbert Subdistricts, drinking
establishments are only allowed in required retail storefronts, as indicated on
the regulating plan, and must also meet the applicable drinking establishment
spacing requirement.
      3.   Principal Building Placement And Form:
         a.   Building Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall comply with section
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building
types are permitted in the South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, and University
Subdistricts (see also section
14-2G-5,
table 2G-6 of this article):
Table 2G-1
Permitted Building Types - South Downtown, Park, South Gilbert, University
 
Riverfront   Permitted Building Types
Crossings    Cottage Row             Apartment Multi-   Live-Work Commercial Mixed    Liner    Civic Or
Subdistricts Home    House Townhouse Building  Dwelling Townhouse Building   Use      Building Institutional
                                               Building                      Building          Building
South                             X         X                 X          X        X        X
Downtown
Park                     X         X         X        X         X          X        X        X
South                    X         X         X        X         X          X        X        X
Gilbert
University                        X         X        X         X          X        X        X
 
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
         b.   Building Placement:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner
of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following
requirements as shown in
figure 2G-4 of this section, except as indicated below: (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-
2017)
FIGURE 2G-4
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2602.png]
 
               (A)   Primary (A) And Secondary (B) Street Setback: Two feet
(2') minimum, eight feet (8') maximum (except as indicated below).
               (B)   Burlington Street Setback: Ten feet (10') minimum, sixteen
feet (16') maximum. Along Burlington Street the minimum front setback area must
be reserved for pedestrian movement along the street frontage and, therefore,
must be integrated with and maintained at the same grade as the public
sidewalk. To ensure safe pedestrian movement along the street frontage, at
grade entrances are required and elevated terraces, patios, stoops, porticoes,
or similar may not encroach into the required minimum setback area. However,
outdoor seating and merchandising areas that are level with the sidewalk may
encroach up to four feet (4') into the required minimum setback area.
               (C)   Lots Fronting On Pedestrian Streets: Five feet (5')
minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement.
See subsection
14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
               (D)   Ralston Creek Frontage Setback: Five feet (5') minimum
from stream corridor buffer line. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (E)   South Gilbert Subdistrict: In the south Gilbert
subdistrict, for a lot with frontage on both Gilbert Street and Highway 6, the
building facade that faces Highway 6 may be aligned along a minimum ten foot
(10') wide pedestrianway with abutting perpendicular parking spaces aligned
along an east-west drive aisle located between the building and Highway 6.
Therefore, the maximum setback along the Highway 6 frontage may be adjusted
accordingly. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
               (F)   Side Setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0')
if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment
buildings and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet
(10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set back
at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
               (G)   Rear Setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum or five feet (5')
minimum if set back along public alley or private rear lane.
               (H)   Above Third Floor: Above the third floor (or above the
second floor if the height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above
grade) the maximum setback does not apply.
               (I)   Forecourts: Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the
maximum setbacks stated above. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4696, 3-
7-2017)
         c.   Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
            (1)   Principal building heights shall be regulated as provided
below:
               (A)   In the south downtown subdistrict buildings shall be two
(2) stories minimum and eight (8) stories maximum in height above grade.
               (B)   In the park, south Gilbert and university subdistricts,
buildings shall be two (2) stories minimum and six (6) stories maximum in
height above grade. Single-story buildings may be permitted in midblock
locations in the south Gilbert subdistrict.
               (C)   Additional building height may be granted through transfer
of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection
14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
               (D)   Building heights may be further restricted by FAA
regulations.
            (2)   Upper floor building facades facing and visible from streets,
plazas, or parks shall step back ten feet (10') minimum from the lower floor
facade as follows:
               (A)   In the south downtown subdistrict above the fifth floor.
               (B)   In the park, south Gilbert, and university subdistricts
above the fourth floor.
               (C)   At street corners, tower elements or similar corner
emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one
facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
               (D)   The required facade step back may be established at a
lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet
(30') in height above grade.
         d.   Building Projections:
            (1)   The following building features may project into setbacks as
follows:
               (A)   Bay windows, eaves, cornices, belt courses, buttresses,
sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
               (B)   Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6')
into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on
upper floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than
eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an
alley or permanent open space.
               (C)   Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building
entries, and similar elements as permitted in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
            (2)   Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of
way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain
permitted signs may also project into public rights of way according to
applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of
this title. Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with
utilities, street trees and other important right of way features.
            (3)   Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-
facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an
attached colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story
building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may
project (cantilever) up to five feet (5') closer to the streetside property
line than the ground level building facade, provided that the upper floor
facade does not project into the minimum setback, is at least sixteen feet
(16') clear above the level of the sidewalk, and does not include a supporting
colonnade within any streetside setback area.
         e.   Building And Frontage Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in
compliance with sections
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article.
         f.   Facade Continuity:
            (1)   To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes and create a
mostly continuous frontage of buildings along primary streets, principal
buildings shall occupy a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary
street lot frontage. In the absence of a building along the remainder of the
lot frontage, a street screen shall be built in compliance with subsection
14-2G-7D of this article.
      4.   Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
         a.   Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type
appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article, and at the minimum ratios
specified in section
14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
         b.   Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening:
Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within and behind
principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in
figure 2G-5 of this section:
FIGURE 2G-5
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2604.png]
 
            (1)   Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston
Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service areas: Thirty feet
(30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully
enclosed, occupied building space, except as allowed in subsection A4b(2)(B) of
this section. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum
from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed,
occupied building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20')
for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (C)   Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary
street building facade.
            (2)   Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10')
minimum and set back three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2
standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (B)   In the South Gilbert Subdistrict, for a corner lot with
frontage on both Gilbert Street and Highway 6, one (1) double loaded aisle of
surface parking is permitted within the private frontage area along the Highway
6 frontage. Surface parking must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
the Highway 6 right-of- way and screened to the S2 standard. Said surface
parking must be set back ten feet (10') minimum from the Gilbert Street right-
of-way and three feet (3') minimum from the primary street building facade on
Gilbert Street and screened to the S2 standard. (Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
               (C)   Building/structured parking: Two feet (2') minimum and set
back one foot (1') minimum from the secondary street building facade and
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
 14-5A-5F of this title.
               (D)   Underground parking: Two feet (2') minimum and set back
zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4696, 3-7-2017)
            (3)   Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Must comply
with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings, or
zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property. Setback area
shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same
side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (C)   Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and
rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
            (4)   Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to
ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
            (5)   Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings
with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including
portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area
must be used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a
larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights of
vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces
must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2 standard.
         c.   Access To Parking And Service Areas:
            (1)   All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed
from public alleys, private rear lanes, or driveways on secondary streets
consistent with the riverfront crossings plan, except where permitted as
specified in subsection A4c(2) of this section.
            (2)   If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from
the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions,
configuration of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street
may be granted by the FBC Committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in
section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
         d.   Construction And Design Standards For Parking Areas:
            (1)   The following subsections of section
14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
               A.   Purpose.
               B.   Paving materials.
               C.   Parking and stacking space size.
               D.   Drainage.
               E.   Location.
               F.   Standards for structured parking.
               H.   Design and layout of surface parking areas.
               I.   Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
               J.   Screening and setback requirements.
               K.   Design of bicycle parking areas.
      5.   Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions
contained in the Riverfront Crossings Code are more specific or restrictive,
said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this
title.
         b.   Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of subsection A4, "Parking, Loading, And Service
Areas", of this section.
         c.   Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures
must be located behind principal buildings according to the same setback
standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view
must be architecturally finished in a manner that is consistent with the
principal building. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
   B.   Central Crossings And Orchard Subdistricts And Eastside Mixed Use
District:
      1.   Intent: The Central Crossings Subdistrict is intended for moderate
intensity mixed use development in buildings with entries opening onto
pedestrian friendly public streets and streetscapes. The Eastside Mixed Use
District is intended for lower intensity mixed use and residential development
in buildings with street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian friendly
streetscapes that provide a transition between higher intensity mixed use areas
in downtown Iowa City and residential neighborhoods to the east. The Orchard
Subdistrict is intended for lower intensity residential development in
buildings with street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian-friendly
streetscapes that provide a transition between higher intensity mixed-use areas
along Riverside Drive and low-scale residential neighborhoods to the west.
Buildings are designed with facades aligned along primary streets and parking
located within buildings behind active uses and in mid-block parking lots and
structures.
      2.   Uses: The principal uses allowed in the Central Crossings
Subdistrict, Orchard Subdistrict and Eastside Mixed Use District are the same
as allowed in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section
14-2C-2,
table 2C-1 of this chapter, except as noted below. Provisions and special
exception approval criteria that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in these
districts as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted
below. In addition, the following restrictions and allowances shall apply:
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         a.   In the Orchard Subdistrict, commercial and industrial uses are
not allowed, except in live-work townhouses, which may contain commercial uses
allowed in the CB-5 Zone, provided the building is constructed to accommodate
such uses and provided the use is not prohibited in the list below. Quick
vehicle service uses are not allowed. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         b.   In the Central Crossings Subdistrict, quick vehicle servicing
uses are not allowed on any frontage designated as primary street or Ralston
Creek frontage, as specified in the Riverfront Crossings regulating plan. In
the Eastside Mixed Use District, quick vehicle servicing uses are not allowed,
except by special exception on property at the corner of Burlington and Van
Buren Streets. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         c.   Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building
types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the provisions in section
 14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and,
therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is limited to one "household"
per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living
use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of
this title. The maximum number of bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3).
Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, in the Central
Crossings Subdistrict for apartment buildings, multi-dwelling buildings and
mixed use buildings the number of three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the total number of units on the lot, except for south
of the Iowa-Interstate Rail Line, where the number of three-bedroom units for
these building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). In the Eastside Mixed
Use District and Orchard Subdistrict, the number of three-bedroom units for
these building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-
2018)
         d.   Residential uses are not allowed within required retail
storefronts, as specified in the Riverfront Crossings regulating plan, except
in the Central Crossings Subdistrict for housing subsidized by a Federal or
State program that requires at least sixty percent (60%) of the units to be
rent restricted and income restricted. (Ord. 18-4768, 9-18-2018)
         e.   Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted
building types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within
a garage or structured parking area.
         f.   Drinking establishments are not allowed.
         g.   Animal related commercial, repair oriented retail, and alcohol
sales oriented retail uses are not allowed in the Eastside Mixed Use District
and Orchard Subdistrict.
         h.   In the Eastside Mixed Use District and Orchard Subdistrict,
commercial recreational uses, eating establishments, sales oriented retail, and
personal service oriented retail uses shall not be open to the public between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except if
located in a storefront with frontage on Van Buren Street or Burlington Street.
      3.   Principal Building Placement And Form:
         a.   Building Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall comply with section
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building
types are permitted in the Central Crossings Subdistrict, Orchard Subdistrict
and the Eastside Mixed Use District (see also section
14-2G-5,
table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-2
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - CENTRAL CROSSINGS, ORCHARD AND EASTSIDE MIXED USE
 
             Permitted Building Types
Subdistricts Cottage                    Apartment Multi-   Live-Work Commercial Mixed-   Liner    Civic Or
             Home    Rowhouse Townhouse Building  Dwelling Townhouse Building   Use      Building Institutional
                                                  Building                      Building          Building
Central                     X         X         X        X         X          X        X        X
Crossings
Eastside     X       X        X         X         X        X         X1         X1               X
Mixed Use
Orchard      X       X        X         X         X        X2                          X         
 
Notes:
   1.    Only allowed on properties with frontage on Van Buren Street or
Burlington Street.
   2.    Only allowed in locations with frontage on Orchard Street.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         b.   Building Placement:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner
of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following
requirements as shown in
 figure 2G-7 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-7
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2606.png]
 
               (A)   Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback:
                  (i)   Central Crossings: Ten feet (10') minimum, sixteen feet
(16') maximum.
                  (ii)   Eastside Mixed Use:
                     (a)   Primary (A): Twenty feet (20') minimum, thirty feet
(30') maximum.
                     (b)   Secondary (B): Ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet
(20') maximum. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
                  (iii)   Orchard: Six feet (6') minimum, twelve feet (12')
maximum. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (B)   Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5')
minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right- of-way or access easement.
See subsection
14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
               (C)   Ralston Creek frontage setback: Five feet (5') minimum
from stream corridor buffer line.
               (D)   Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0')
if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment
buildings and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet
(10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set back
at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
               (E)   Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum or five feet (5')
minimum if set back along public alley or private rear lane. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016)
               (F)   In the Central Crossings Subdistrict and Eastside Mixed
Use District, the maximum setback does not apply above the second floor. In the
Orchard District, the maximum setback does not apply above the second floor and
is increased to a maximum of twenty five feet (25') above the first floor.
(Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (G)   Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum
setbacks stated above. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (H)   In the Orchard District, thirty feet (30') minimum from
RS-8 Zone boundary. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         c.   Building Height And Facade Stepbacks:
            (1)   Central Crossings: Except as provided below, principal
buildings shall be four (4) stories maximum in height above grade.
               (A)   Additional building height may be granted through transfer
of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection
14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
               (B)   Building heights may be further restricted by FAA
regulations. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
            (2)   Eastside Mixed Use and Orchard: Principal buildings shall be
three (3) stories maximum in height above grade. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
            (3)   In the Central Crossings Subdistrict above the third floor,
building facades facing and visible from streets, plazas, or parks shall step
back ten feet (10') minimum from the lower floor facade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (A)   At street corners, tower elements or similar corner
emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one
(1) facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC Committee.
               (B)   The required facade step back may be established at a
lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet
(30') in height above grade. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
            (4)   In the Orchard Subdistrict, above the second floor, building
facades facing streets and RS-8 Zone boundaries shall step back ten feet (10')
minimum, twenty five feet (25') maximum from the lower floor facade. At street
corners, tower elements or similar corner emphasis treatments may be exempt
from the stepback requirement for up to one (1) facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as
approved by the FBC Committee. Alternatively, if approved by the FBC, the
required facade stepback may be established above the first floor or may be
tiered with the ten foot (10') minimum stepback achieved with smaller stepbacks
above both the first and second stories. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         d.   Building Projections:
            (1)   The following building features may project into setbacks as
follows:
               (A)   Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt
courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
               (B)   Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6')
into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on
upper floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than
eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an
alley or permanent open space.
               (C)   Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building
entries, and similar elements as permitted in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
            (2)   Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights-of-
way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain
permitted signs may also project into public rights-of- way according to
applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of
this title. Projections into the right-of-way shall not interfere with
utilities, street trees and other important right-of-way features.
            (3)   Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-
facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an
attached colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story
building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may
not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground level
building facade, except for building features noted above.
         e.   Building And Frontage Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in
compliance with sections
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
         f.   Facade Continuity:
            (1)   Central Crossings and Orchard: To define pedestrian friendly
streetscapes and create a mostly continuous frontage of buildings along primary
streets, principal buildings shall occupy a minimum of seventy five percent
(75%) of the primary street lot frontage. Only in the Central Crossings
Subdistrict, in the absence of a building along the remainder of the lot
frontage, a street screen shall be built in compliance with subsection
14-2G-7D of this article. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
            (2)   Eastside Mixed Use: To define pedestrian friendly
streetscapes while maintaining a lower intensity development character along
primary streets, principal buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) and a maximum of seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot
frontage.
      4.   Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
         a.   Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type
appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios
specified in section
14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
         b.   Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening:
Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within and behind
principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as shown in
 figure 2G-8 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-8
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2608.png]
 
            (1)   Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston
Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking and service areas: Thirty feet (30')
minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully enclosed,
occupied building space. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') min. from
the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed, occupied
building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') for
buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (C)   Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary
street building facade.
            (2)   Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10')
minimum and set back three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2
standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (B)   Building/structured parking: One foot (1') minimum from
the secondary street building facade and screened from public view by
architecturally finished building facades, according to the standards for
structured parking set forth in subsection
 14-5A-5F of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-
2017)
               (C)   Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back
zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade.
            (3)   Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Must comply
with the same side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings, or
zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property. Setback area
shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same
side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (C)   Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and
rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
            (4)   Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to
ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
            (5)   Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings
with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including
portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area
must be used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a
larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights of
vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces
must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2 standard.
         c.   Access To Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
            (1)   All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed
from public alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets
consistent with the applicable regulating plan, except as allowed in subsection
B4c(2) of this section.
            (2)   If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from
the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions,
configuration of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street
may be granted by the FBC committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in
section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
         d.   Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
            (1)   The following subsections of section
14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
               A.   Purpose.
               B.   Paving materials.
               C.   Parking and stacking space size.
               D.   Drainage.
               E.   Location.
               F.   Standards for structured parking.
               H.   Design and layout of surface parking areas.
               I.   Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
               J.   Screening and setback requirements.
               K.   Design of bicycle parking areas.
      5.   Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions
contained in this article are more specific or restrictive, said provisions
shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title.
         b.   Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of subsection B4, "Parking, Loading, And Service
Areas", of this section.
         c.   Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures
must be located behind principal buildings according to the same setback
standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings within public view
must be architecturally finished in a manner that is consistent with the
principal building.
   C.   Gilbert Subdistrict:
      1.   Intent: The Gilbert subdistrict (shaded in dark in
figure 2G-9 of this section) is intended for lower intensity mixed use
development in buildings with street-facing entries opening onto pedestrian
friendly streetscapes. Buildings are designed with facades aligned along
primary streets, modest setbacks, and parking located within buildings behind
active uses and in midblock parking lots. This area is intended to create a
transition between higher intensity mixed use areas and lower to medium
intensity residential areas.
Figure 2G-9
Subdistrict Locator - Gilbert
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2610.png]
 
      2.   Uses: The principal uses allowed in the Gilbert Subdistrict are the
same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section
14-2C-2,
table 2C-1 of this chapter. Provisions and special exception approval criteria
that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in the Gilbert Subdistrict as set forth
in chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In addition, the
following restrictions and allowances shall apply: (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
         a.   Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building
types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the provisions in section
14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and,
therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is limited to one "household"
per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living
use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of
this Code. The maximum number of bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3).
Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, for apartment
buildings, multi-dwelling buildings and mixed use buildings the number of
three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
number of units on the lot, except for south of the Iowa-Interstate Rail Line,
where the number of three-bedroom units for these building types may not exceed
twenty percent (20%). (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
         b.   Residential uses are not allowed within required retail
storefronts, as specified in the riverfront crossings regulating plan.
         c.   Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted
building types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within
a garage or structured parking area.
         d.   Building trade uses shall be allowed on properties located south
of the Iowa-Interstate Railroad, provided all aspects of the operation are
conducted indoors and, except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor storage of
materials and equipment is not allowed.
         e.   Drinking establishments are not allowed.
      3.   Principal Building Placement And Form:
         a.   Building Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall comply with section
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building
types are permitted in the Gilbert Subdistrict (see also section
14-2G-5,
table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-3
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - GILBERT
 
Riverfront   Permitted Building Types
Crossings    Cottage Row             Apartment Multi-   Live-Work Commercial Mixed    Liner    Civic Or
Subdistricts Home    House Townhouse Building  Dwelling Townhouse Building   Use      Building Institutional
                                               Building                      Building          Building
Gilbert      X       X     X         X         X        X         X          X        X        X
 
         b.   Building Placement:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner
of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following
requirements as shown in
figure 2G-10 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-10
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2612.png]
 
               (A)   Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback: Ten feet
(10') minimum, twenty feet (20') maximum.
               (B)   Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5')
minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement.
See subsection
14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
               (C)   Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0')
if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment
buildings, multi-dwelling buildings, and cottage homes where the minimum is
always ten feet (10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors
must be set back at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
               (D)   Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum.
               (E)   Above the third floor (or above the second floor if the
height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above grade) the maximum
setback does not apply.
               (F)   Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum
setbacks stated above.
         c.   Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
            (1)   Except as provided below, principal buildings shall be three
(3) stories maximum in height above grade.
               (A)   Additional building height may be granted through transfer
of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection
 14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
            (2)   Above the third floor, building facades facing and visible
from public streets, plazas, or parks shall step back ten feet (10') minimum
from the lower floor facade.
               (A)   At street corners, tower elements or similar corner
emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one
facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
               (B)   The required facade step back may be established at a
lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet
(30') in height above grade.
         d.   Building Projections:
            (1)   The following building features may project into setbacks as
follows:
               (A)   Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt
courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
               (B)   Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6')
into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on
upper floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than
eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an
alley or permanent open space.
               (C)   Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building
entries, and similar elements as permitted in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
            (2)   Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of
way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain
permitted signs may also project into public rights of way according to
applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of
this title. Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with
utilities, street trees, and other important right of way features.
            (3)   Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-
facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an
attached colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story
building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may
not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground level
building facade, except for building features noted above.
         e.   Building And Frontage Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in
compliance with sections
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article.
         f.   Facade Continuity:
            (1)   To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes while maintaining
a lower intensity development character along primary streets, principal
buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) and a maximum of
seventy five percent (75%) of the primary street lot frontage.
      4.   Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
         a.   Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type
appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios
specified in section
14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
         b.   Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening:
Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within, behind and to the
side of principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in
 figure 2G-11 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-11
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2614.png]
 
            (1)   Primary Street, Pedestrian Street, And Designated Ralston
Creek Frontage Setback (E) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Thirty feet
(30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully
enclosed, occupied building space.
               (B)   Surface parking located to the side of buildings: Ten feet
(10') minimum from the streetside property line (E') and set back three feet
(3') minimum from the primary street building facade (E) and screened by low
masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard, alternative
materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And
Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
               (C)   Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum
from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed,
occupied building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20')
for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (D)   Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary
street building facade.
            (2)   Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Ten feet (10')
minimum and located three feet (3') minimum from the secondary street building
facade and screened by low masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2
standard, alternative materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and
set back one foot (1') minimum from the secondary street building facade and
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (C)   Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back
zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facade.
            (3)   Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Five feet (5')
minimum or zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property.
Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same
side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (C)   Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and
rear setback requirements as principal buildings.
            (4)   Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to
ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
            (5)   Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings
with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including
portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area
must be used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a
larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights of
vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces
must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2 standard.
         c.   Access To Parking, Loading, And Service Areas:
            (1)   All parking, loading, and service areas shall be accessed
from public alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets
consistent with the riverfront crossings plan, except as allowed in subsection
C4c(2) of this section.
            (2)   If access from an alley, private rear lane, or driveway from
the secondary street is not feasible due to topography, site conditions,
configuration of the lot, and/or other constraints, access to a primary street
may be granted by the FBC Committee. Any request for a curb cut on an arterial
street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set forth in
section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
         d.   Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
            (1)   The following subsections of section
14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
               A.   Purpose.
               B.   Paving materials.
               C.   Parking and stacking space size.
               D.   Drainage.
               E.   Location.
               F.   Standards for structured parking.
               H.   Design and layout of surface parking areas.
               I.   Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
               J.   Screening and setback requirements.
               K.   Design of bicycle parking areas.
      5.   Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions
contained in the riverfront crossings code are more specific or restrictive,
said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this
title.
         b.   Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of subsection C4, "Parking, Loading, And Service
Areas", of this section.
         c.   Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures
must be located behind or to the side of principal buildings according to the
same setback standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings
within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is
consistent with the principal building.
   D.   West Riverfront Subdistrict:
      1.   Intent: The west riverfront subdistrict (shaded in dark in
 figure 2G-12 of this section) is intended for commercial and mixed use
development in buildings with street-facing entries opening onto streetscapes
designed to provide a comfortable and attractive environment for pedestrians
buffered from vehicular traffic on Riverside Drive. Along the west side of
Riverside Drive south of Benton Street, buildings are designed with facades
fronting onto a pedestrianway and perpendicular parking aligned along a
continuous north-south travelway allowing cross parcel connections among
adjacent sites and a reduction in curb cuts along Riverside Drive. Along the
Iowa River, buildings are located, oriented, and designed to take advantage of
river views. Along streets in this district, buildings are designed with
facades aligned parallel to Riverside Drive, Benton Street, and Sturgis Corner
Drive, with parking located in midblock and side yard locations with front yard
parking only along the west side of Riverside Drive south of Benton Street, and
along some portions of Orchard Street and Highway 6.
Figure 2G-12
Subdistrict Locator - West Riverfront
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3287.png]
 
      2.   Uses: The principal uses allowed in the West Riverfront Subdistrict
are the same as allowed in the CB-5 Zone, as specified in section
 14-2C-2,
table 2C-1 of this chapter. Provisions and special exception approval criteria
that apply in the CB-5 Zone also apply in the West Riverfront Subdistrict, as
set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title, except as noted below. In
addition, the following restrictions and allowances shall apply: (Ord. 16-4675,
9-20-2016)
         a.   Household living uses shall be allowed within permitted building
types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. For multi-family uses, the provisions in section
14-4B-4 of this title are superseded by the standards in this article and,
therefore, do not apply. Residential occupancy is limited to one "household"
per dwelling unit, as this term is defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title. The residential occupancy of a household living
use is constrained by the provisions of title 17, chapter 5, "Housing Code", of
this Code. The maximum number of bedrooms per dwelling unit is three (3).
Residential density (units per acre): no maximum. However, for apartment
buildings, multi-dwelling buildings and mixed use buildings the number of
three-bedroom units per lot may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
number of units on the lot; south of Benton Street, the number of three-bedroom
units for these building types may not exceed twenty percent (20%). (Ord. 18-
4744, 4-2-2018)
         b.   Assisted group living uses shall be allowed within permitted
building types as specified in section
14-2G-5 of this article. Residential occupancy is limited to one roomer per
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, not including floor area within
a garage or structured parking area.
         c.   Residential uses are not allowed within required retail
storefronts, as specified in the riverfront crossings regulating plan.
         d.   Outdoor commercial recreational uses shall be allowed by special
exception. The Board of Adjustment may modify subdistrict standards as
appropriate for the specific use.
         e.   Building trade uses shall be allowed, provided all aspects of the
operation are conducted indoors and, except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor
storage of materials and equipment is not allowed.
         f.   Drinking establishments must meet the applicable drinking
establishment spacing requirement.
      3.   Principal Building Placement And Form:
         a.   Building Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall comply with section
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article. The following building
types are permitted in the West Riverfront Subdistrict (see also section 14-2G-
5,
table 2G-6 of this article):
TABLE 2G-4
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES - WEST RIVERFRONT
 
Riverfront   Permitted Building Types
Crossings    Cottage Row             Apartment Multi-   Live-Work Commercial Mixed    Liner    Civic Or
Subdistricts Home    House Townhouse Building  Dwelling Townhouse Building   Use      Building Institutional
                                               Building                      Building          Building
West                X     X         X         X        X         X          X        X        X
riverfront
 
         b.   Building Placement:
            (1)   Principal buildings shall be placed to the front and corner
of lots and aligned along setbacks in compliance with the following
requirements as shown in
 figure 2G-13 of this section, except as allowed in subsections D3b(2), D3b(3),
and D3b(4) of this section.
FIGURE 2G-13
BUILDING PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2618.png]
 
               (A)   Primary (A) and secondary (B) street setback: Ten feet
(10') minimum, twenty feet (20') maximum.
               (B)   Lots fronting on pedestrian streets: Five feet (5')
minimum, ten feet (10') maximum from public right of way or access easement.
Pedestrian streets that provide frontage for buildings located along the
riverfront shall provide a connection through the block between the riverfront
trail and the intersecting public street. See subsection
14-2G-7B of this article for additional requirements.
               (C)   Side setback (C): Ten feet (10') minimum or zero feet (0')
if building abuts or will abut the adjacent building, except for apartment
buildings and multi-dwelling buildings where the minimum is always ten feet
(10'). For mixed use buildings, facades on residential floors must be set back
at least ten feet (10') from the side lot line.
               (D)   Rear setback (D): Ten feet (10') minimum.
               (E)   Above the third floor (or above the second floor if the
height of the first 2 stories is at least 30 feet above grade) the maximum
setback does not apply.
               (F)   Approved forecourt frontages may exceed the maximum
setbacks stated above.
            (2)   Setbacks along the west side of South Riverside Drive south
of Benton Street shall be as shown in the riverfront crossings district master
plan. Building facades shall be aligned along a pedestrianway with abutting
perpendicular parking spaces aligned along a continuous north-south drive
aisle, which allows cross parcel connections among adjacent sites.
            (3)   On lots with double frontages on Sturgis Corner Drive and
South Riverside Drive or Sturgis Corner Drive and Highway 6, Sturgis Corner
Drive shall be considered the primary street frontage. For these lots, there
shall be no maximum building setback along the Riverside Drive and Highway 6
frontages.
            (4)   For lots with double frontages on Orchard Street and
Riverside Drive, there shall be no maximum building setback along the Orchard
Street frontage.
         c.   Building Height And Facade Step Backs:
            (1)   Except as provided below, principal buildings shall be four
(4) stories maximum in height above grade.
               (A)   Principal buildings with frontage on the Iowa River may be
eight (8) stories maximum in height before application of bonus provisions.
               (B)   Additional building height may be granted through transfer
of development rights or through bonus height provisions as set forth in
subsection
14-2G-7G, "Building Height Bonus Provisions", of this article.
            (2)   Above the third floor, building facades facing and visible
from streets, plazas, parks, and single-family residential zones shall step
back ten feet (10') minimum from the lower floor facade.
               (A)   At street corners, tower elements or similar corner
emphasis treatments may be exempt from the step back requirement for up to one
facade bay (maximum 35 feet) as approved by the FBC committee.
               (B)   Buildings with frontage on the Iowa River shall be exempt
from the step back requirement.
               (C)   The required facade step back may be established at a
lower floor than stated above, provided it is established at least thirty feet
(30') in height above grade.
         d.   Building Projections:
            (1)   The following building features may project into setbacks as
follows:
               (A)   Bay windows, eaves, roof overhangs, cornices, belt
courses, buttresses, sills, and other similar features: Two feet (2') maximum.
               (B)   Balconies on upper floors may project up to six feet (6')
into front setbacks. Balconies may project beyond nonstreet-facing facades on
upper floors up to four feet (4') maximum, but shall extend no closer than
eight feet (8') from a side or rear lot line, unless said lot line abuts an
alley or permanent open space.
               (C)   Canopies, awnings, stoops, terraces, covered building
entries, and similar elements as permitted in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
            (2)   Awnings and canopies may also project into public rights of
way according to the applicable provisions of the building code. Certain
permitted signs may also project into public rights of way according to
applicable standards set forth in chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of
this title. Projections into the right of way shall not interfere with
utilities, street trees and other important right of way features.
            (3)   Arcades and galleries projecting beyond ground level street-
facing building facades are not permitted. (An arcade is a facade with an
attached colonnade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway with upper story
building space above. A gallery is a colonnade that is attached to a ground
level facade that projects over the sidewalk/walkway.) Upper floor facades may
not project closer to the streetside property line than the ground level
building facade, except for building features noted above.
         e.   Building And Frontage Types:
            (1)   Principal buildings and building facades shall be designed in
compliance with sections
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", and
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this article.
         f.   Facade Continuity:
            (1)   To define pedestrian friendly streetscapes while maintaining
a lower intensity development character along primary streets, principal
buildings shall occupy a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the primary street
lot frontage.
            (2)   To ensure public access and view corridors to the Iowa River,
buildings located along the riverfront shall occupy no more than seventy five
percent (75%) of the width of the lot as measured along the riverside lot line.
            (3)   Any building that exceeds five (5) stories in height must be
separated from any other building that exceeds five (5) stories in height by a
distance equal to the height of the taller building or one hundred feet (100'),
whichever is less.
      4.   Parking And Service Areas:
         a.   Parking: Parking shall be provided using a permitted parking type
appropriate for the selected building type in compliance with section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article and at the minimum ratios
specified in section
14-5A-4, "Minimum Parking Requirements", of this title.
         b.   Parking, Loading, And Service Area Placement And Screening:
Parking, loading, and service areas shall be located within, behind and to the
side of principal buildings in compliance with the following requirements as
shown in
figure 2G-14 of this section.
FIGURE 2G-14
PARKING AND SERVICE PLACEMENT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2620.png]
 
            (1)   Primary Street And Pedestrian Street Setback (E) And
Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service areas: Thirty feet
(30') minimum from primary street building facade and located behind fully
enclosed, occupied building space.
               (B)   Surface parking located to the side of buildings: Ten feet
(10') minimum from the streetside property line (E') and set back three feet
(3') minimum from the primary street building facade (E) and screened by low
masonry walls and landscaping as specified for S2 standard, alternative
materials (option B), set forth in chapter 5, article F, "Screening And
Buffering Standards", of this title.
               (C)   Along the west side of South Riverside Drive south of
Benton Street, one (1) single loaded aisle of parking is permitted within the
private frontage area. The parking aisle shall be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the front property line and the area between the parking aisle
and the public sidewalk shall be landscaped to the S2 standard. (Ord. 16-4675,
9-20-2016)
               (D)   Building/structured parking: Thirty feet (30') minimum
from the primary street building facade and located behind fully-enclosed,
occupied building space, except the setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20')
for buildings with ground-level residential uses. (Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
               (E)   Underground parking: Zero feet (0') minimum from primary
street building facade.
            (2)   Secondary Street Setback (F) And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service areas along Myrtle
Avenue and Highway 1: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back three feet (3')
minimum from secondary street building facades and screened to the S2 standard.
               (B)   Surface parking, loading, and service areas along Orchard
Street: Ten feet (10') minimum and screened to the S2 standard.
               (C)   Building/structured parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (D)   Underground parking: Ten feet (10') minimum and set back
zero feet (0') minimum from secondary street building facades.
            (3)   Side (G) And Rear (H) Setbacks And Screening:
               (A)   Surface parking, loading, and service area: Five feet (5')
minimum or zero feet (0') where parking is shared with the adjacent property.
Setback area shall be landscaped to the S2 standard.
               (B)   Building/structured parking: Must comply with the same
side and rear setback requirements as principal buildings. Parking must be
screened from view by architecturally finished building facades, according to
the standards for structured parking set forth in subsection
14-5A-5F of this title.
               (C)   Underground parking: Must comply with the same side and
rear setback requirement as principal buildings.
            (4)   Underground Parking: Underground parking shall be designed to
ensure ground floor finished floor elevations meet elevation requirements for
permitted frontage types.
            (5)   Buildings With Ground Floor Residential Use: For buildings
with ground floor residential use, no surface parking shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to any residential portion of a building (i.e., not including
portions of the building containing garage space). This ten foot (10') area
must be used for walkways and landscaping and/or may be included as part of a
larger open space area. If parking spaces are located where headlights of
vehicles shine onto a wall containing ground floor windows, said parking spaces
must be screened from view of the windows to at least the S2 standard.
         c.   Access To Parking And Service Areas:
            (1)   All parking and service areas shall be accessed from public
alleys, private rear lanes or driveways on secondary streets consistent with
the riverfront crossings plan. Limited access to primary streets is allowed
consistent with the riverfront crossings plan. However, in order to improve
traffic circulation upon redevelopment, the city may require closure of
inappropriately located curb cuts in favor of shared access points along the
frontage.
            (2)   FBC committee approval is required for the placement of new
driveway and curb cuts along primary streets. Any request for a curb cut on an
arterial street will be reviewed according to the applicable provisions set
forth in section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this title.
         d.   Construction And Design Standards For Parking And Loading Areas:
            (1)   The following subsections of section
14-5A-5, "Construction And Design Standards", of this title shall apply:
               A.   Purpose.
               B.   Paving materials.
               C.   Parking and stacking space size.
               D.   Drainage.
               E.   Location.
               F.   Standards for structured parking.
               H.   Design and layout of surface parking areas.
               I.   Landscaping and tree requirements within parking areas.
               J.   Screening and setback requirements.
               K.   Design of bicycle parking areas.
      5.   Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 4, article C of this title. However, if the provisions
contained in the riverfront crossings code are more specific or restrictive,
said provisions shall supersede the provisions of chapter 4, article C of this
title.
         b.   Garages and parking structures must be located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of subsection D4, "Parking And Service Areas",
of this section.
         c.   Accessory buildings other than garages and parking structures
must be located behind and to the side of principal buildings according to the
same setback standards as surface parking. Facades of accessory buildings
within public view must be architecturally finished in a manner that is
consistent with the principal building. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 20-
4840, 12-15-2020)
14-2G-4: FRONTAGE TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally: A building's frontage condition, the transition from public
to private space, from indoor to outdoor at the main entrance, the design
treatment of ground floor building facades, the configuration of facade
projections, and the disposition of improvements within required setbacks,
strongly influences the quality and character of public streets and spaces.
All principal buildings in the form based zoning districts shall be designed
with frontage types meeting the requirements of this section. The standards
recognize that different types of buildings, as defined in the building type
standards in section
14-2G-5 of this article, may call for different frontage conditions.
Illustrations within this section are intended to demonstrate basic frontage
type standards and are not intended to promote a particular architectural style
or represent the architectural detail necessary for high quality buildings.
Table 2G-5 of this section identifies which of the frontage types are permitted
in conjunction with each of the building types: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
TABLE 2G-5
PERMITTED FRONTAGE TYPES
Building Permitted Frontage Types
Types    Storefront Urban Flex Terrace Stoop Porch And Yard Portico Forecourt
Building      Permitted Frontage Types
Types         Storefront Urban Flex Terrace Stoop Porch And Portico Forecourt
                                                  Yard
Cottage home                             X     X                 
Row house                         X       X     X                 
Townhouse                         X       X     X                 
Apartment                         X3      X3             X       X1
building
Multi-
dwelling                          X3      X3             X       X1
building
Live-work               X          X       X                      
townhouse
Commercial    X          X                                      X1
building
Mixed-use     X          X          X2,3    X2,3           X2      X1
building
Liner         X          X          X3      X3                     
building
Civic or
institutional           X          X       X              X       X1
building
 
Notes:
   1.    Subordinate frontage type, to be used in conjunction with other
permitted frontage type(s).
   2.    Frontage type may be allowed by the FBC for appropriate horizontal
mixing of uses, e.g., for large mixed use buildings with multiple street
frontages.
   3.   Allowed for access to individual dwelling units or live-work units.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
   B.   Storefront:
      1.   Description: The storefront frontage is the primary frontage type
for buildings with active commercial ground floor uses, such as retail,
personal services, and restaurants; see
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The
frontage provides storefront facades that are typically aligned close to the
streetside property line, with large transparent windows and multiple building
entries at the grade of the fronting sidewalk. The regulating plan indicates
locations where this frontage type is required.
FIGURE 2G-15
STOREFRONT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2622.png]
 
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the public sidewalk and the
building facade shall be designed for additional sidewalk width and other
pedestrian oriented uses, such as plaza space, outdoor patio space for
restaurant and cafe seating, landscaping, public art, or recessed entryways.
         b.   To encourage commercial activity at the street level, private
frontage areas should be seamlessly integrated with and at the same level as
the public sidewalk to the extent possible. With approval of the FBC committee,
on sloping sites in specific locations where there is a desire to provide
usable outdoor space the private frontage area may be slightly raised above
sidewalk grade to create a level plaza or patio area. The elevation of the
raised area shall not exceed the elevation of the ground floor finished floor
(see subsection B2d of this section). A transparent, decorative wrought iron or
similar metal railing may be located at the edge of the raised area if required
for safety, but shall be limited to forty two inches (42") maximum in height.
Opaque railings, fences or walls shall not be permitted. Access to raised areas
shall be provided directly from the sidewalk through steps and/or ramps. The
use of ramps and railings shall be minimized to maintain a seamless transition
from sidewalk to storefront. Transparent, decorative wrought iron or similar
metal fencing/railings not to exceed forty two inches (42") are allowed for
outdoor service areas and sidewalk cafes for eating and drinking
establishments, as approved by the city. Any such fencing/railings for outdoor
service areas and sidewalk cafes must include landscaped planters or planter
boxes along at least fifty percent (50%) of its length.
         c.   A minimum seventy percent (70%) of the area of the ground floor
facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height above adjacent ground level
shall consist of storefront windows and doors. Glazing shall be clear and
highly transparent and individual lites for display windows should be as large
as possible to invite views into the interior space. Transom windows are
encouraged above storefront display windows. Residential window types, closely
spaced mullions, and punched windows are not allowed for storefront frontages.
Reflective (mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Low-E glazing will
reduce transparency, so is discouraged for storefront windows, but if used, the
glass chosen should have a high visible light transmittance and low
reflectivity. Such windows must allow views into the interior space. The bottom
of storefront windows shall be no more than two feet (2') above the adjacent
ground level, except along sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to
the extent possible so that views into the interior are maximized and blank
walls are avoided.
         d.   The ground floor finished floor elevation shall match the
elevation of the abutting public sidewalk or publicly accessible plaza. On
sloping sites the FBC committee may adjust this requirement, provided that the
height of the ground floor of the building is no more than three feet (3')
above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or public pedestrian plaza at
any point along a street-facing facade.
         e.   The ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height shall be
fourteen feet (14') minimum.
         f.   Ground floor building space shall be designed to meet building
code requirements for commercial uses.
         g.   Entries to individual ground floor tenant spaces and entries to
common lobbies accessing upper floor space shall open directly onto public
sidewalks or publicly accessible outdoor plazas. Thresholds at building entries
shall match the grade of the adjacent sidewalk or plaza area.
         h.   Storefront entries shall be recessed a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") and sheltered by awnings or canopies that project a minimum of six feet
(6') from the building facade. Entries must also be distinguished by facade
design, materials, articulation, or other architectural details that provide
relief to the building facade and draw attention to the entrance.
         i.   Awnings or canopies designed to provide weather protection are
required along at least sixty percent (60%) of the street-facing facade and
shall project four feet (4') minimum, eight feet (8') maximum from the front
facade and shall be located eight feet (8') minimum above the adjacent
sidewalk.
   C.   Urban Flex:
      1.   Description: The urban flex frontage is a frontage type appropriate
for buildings with ground floor commercial uses where more flexibility is
desired for nonretail uses, such as offices, institutional uses, building trade
uses, and live-work uses, or along secondary frontages where views into the
interior of the building are not as critical, but where architecturally
finished facades with elements that provide visual interest and comfort to
pedestrians are important. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The
frontage provides ground floor storefront conditions with high proportions of
transparency, but to a lesser degree than the storefront frontage.
FIGURE 2G-16
URBAN FLEX
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2624.png]
 
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the public sidewalk and the
building facade shall be designed for pedestrian oriented uses, such as plaza
space, outdoor patio space for restaurant and cafe seating, landscaping, public
art, or recessed entryways.
         b.   To encourage commercial activity at the street level, private
frontage areas should be seamlessly integrated with and at the same level as
the public sidewalk to the extent possible. With approval of the FBC committee,
on sloping sites in specific locations where there is a desire to provide
usable outdoor space the private frontage area may be slightly raised above
sidewalk grade to create a level plaza or patio area. The elevation of the
raised area shall not exceed the elevation of the ground floor finished floor
(see subsection C2d of this section). A transparent, decorative wrought iron or
similar metal railing may be located at the edge of the raised area if required
for safety, but shall be limited to forty two inches (42") maximum in height.
Opaque railings, fences or walls shall not be permitted. Access to raised areas
shall be provided directly from the sidewalk through steps and/or ramps. The
use of ramps and railings shall be minimized to maintain a seamless transition
from sidewalk to storefront. Transparent, decorative wrought iron or similar
metal fencing/railings not to exceed forty two inches (42") are allowed for
outdoor service areas and sidewalk cafes for eating and drinking
establishments, as approved by the city. Any such fencing/railings for outdoor
service areas and sidewalk cafes must include landscaped planters and/or
planter boxes along at least fifty percent (50%) of its length.
         c.   A minimum fifty percent (50%) of the area of the ground floor
facade between two (2) and ten feet (10') in height above adjacent ground level
shall consist of storefront windows and doors. Glazing shall be clear and
highly transparent. Residential window types, closely spaced mullions, and
punched windows are not allowed for urban flex frontages. Reflective (mirrored)
or colored glass is not permitted. Low-E glazing will reduce transparency, so
is discouraged for storefront windows, but if used, the glass chosen should
have a high visible light transmittance and low reflectivity. Such windows must
allow views into the interior space. The bottom of storefront windows shall be
no more than three feet (3') above the adjacent ground level, except along
sloping sites, where this standard shall be met to the extent possible so that
views into the interior are maximized and blank walls are avoided.
         d.   The ground floor finished floor elevation shall not exceed twelve
inches (12") maximum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk or
publicly accessible plaza. On sloping sites the FBC committee may adjust this
requirement, provided that at least a portion of the ground floor finished
floor elevation is located within twelve inches (12") of the elevation of the
abutting public sidewalk or publicly accessible plaza, views into storefronts
are maximized to the extent possible, and blank walls are avoided.
         e.   The ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height shall be
fourteen feet (14') minimum.
         f.   Ground floor building space shall be designed to meet building
code requirements for commercial uses.
         g.   Entries to ground floor building space and common lobbies
accessing upper floor space shall open directly onto public sidewalks or
publicly accessible outdoor plazas where present, or shall be directly
connected to sidewalks by a paved walkway.
         h.   Thresholds at building entries shall match the grade of adjacent
sidewalks, plaza areas, or paved walkways.
         i.   Building entries shall be recessed a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") and sheltered by awnings or canopies that project a minimum of six feet
(6') from the building facade. Entries must also be distinguished by facade
design, materials, articulation, or other architectural details that provide
relief to the building facade and draw attention to the entrance.
         j.   Awnings and canopies designed to provide weather protection along
frontages are encouraged and may project eight feet (8') maximum from the front
facade and shall be located eight feet (8') minimum above the adjacent
sidewalk.
   D.   Terrace:
      1.   Description: The terrace frontage provides for vertical separation
of building space from sidewalk grade and creates semiprivate outdoor space for
individual dwelling units by elevating and partially enclosing a portion of the
private frontage area. The terrace frontage is suited for ground floor
residential uses in urban settings and may be appropriate for live-work and
institutional uses. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types.
FIGURE 2G-17
TERRACE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3289.png]
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building
facade shall be designed as a raised terrace, which is elevated up to thirty
six inches (36") maximum above grade by a garden wall to provide a semiprivate
outdoor space. The terrace may also be suitable for outdoor seating for live-
work uses.
         b.   A terrace shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10')
maximum beyond the front facade. A terrace may extend along the front facade
for the width of the dwelling unit. The terrace frontage is only allowed for
access to individual dwelling units, individual live-work units, or for
institutional uses. To enhance privacy, adjacent terrace frontages shall be
separated by walls and/or railings, or by a minimum six feet (6') wide
landscaped area.
         c.   Terraces may be hardscaped or landscaped, or a combination of
both. Wood or composite decking shall not be permitted. Where present, any
private frontage area between the terrace and the edge of sidewalk shall be
landscaped, except for walkways leading to the terrace.
         d.   Terraces shall be enclosed by garden walls up to forty two inches
(42") maximum in height above grade. The garden wall's design and materials
shall be of high quality and compatible with the building's architecture. A
decorative, transparent railing or fence, constructed of metal and glass,
wrought iron, or metal faithfully imitating wrought iron, may be affixed atop
the garden walls if additional height is necessary for safety. The railing
height shall not exceed forty two inches (42") maximum above the terrace grade.
Steps or a ramp shall be provided for access to the terrace. Steps and/or ramps
may be perpendicular or parallel to the sidewalk.
         e.   To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished
floor elevation of ground floor residential building space shall be elevated
eighteen inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public
sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade and may be flush with
or slightly elevated above the terrace level.
         f.   Building entries shall be accessed directly from the terrace.
         g.   Landscaping of the terrace may include ground covers, grasses,
garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material shall be of
a variety that will not exceed forty two inches (42") in height at maturity
(except trees) so as not to obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall
be selected to prevent encroachment of the public sidewalk. Thorny plants are
not permitted.
   E.   Stoop:
      1.   Description: The stoop frontage is a frontage type appropriate for
certain buildings with ground floor residential or institutional use. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The stoop
frontage provides for vertical separation of building space from sidewalk grade
and modest projections of stoops and covered entries for individual dwelling
units beyond building facades. The stoop frontage typically is used in
conjunction with shallow setbacks.
FIGURE 2G-18
STOOP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2628.png]
 
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building
facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended
as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas other than
stoop, stair, accessible ramp, and paved walkway are not permitted.
         b.   To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished
floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and
thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
         c.   Stoops shall be provided at the entries of individual units along
front building facades and shall consist of an exterior floor area raised
eighteen inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public
sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to generally match
the interior ground floor finished floor elevation. For buildings with multiple
stoops, or a combination of stoops, porches, and porticoes, a six foot (6')
minimum landscaped area shall be provided between adjacent frontages.
         d.   Stoops shall project four feet (4') minimum, six feet (6')
maximum beyond the front facade and extend five feet (5') minimum, eight feet
(8') maximum along the front facade.
         e.   The exterior stair of a stoop may be perpendicular or parallel to
the sidewalk.
         f.   Landscaping on both sides of the stoop is required. Landscaping
may be at grade or elevated, and may be demarcated by a garden wall up to
twenty four inches (24") in height or a maximum forty two inches (42")
decorative, transparent fence constructed of wrought iron or metal that
faithfully imitates wrought iron. Plants may include ground covers, grasses,
garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material (except
trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground
floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent encroachment of the
public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the
public sidewalk.
   F.   Porch And Yard:
      1.   Description: The porch and yard frontage is a frontage type
appropriate for certain residential buildings. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The porch
and yard frontage provides for vertical separation of building space from
sidewalk grade, projections of usable porches beyond building facades, and is
typically set back from the streetside property line to provide a front yard
area. An optional fence may be built at or close to the property line to
delineate the front yard.
FIGURE 2G-19
PORCH AND YARD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2630.png]
 
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building
facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended
as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas other than
porch, stair, accessible ramps, and paved walkway are not permitted.
         b.   To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished
floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and
thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
         c.   Porches shall be provided at the entries of single- or two-
family dwellings along front building facades and shall consist of an exterior
floor area raised eighteen inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the
abutting public sidewalk, and thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to
generally match the interior ground floor finished floor elevation. For
buildings with multiple porches, or a combination of porches and stoops, a six
foot (6') minimum landscaped area shall be provided between adjacent frontages.
         d.   Porches shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10')
maximum beyond the front facade and extend at least fifty percent (50%) of the
facade width along the front facade.
         e.   An optional fence enclosing the front yard shall not exceed forty
eight inches (48") maximum in height. Fences shall be made of high quality
materials and construction compatible with the building's architecture.
Permitted materials include vertical wood pickets, wood lattice, wrought iron,
and metal that faithfully imitates wrought iron. Fences shall be
semitransparent with maximum fifty percent (50%) opacity. Chainlink or wire
mesh fences are prohibited.
         f.   Front yard landscaping may include ground covers, grasses, garden
plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material (except trees)
shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground floor
windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent encroachment of the public
sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the public
sidewalk.
   G.   Portico:
      1.   Description: The portico frontage is a frontage type appropriate for
certain buildings with ground floor residential use as well as institutional
uses. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The portico
frontage has its building facade aligned close to the streetside property line
with the ground floor elevated above the sidewalk level to provide privacy for
the ground floor windows and is accessed by a covered, generously sized
exterior stairway and landing.
FIGURE 2G-20
PORTICO
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2632.png]
 
      2.   Standards:
         a.   The private frontage area between the sidewalk and the building
facade shall be landscaped with the intent to provide privacy for residents and
attractive landscape for pedestrians. The private frontage area is not intended
as outdoor gathering space (such as patios) and hardscaped areas other than
portico, stair, accessible ramp, and paved walkway are not permitted.
         b.   To provide vertical separation and enhance privacy, the finished
floor elevation of ground floor residential space shall be elevated eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and
thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade.
         c.   Porticoes shall be provided at building entries along front
building facades and shall consist of an exterior floor area raised eighteen
inches (18") minimum above the elevation of the abutting public sidewalk, and
thirty six inches (36") maximum above grade to generally match the interior
ground floor finished floor elevation. Porticoes may provide access to a
central lobby of a multi-unit building or may provide direct access to no more
than two (2) entrances to individual dwelling units.
         d.   Porticoes shall project six feet (6') minimum, ten feet (10')
maximum beyond the front facade and extend ten feet (10') minimum, twenty feet
(20') maximum along the front facade. A flat or pitched roof that is supported
by columns or piers shall extend over the entire portico. Alternatively a flat
metal canopy suspended from support rods or cables may extend over the entirety
of the portico. For buildings with multiple porticoes, or a combination of
stoops and porticoes, a six foot (6') minimum landscaped area shall be provided
between adjacent frontages.
         e.   Landscaping on both sides of the portico is required. Landscaping
may be at grade or elevated, and may be demarcated by a garden wall up to
twenty four inches (24") in height or a maximum forty two inches (42")
decorative, transparent fence constructed of wrought iron or metal that
faithfully imitates wrought iron. Plants may include ground covers, grasses,
garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant material (except
trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not obstruct ground
floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent encroachment of the
public sidewalk. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of the
public sidewalk.
   H.   Forecourt:
      1.   Description: The forecourt frontage is a subordinate frontage type
intended for use in combination with one or more of the above permitted
frontage types. See
table 2G-5 of this section to determine appropriate building types. The
forecourt frontage is created by setting back the central portion of the
building facade to create an entry plaza or green that is surrounded by
building facades on three (3) sides. Forecourts at corners are not permitted.
FIGURE 2G-21
FORECOURT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2634.png]
      2.   Standards:
         a.   Forecourts shall be twenty feet (20') minimum in depth and width,
however, neither dimension shall exceed 1.5 times the other dimension. In
addition, the width of a forecourt shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the
overall facade width.
         b.   Forecourts may provide access to a central lobby of a larger
building or may provide access to multiple uses through individual entrances.
Depending on ground floor uses, forecourts may be appropriate for either
semiprivate or public uses, such as outdoor cafes, gardens, public art, or
fountains.
         c.   The forecourt may be hardscaped or landscaped, or a combination
thereof, and may be elevated twenty four inches (24") maximum above the
elevation of the public sidewalk to maintain visual connectivity between the
forecourt and the public sidewalk. If elevated, steps and/or ramps shall be
provided to directly connect the forecourt with the adjacent sidewalk.
         d.   Garden walls twenty four inches (24") maximum in height may be
used to separate the forecourt from the public sidewalk while maintaining
visual connectivity. The garden wall's design and materials shall be high
quality and compatible with the building's architecture.
         e.   Where landscaped areas are provided, plants may include ground
covers, grasses, garden plants, low shrubs, and ornamental trees. All plant
material (except trees) shall be of a variety whose height at maturity will not
obstruct ground floor windows. Plant material shall be selected to prevent
encroachment of the public sidewalk or walkways necessary to gain access to the
building. Thorny plants are not permitted within three feet (3') of public
sidewalks or walkways necessary to gain access to the building.
         f.   Other design standards required for the primary frontage types
shall apply. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-5: BUILDING TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally: The building type standards differentiate and define a range
of principal building typologies deemed appropriate for the Riverfront
Crossings District and the Eastside Mixed Use District. The building types
describe basic building configuration and massing, pedestrian access, vehicle
access, and parking specific to each typology. The standards are intended to
complement the subdistrict standards and frontage type standards set forth in
previous sections. Illustrations are intended to demonstrate basic building
type standards, and are not intended to promote a particular architectural
style or represent the architectural detail necessary for high quality
buildings. In the event of conflicting requirements the more stringent
requirement shall control.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies which of the building types are allowed
in each of the subdistricts: (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
TABLE 2G-6
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
Permitted Form-Based Zoning Districts
Building  South         South              Central           West       Eastside
Types     Downtown Park Gilbert University Crossings Gilbert Riverfront Mixed    Orchard
                                                                        Use
Permitted     Form-Based Zoning Districts
Building      South         South              Central           West       Eastside
Types         Downtown Park Gilbert University Crossings Gilbert Riverfront Mixed    Orchard
                                                                            Use
Cottage home                                             X                  X        X
Rowhouse                                                 X       X          X        X
Townhouse              X    X                  X         X       X          X        X
Apartment     X        X    X       X          X         X       X          X        X
building
Multi-
dwelling      X        X    X       X          X         X       X          X        X
building
Live-work              X    X       X          X         X       X          X        X2
townhouse
Commercial    X        X    X       X          X         X       X          X1
building
Mixed-use     X        X    X       X          X         X       X          X1
building
Liner         X        X    X       X          X         X       X                   X
building
Civic or
institutional X        X    X       X          X         X       X          X
building
 
Notes:
   1.   Only allowed on properties with frontage on Van Buren Street or
Burlington Street.
   2.    Only allowed on properties with frontage on Orchard Street.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017)
   B.   Cottage Home:
      1.   Description: The cottage home is a detached single-family house on a
fee simple lot. The cottage home provides a semiprivate front yard and a
private back yard. Garages are located in the rear yards, accessed either from
an alley or by narrow driveways between adjacent cottage homes.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-22
COTTAGE HOME (ALLEY ACCESS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2636.png]
 
FIGURE 2G-23
COTTAGE HOME (DRIVEWAY ACCESS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2638.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed of one-, one and a half-, or two-
story volumes.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   The main entrance shall be located within the facade and shall be
accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a garage located in the rear yard
behind the principal building. Garages may be detached, attached to the
principal building, or connected to the principal building by a covered or
enclosed breezeway.
         b.   Vehicular access shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Where a public alley or private rear lane is present garages
shall be accessed from the alley or rear lane.
            (2)   Where no rear access is possible, garages shall be accessed
through maximum ten feet (10') wide driveways accessed from the front of the
lot between adjacent cottage homes. Shared driveways between adjacent lots are
encouraged.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   C.   Row House:
      1.   Description: The row house is a single-family unit that shares
common walls with one or two (2) of the adjacent units. A row house may be
located on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multi-unit development.
The row house provides a semiprivate front yard and a private back yard.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-24
ROW HOUSE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2642.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-
story volumes.
         b.   Groups of row houses may consist of two (2) to six (6) attached
units.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   The main entrance shall be located within the facade and shall be
accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a garage, which may be detached or
attached to the principal building.
         b.   Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane
and shall not face the street.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   D.   Townhouse:
      1.   Description: The townhouse is a single-family unit that shares
common walls with one or two (2) of the adjacent units. A townhouse may be
located on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multi-unit development.
The townhouse provides a semiprivate front yard but no private back yard.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-25
TOWNHOUSE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2640.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-
story volumes.
         b.   Groups of townhouses may consist of two (2) to ten (10) units.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Entrances to each dwelling shall be located within the facade and
shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type. See
section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a garage attached to or tucked under
the unit at the rear.
         b.   Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane
and shall not face the street.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   E.   Apartment Building:
      1.   Description: The apartment building is designed to be occupied by
multiple dwelling units configured as a double loaded corridor building. The
apartment building is oriented perpendicular to the primary street frontage and
sits atop an underground parking garage whose bay width determines the building
width.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-26
APARTMENT BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2644.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed of two-, three-, or four-story (where
permitted) volumes.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   The main entrance to the apartment building shall be located
within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an
allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   Access to dwelling units shall be from a shared lobby located at
the main entrance with entrances to each dwelling unit provided through central
corridors. Exterior corridors and exterior stairways to upper floor dwelling
units are not permitted.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in an underground structure located
beneath the building footprint. The underground structure shall be designed so
that the finished floor elevation of the residential space above matches the
elevation of the frontage type (see section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article).
         b.   Additional surface parking may be located to the rear of the
building.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   F.   Multi-Dwelling Building:
      1.   Description: The multi-dwelling building is designed to be occupied
by multi-family dwelling units or group living uses. The multi-dwelling
building may be arranged in a variety of configurations, including bar, L, U
and C shapes. A multi- dwelling building may be configured around a courtyard
providing private outdoor space, or may be part of a larger development with
multiple buildings configured around a common courtyard.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-27
MULTI-DWELLING BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2646.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable
subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back
requirements.
         b.   Courtyards shall have no dimension less than twenty feet (20')
and shall be designed with appropriate landscaping and/or hardscaping to
provide a safe and attractive outdoor space for residents of the building.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   The main entrance to the multi-dwelling building shall be located
within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through an
allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   Access to dwelling units shall be from a shared lobby located at
the main entrance with entrances to each dwelling unit provided through shared
corridors. Exterior corridors and exterior stairways to upper floor dwelling
units are not permitted.
         c.   Ground floor dwelling units fronting on a street may also have a
separate entrance directly from the street through an allowed frontage type.
However, the scale and design of entrances to individual units shall be such
that the entrance to the shared lobby is clearly recognizable as the building's
main entrance.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a surface lot in the rear, an
underground structure, an above grade midblock structure, an integrated
structure contained within the base of the building, or a combination thereof.
         b.   Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be
separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This
space shall be landscaped to screen the parking structure and may contain an
alley or private rear lane providing vehicular access to the structure.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   G.   Live-Work Townhouse:
      1.   Description: The live-work townhouse is designed to be occupied by a
single dwelling unit and a single ground floor commercial or flex space. The
live-work townhouse shares common walls with one or two (2) adjacent units and
may be located on a separate fee simple lot or be part of a multi-unit
development.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-28
LIVE-WORK TOWNHOUSE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2648.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed of two-, two and a half-, or three-
story volumes.
         b.   Groups of live-work townhouses may consist of two (2) to ten (10)
units.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Entrances to ground floor commercial or flex space shall be
located within the facade and shall be accessed directly from a street through
an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   Entrances to each dwelling unit shall be provided through a
separate street level entrance or through a foyer shared with the commercial
space.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a garage attached to or tucked under
the unit at the rear, and/or a surface lot located behind the building.
         b.   Garage doors must be oriented to an alley or private rear lane
and shall not face the street.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   H.   Commercial Building:
      1.   Description: Commercial buildings are designed for occupancy by one
or more nonresidential uses. If present, uses generating visitor or customer
traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal services) are typically located
on the ground floor facing the sidewalk.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-29
COMMERCIAL BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2650.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable
subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back
requirements.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   For buildings occupied by a single user: The main entrance to a
lobby shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street
through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   For buildings occupied by multiple uses: Entrances to ground
floor commercial spaces shall be located within the facade and shall be
accessed from a street through an allowed frontage type. Entrances to upper
floor commercial space shall be through a street level lobby and/or interior
corridors accessed from the street through a separate entrance.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground structure,
above grade midblock structure, tuck under parking, or a combination thereof.
         b.   Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be
separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This
space may contain an alley or private rear lane.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   I.   Mixed Use Building:
      1.   Description: Mixed use buildings are designed for occupancy by a
minimum of two (2) different uses that may be vertically and/or horizontally
demised. If present, uses generating visitor or customer traffic (such as
retail, restaurants, personal services, live-work commercial space) are
typically located on the ground floor facing the sidewalk, whereas uses
generating limited pedestrian activity (such as office or residential) are
typically located on upper floors or behind street fronting commercial uses.
Residential uses are not allowed in street-facing storefront spaces unless
designed as live-work space.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-30
MIXED USE BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2652.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Buildings shall be composed in accordance with the applicable
subdistrict standards with respect to building height and step back
requirements.
         b.   Courtyards shall have no dimension less than twenty feet (20')
and shall be designed with appropriate landscaping and/or hardscaping to
provide a safe and attractive outdoor space.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Entrances to ground floor commercial spaces shall be located
within the facade and shall be accessed from a street through an allowed
frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   Entrances to upper floor commercial space or dwelling units shall
be through a street level lobby and/or interior corridors accessed from the
street through a separate entrance.
         c.   Entrances to live-work residential space may be provided directly
from the live-work commercial space.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground structure,
above grade midblock structure, an integrated structure contained within the
base of the building, or a combination thereof in accordance with the parking
type standards. See section
14-2G-6,
table 2G-7 of this article.
         b.   Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall be
separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This
space may contain an alley or private rear lane.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   J.   Liner Building:
      1.   Description: A liner building is a shallow building designed and
placed in a manner that hides a parking structure from public view and provides
for more active, pedestrian oriented building uses along a street frontage.
Liner buildings are oriented toward the street with no or minimal openings to
the rear. The parking structure in the rear may be attached to the liner
building, or slightly detached as required for fire separation. The liner
building may be occupied by a single use or a mix of uses. If present, uses
generating visitor or customer traffic (such as retail, restaurants, personal
services) are typically located on the ground floor facing the sidewalk,
whereas uses generating lower pedestrian activity (such as office or
residential) are typically located on upper floors. The liner building may also
include live-work units, and townhouse units.
Table 2G-6 of this section identifies the subdistricts where this building type
is permitted.
FIGURE 2G-31
LINER BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2654.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   A liner building shall be at least tall enough to visually screen
the parking structure behind the building.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Entrances to ground floor uses shall be located within the facade
and shall be accessed directly from a street through an allowed frontage type.
See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   Entrances to upper floor commercial space or dwelling units shall
be through a street level lobby and/or interior corridors accessed directly
from the street.
         c.   Entrances to live-work residential lofts may be provided directly
from the live-work commercial space through internal stairs.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   Parking shall be provided in a parking structure located behind
the liner building.
         b.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
   K.   Civic Or Institutional Building:
      1.   Description: Civic or institutional buildings are designed for
occupancy by public or quasi-public uses that provide important services to the
community. A civic or institutional building contributes significantly to the
quality of a place and often is the focal point of a public open space and
built with high quality materials and architectural design. Civic or
institutional buildings may be publicly owned and operated (e.g., city hall,
post office, school, courthouse), semipublic (YMCA, Boys And Girls Club,
museum), or privately owned and operated (e.g., church, daycare center, private
school).
FIGURE 2G-32
CIVIC OR INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2656.png]
 
      2.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Civic or institutional buildings may be designed as freestanding
buildings in a public space or integrated into the urban fabric, as deemed
appropriate for their use and context.
         b.   Civic or institutional buildings that are integrated into the
urban fabric should generally be composed in accordance with the applicable
subdistrict standards with respect to setbacks, building height, and step back
requirements. However, the FBC committee may approve exceptions under the
following circumstances:
            (1)   To accommodate architectural elements integral to the
building design that contribute to public realm, such as a tower or steeple, or
an entry plaza.
            (2)   To accommodate appropriate civic or institutional uses that
cannot feasibly be accommodated within the building envelope permitted in the
applicable subdistrict.
         c.   Freestanding civic or institutional buildings may be located
within a public or publicly accessible park or plaza and are exempt from the
maximum setback requirements of the applicable subdistrict. However,
freestanding buildings shall be designed with four (4) building facades of
equal architectural quality.
      3.   Primary Pedestrian Access:
         a.   For buildings occupied by a single user: The main entrance to a
lobby shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a street
through an allowed frontage type. See section
14-2G-4,
table 2G-5 of this article.
         b.   For buildings occupied by multiple uses: The building may provide
either a shared entrance with street level lobby, or separate entrances. All
entrances shall be located within the facade and shall be accessed from a
street through allowed frontage types.
         c.   Freestanding civic or institutional buildings shall provide
pedestrian access from at least two (2) sides.
      4.   Vehicle Parking:
         a.   For freestanding civic or institutional buildings:
            (1)   Vehicular access shall be limited to service and emergency
vehicle access, provided through pedestrian walkways of sufficient width and
construction.
            (2)   Parking shall be provided on street. Shared off street
parking may be provided remotely in a lot or structure.
         b.   For civic or institutional buildings integrated into the urban
fabric:
            (1)   Parking may be provided in a surface lot, underground
structure, above grade midblock structure, an integrated structure contained
within the base of the building, or a combination thereof in accordance with
the parking type standards. See section
14-2G-6,
table 2G-7 of this article.
            (2)   Where present, above grade midblock parking structures shall
be separated from the principal building by at minimum forty feet (40'). This
space may contain an alley or private rear lane.
         c.   Refer to section
14-2G-6, "Parking Type Standards", of this article for additional requirements.
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-6: PARKING TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally: The parking type standards describe the allowed off street
parking options and determine their basic design requirements. Additional
requirements are set forth in the subdistrict standards and building type
standards of this article. The images herein are intended to illustrate typical
conditions. The actual design and configuration of a parking facility may vary.
Table 2G-7 of this section identifies which of the parking types are allowed in
conjunction with each of the building types:
TABLE 2G-7
PERMITTED PARKING TYPES
Building Permitted Parking Types
Types    Garage Tuck Under Surface Midblock  Lined     Integrated Underground
                Parking    Lot     Structure Structure Structure  Structure
              Permitted Parking Types
Building             Tuck    Surface Midblock  Lined     Integrated Underground
Types         Garage Under   Lot     Structure Structure Structure  Structure
                     Parking
Cottage home  X
Row house     X
Townhouse     X      X
Apartment                    X                           X          X
building
Multi-
dwelling                     X       X                   X          X
building
Live-work     X      X       X
townhouse
Commercial           X       X       X                   X          X
building
Mixed use                    X       X                   X          X
building
Liner                                          X
building
Civic or
institutional        X       X       X         X         X          X
building
 
   B.   Garage: Garages provide private, enclosed parking spaces for individual
dwelling units. Garages shall be located behind the principal building and may
be attached to it, connected through a breezeway, or detached.
FIGURE 2G-33
GARAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2658.png]
 
   C.   Tuck Under Parking: Tuck under parking provides covered and enclosed
parking spaces located at the rear of a building. Tuck under parking may be
combined with other parking types and works particularly well on properties
that slope away from the primary street right of way and where a residential
dwelling must be elevated above a flood hazard area.
FIGURE 2G-34
TUCK UNDER PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2660.png]
 
   D.   Surface Lot: Surface lots provide uncovered, at grade parking spaces.
Surface lots shall be located according to the rules set forth in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article.
FIGURE 2G-35
SURFACE LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2662.png]
 
   E.   Midblock Structure: Midblock structures are freestanding parking
structures located in the center of a larger block. Midblock structures shall
be set back from adjacent buildings by at least forty feet (40') to provide
sufficient light and privacy for commercial or residential uses facing the
block interior. This setback may accommodate an alley, private rear lane, and/
or rear yards.
FIGURE 2G-36
MIDBLOCK STRUCTURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2666.png]
 
   F.   Lined Structure: Lined structures are parking structures located behind
shallow liner buildings that are oriented solely toward the street. Lined
structures may be directly attached to the liner building or detached by a
minimal fire separation distance. Lined structures shall be limited to a height
that is adequately screened from public view by the associated liner building.
FIGURE 2G-37
LINED STRUCTURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2664.png]
 
   G.   Integrated Structure: Integrated structures are parking structures
located within an occupied building. Integrated structures may be fully or
partially integrated into the building.
FIGURE 2G-38
INTEGRATED STRUCTURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2668.png]
 
   H.   Underground Structure: Underground structures are parking structures
located below grade. Underground structures may be combined with other
aboveground parking types.
FIGURE 2G-39
UNDERGROUND STRUCTURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2670.png]
 
(Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
14-2G-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Streetscape And Frontage Area Improvements:
      1.   The area within the public right of way between existing or planned
curb lines and the streetside property line shall be improved for pedestrian
circulation, streetscape amenities, and landscape space consistent with
provisions of the riverfront crossings district master plan and the city's
sidewalk standards and tree requirements. In the riverfront crossings and
eastside mixed use districts, street trees shall be planted in the public right
of way between the public sidewalk and street curb, according to the tree
species and planting specifications of the city forester. One overstory tree is
required for every thirty feet (30') of lot frontage, but not less than one
tree per lot. Smaller trees may be approved by the FBC committee in locations
where overstory trees would interfere with overhead utilities. If any of these
provisions conflict, the more specific standard shall apply.
      2.   The private frontage area, which is the area between the property
line and the plane of any street-facing building facade, shall be improved
consistent with section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article. Within the private
frontage area, outdoor storage and work areas, mechanical equipment, accessory
buildings, or other improvements that detract from the quality of the
pedestrian environment are prohibited. The placement of walls and fencing shall
comply with the applicable frontage type standards. In the west riverfront
subdistrict the private frontage area may differ as described in the
subdistrict standards.
      3.   All areas of the site that are not used for buildings, parking,
vehicular and pedestrian use areas shall be landscaped with trees and/or plant
materials. A landscaping plan for such areas must be submitted at the time of
site plan review.
FIGURE 2G-40
STREETSCAPE AND FRONTAGE AREA IMPROVEMENTS - TYPICAL NONRESIDENTIAL FRONTAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2672.png]
 
FIGURE 2G-41
STREETSCAPE AND FRONTAGE AREA IMPROVEMENTS - TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL FRONTAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2676.png]
 
   B.   Pedestrian Streets:
      1.   Buildings may front on a pedestrian street, where provided, in
compliance with the requirements in sections
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", and 14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of
this article. In such a case, the pedestrian street is considered a primary
street, and as such, all provisions of this article that apply to primary
streets shall also apply to pedestrian streets. In cases where a pedestrian
street is illustrated on the regulating plan as a primary street and for
Ralston Creek frontages illustrated on the regulating plan, a pedestrian street
is required, and must be designed according to the following standards. In the
case of a Ralston Creek frontage, the required stream corridor buffer may be
included in the required pedestrian street right of way or public access
easement.
      2.   Pedestrian streets shall be designed to meet the following
standards:
         a.   Public Pedestrian Street:
            (1)   Public pedestrian streets shall be located within a public
right of way and function like a street, but be limited to nonmotorized
traffic.
            (2)   Buildings shall front on and be accessed from the public
pedestrian street through an allowed frontage type.
            (3)   Public pedestrian streets shall be at least forty feet (40')
in width and intersect with, be perpendicular to and visible from a public
street right of way and be owned by a government entity. Additional right of
way width may be required beyond the minimum based on location and the amount
of pedestrian traffic anticipated.
            (4)   Public pedestrian streets may provide for pedestrian travel
through a block to other neighborhood destinations, such as parks, riverfront
areas, trails, schools, and neighborhood commercial areas.
         b.   Private Pedestrian Street:
            (1)   Private pedestrian streets shall be designed as publicly
accessible thoroughfares that function like residential streets but are limited
to nonmotorized traffic.
            (2)   Residential buildings shall front on and be accessed from the
private pedestrian street through an allowed frontage type.
            (3)   A private pedestrian street shall be established through a
shared public access easement that shall be at minimum thirty feet (30') wide
and intersect with, be perpendicular to and visible from a public street right
of way.
         c.   Ralston Creek Frontages:
            (1)   The required thirty foot (30') stream corridor buffer shall
serve as the pedestrian street right of way or public access easement and shall
function like a street, but is limited to nonmotorized traffic.
            (2)   Buildings shall front on and be accessed from the pedestrian
street through an allowed frontage type.
            (3)   The required public trail may serve as a sidewalk that
provides access to building frontages. In addition, a separate sidewalk may be
constructed on a raised terrace along the building frontages to provide better
access to residential units that are elevated above the flood hazard level.
         d.   General Standards: A creative and unique streetscape along the
pedestrian street is encouraged based on the type and scale of the buildings
along the frontage and the amount of pedestrian traffic anticipated.
Streetscape design shall be approved by the FBC committee and must meet the
following minimum standards:
            (1)   To ensure public safety, pedestrian scale lighting is
required along any pedestrian street per city requirements as determined by the
FBC committee.
            (2)   Depending on the location and the design of the development,
provision for emergency vehicle access may be required. If required, a central
paved pathway must be provided that is at least twenty feet (20') wide and
remains free of obstructions.
            (3)   Each pedestrian street, except for Ralston Creek frontages
and pedestrian streets that require a central twenty foot (20') fire lane,
shall include at least two (2), minimum six foot (6') wide public sidewalks
separated by a central green space. For pedestrian streets that exclusively
serve residential building types, one centrally located minimum ten foot (10')
sidewalk flanked by green space may be approved by the FBC committee. See
subsection B2c of this section for sidewalk requirements for Ralston Creek
frontages.
            (4)   Street trees must be planted at the same ratio as required
for a regular street right of way, although trees may be clustered or spaced
according to the streetscape design plan approved by the FBC committee.
            (5)   Any areas that are not intended for pedestrian pathways shall
be landscaped or used for pedestrian amenities, bicycle parking, seating areas,
public art, sidewalk cafe seating, and similar. Landscaped areas may be
designed to provide stormwater conveyance.
   C.   Pedestrian Passageways:
      1.   For buildings with nonresidential uses and facades longer than two
hundred feet (200') along a primary street, publicly accessible pedestrian
passageways from primary streets to and through the interior of the block are
required to provide pedestrian access from parking areas at the rear of
buildings to street frontages.
      2.   Passageways shall be designed to meet the following standards:
         a.   Passageways shall be twenty feet (20') minimum in width and
twelve feet (12') minimum in height;
         b.   Upper floors may continue over the passageway. Open air
passageways are also allowed;
         c.   Passageways should be designed to preclude normal vehicular
access and preferably be separate from other emergency vehicle accessways to
the interior of the block;
         d.   If a pedestrian passageway is provided in conjunction with a
midblock driveway, the pedestrian walkway shall be separated from vehicular
traffic by raising and curbing the walkway. Bollards and/or landscaping may
also be required to improve safety in high traffic volume situations;
         e.   Pedestrian passageways serving projects with ground floor
residential use may be for the sole use of building tenants and secured with
gates;
         f.   To ensure safe and secure use, passageways shall be designed to
provide clear lines of sight, little or no variation in enclosing wall planes,
adequate light levels, and shall be kept clean and clear of debris.
   D.   Street Screens:
      1.   Where street screens are required in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article, a wall that meets the
following standards shall be built for the purpose of enhancing security or for
screening a parking lot or side yard area from public view.
      2.   Street screens shall be designed to meet the following standards:
         a.   Street screens shall be constructed coplanar with or recessed
maximum two feet (2') from the street-facing facade.
         b.   Street screens shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height but
shall not exceed the height of the ground floor facade.
         c.   Street screens shall be constructed of masonry or other high
quality wall material complementary to the adjacent building facade. A
decorative wrought iron or metal fence that faithfully imitates wrought iron
may be approved by the FBC committee, provided the intended purpose of the
street screen is achieved.
         d.   Street screens may have openings for approved driveways and
pedestrian passageways.
         e.   Street screens over fifteen feet (15') in length shall be
articulated and/or be enhanced by landscaping to provide visual interest along
the street frontage.
   E.   Open Space Requirement For Projects With Residential Use:
      1.   On lots that contain multi-dwelling buildings, apartment buildings,
and/or mixed use buildings that contain multi-family or group living uses,
usable open space shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of ten (10) square
feet per bedroom, but not less than four hundred (400) square feet, according
to the standards set forth in this subsection.
      2.   For the purpose of this section, "open space" is defined as having
the following characteristics:
         a.   Open air, outdoor space accessible for shared use by occupants of
residential units on the property, except as allowed for indoor activity space,
as noted below;
         b.   Designed to preserve privacy for individual dwelling units;
         c.   Improved to support passive recreation, leisure activities and
informal gathering;
         d.   Includes amenities such as seating, shade trees, planters,
gardens, and/or other improvements to support passive recreation or leisure
activities;
         e.   Located in one or more clearly defined, compact areas, with each
area not less than four hundred (400) square feet, with no dimension less than
twenty feet (20') and no slope greater than ten percent (10%);
         f.   Separated and buffered from vehicular use areas through the use
of landscaping and/or garden walls or fencing.
      3.   Paved areas and bicycle parking areas shall not be counted toward
usable open space, except that paved paths no wider than five feet (5') and
pervious pavement designed exclusively for passive outdoor recreation may be
included within the defined open space area.
      4.   Private frontage areas may not count toward the open space
requirement, except for forecourts, as noted below.
      5.   Shared garden and patio space located on upper floor terraces,
rooftops or podiums (on the top level of a parking garage) shall count toward
the open space requirement, provided these areas are designed with green
features, such as planters or functional green roofs, contain outdoor seating
and other appropriate amenities, are free of any obstructions, screened from
rooftop mechanical equipment, and are improved and available for safe and
convenient access to all residential occupants of the building. Security and
close monitoring of any such space is required to ensure the safety of
residents and the public. The city reserves the right to restrict or close such
a space and require the owner to pay a fee in lieu if such space is deemed a
public hazard or nuisance.
      6.   A forecourt meeting the standards above shall count toward the open
space requirements, provided:
         a.   It complies with the forecourt frontage type standards in section
14-2G-4 of this article;
         b.   It is square or rectangular in form with a minimum side dimension
of twenty feet (20') and no side greater than 1.5 times the dimension of
another side;
         c.   It includes amenities such as seating, shade trees, planters,
gardens, and/or other improvements to support passive recreation or leisure
activities;
         d.   Its elevation is not lower than grade or higher than the ground
floor finished floor elevation.
      7.   Indoor activity space may count for up to fifty percent (50%) of the
required open space, provided the indoor activity space meets the following
requirements:
         a.   The space is accessible for shared use by occupants of
residential units on the property;
         b.   It is designed to preserve privacy for individual dwelling units;
         c.   It is improved to support recreation and leisure activities and
informal gathering and as such is separate and distinguishable from entry
areas, storage areas, mailroom, and other areas not devoted to recreation and
leisure activities;
         d.   Each indoor activity area is not less than two hundred twenty
five (225) square feet, with no dimension less than fifteen feet (15');
         e.   A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the combined surface area of
all the walls is transparent and at least one wall is an exterior wall with
minimum forty percent (40%) window coverage. If located on the top floor,
transparent skylights may be counted toward the transparency requirement.
      8.   The payment of a fee in lieu of providing the required usable open
space may be requested by the developer in cases where there is practical
difficulty meeting the standards. A fee in lieu of the open space requirement
may be requested according to the following procedures and requirements:
         a.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the open space requirement must
be met on site, either as usable outdoor space and/or as indoor activity area
meeting the minimum dimensional requirements as stated above, unless the lot
contains residential development of twenty (20) or fewer bedrooms. In such a
case, up to one hundred percent (100%) of the open space requirement may be
satisfied with a payment in lieu;
         b.   The developer must request payment in lieu of open space at the
time of site plan review;
         c.   The fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit;
         d.   The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land that
otherwise would have been required for the open space. The fair market value of
the land shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser who is
acceptable to both the city and the developer. The appraisal cost shall be
borne by the developer.
         e.   All such fees shall be deposited in either the riverfront
crossings district east (for properties located east of the Iowa River), the
riverfront crossings district west (for properties located west of the Iowa
River), or the eastside mixed use open space account. All payments will be used
to acquire or develop public open spaces, parks, recreation facilities and
greenways/trails that are located within the applicable riverfront crossings
open space district. For the eastside mixed use district funds shall be used
within the central planning district - subarea A.
   F.   Building Design Standards:
      1.   Facade Composition:
         a.   Building facades shall be designed with a base, middle, and top,
as illustrated in
 figure 2G-42 of this section. The ground floor facade, or in the case of
taller buildings the facade of the first few stories, composes the base. The
building elements and features above or including the uppermost occupied floor,
including parapet walls and eaves, compose the top. The top of buildings shall
be delineated with some form of cornice expression, either with trim material,
brackets and panels, eave details, or accentuated masonry. The base of a
building shall be distinguished from the middle through the use of string
courses, cornice expression, or installation of awnings or canopies. Where the
exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane of the building, the
materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a belt course,
soldier course, band board or other trim appropriate to the building materials
being used.
         b.   To break up building facades along street frontages, facades
shall be divided vertically into bays, as illustrated in
 figure 2G-42 of this section. Facade bays shall be twenty feet (20') minimum
and thirty five feet (35') maximum in width and establish a rhythm of vertical
modules unified by a complementary rhythm of windows and window groupings.
Facade bays shall be distinguished by varying fenestration patterns, recessing
wall planes, varying building materials, or establishing a rhythm of
architectural elements such as pilasters or window bays. Where the exterior
wall material changes along the horizontal plane of a building, the change must
occur on an inside corner of the building wall. In the eastside mixed use
district, the standard in subsection F1d of this section applies instead of
this standard.
         c.   To avoid flat, continuous, and overly long upper floor facades,
the maximum length of an upper floor facade shall be fifty feet (50').
Articulation between continuous upper floor facade sections shall be
accomplished by recessing the facade two feet (2') minimum for a distance of at
least ten feet (10') along rear and side facades and three feet (3') minimum
for a distance of at least ten feet (10') along front facades, as illustrated
in
figure 2G-42 of this section. If an upper story facade is recessed more than
five feet (5'), said distance shall be increased to at least twenty feet (20').
If balconies are constructed within the recessed area, the distance between the
outside edges of any balconies that face each other across the recessed area
shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18'). In the eastside mixed use district,
the standard in subsection F1d of this section applies instead of this
standard.
         d.   In the eastside mixed use district, building facades greater than
forty feet (40') in width must be broken into modules that give the appearance
of smaller, individual buildings, as illustrated in
 figure 2G-42B of this section. Each module must meet the following standards.
In no case shall a mixed use building, commercial building, multi-dwelling
building or apartment building be greater than sixty feet (60') in width along
primary street frontages unless designed as a building with a landscaped
forecourt frontage and building wings that do not exceed sixty feet (60') in
width along primary street frontages, as approved by the FBC committee.
            (1)   Each module must be no greater than thirty feet (30') and no
less than ten feet (10') in width and must be distinguished from adjacent
modules by a variation in the wall plane of at least two feet (2') in depth
along rear and side facades and at least three feet (3') in depth along front
facades.
            (2)   Each module must have a corresponding change in the roofline.
            (3)   As appropriate to the chosen architectural style of the
building, each module must be distinguished from the adjacent module by at
least one of the following means: variation in material colors, types, or
textures; variation in the building and/or parapet height; variation in the
architectural details such as decorative banding, reveals, stone, or tile
accents; variation in window pattern; variation in the use of balconies,
recesses, or bay windows.
         e.   Architectural style in the eastside mixed use district: Buildings
must be designed in a manner that is consistent with a historic architectural
style typical of residential buildings in the central planning district.
However, building facades that are visible only from public alleys are not
subject to these standards. The applicable architectural styles are as follows:
Italianate; Queen Anne; colonial revival; craftsman; craftsman bungalow;
American foursquare; prairie style; period revival; and eclectic. The applicant
must indicate in detail how each of the following architectural elements in the
proposed building are consistent with one of these architectural styles:
            (1)   Form and mass of the building;
            (2)   Roof configuration and pitch;
            (3)   Style and placement of windows and doors;
            (4)   Window and door trim, eave boards, frieze boards, and other
trim;
            (5)   Porch and entrance features;
            (6)   Building details and ornamentation.
         f.   To create a seamless transition between the facades of a building
at a street corner, both street-facing facades shall be designed with equal
architectural quality and detail as illustrated in
figure 2G-43 of this section. Buildings shall reinforce street corners by
repeating facade elements such as signs, awnings and window and wall treatments
on both sides of the building facing the corner. Additional corner emphasis
with chamfered or rounded facades, corner entries accentuated through changes
in design treatments, materials, canopy projections, roof or parapet forms, or
through other architectural method is encouraged on street corners. Where
additional corner emphasis is provided that extends vertically to the top of
the building, the upper floor step back requirement may be waived or adjusted
by the FBC committee.
         g.   For any exterior building wall that faces a street, park,
forecourt, plaza, public trail, the Iowa River or Ralston Creek, a minimum of
twenty five percent (25%) of said wall between the ground floor and the top of
the wall shall be comprised of doors and transparent windows, with the
following exceptions:
            (1)   For buildings with storefront and urban flex frontages, this
standard applies only to upper floors with the ground floor meeting
fenestration requirements for these frontage types.
            (2)   Side facades built to the property line that will abut an
adjacent building, but that are temporarily within public view, are exempt from
this requirement.
         h.   Along street-facing facades and facades that face the Iowa River,
Ralston Creek, plazas, open space or trails, blank walls greater than fifteen
feet (15') in length are not allowed. Elements such as windows, doors, columns,
pilasters, changes in material, artwork, or other architectural details that
provide visual interest must be distributed across the facade in a manner
consistent with the overall design of the building.
FIGURE 2G-42
FACADE COMPOSITION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2674.png]
 
FIGURE 2G-42B
BUILDING COMPOSITION IN THE EASTSIDE MIXED USE DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2679.png]
 
FIGURE 2G-43
CORNER TREATMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2681.png]
 
      2.   Building Entries:
         a.   Primary entries to ground floor building space and to common
lobbies accessing upper floor building space shall be accessed through an
allowed frontage type located along street-facing facades with preference given
to entries along facades facing primary streets. Building entries along rear
and side facades or from parking garages may not serve as principal building
entries. Buildings with more than three (3) street-facing facades shall have
building entries on at least two (2) sides.
         b.   For buildings that contain residential dwelling units, there must
be at least one main entrance on the street-facing facade that provides
pedestrian access to dwelling units within the building through an allowed
frontage type. For buildings with more than two (2) street frontages, building
entrances must be provided along at least two (2) street frontages and at least
one of those entrances must be along the primary street. Access to dwelling
units must not be solely through a parking garage or from a rear or side
entrance.
         c.   Entries on street-facing facades shall be sheltered by an awning,
canopy, a recessed doorway, portico, and/or a porch as appropriate to the
frontage type, and shall be distinguished by facade recesses or variations in
facade design appropriate to the frontage type as set forth in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article.
         d.   Primary residential entries shall be demarcated with a transom
and sidelight windows, pilasters and pediment, door surround and raised
cornice, or a combination of these treatments.
         e.   For storefront and urban flex frontages greater than one hundred
feet (100') in length, at least one usable building entry shall be provided for
every fifty feet (50') of frontage. This requirement shall not apply in the
west riverfront subdistrict.
         f.   Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways to upper
floor building space are not permitted. Unenclosed, exterior corridors on upper
floors are not permitted.
         g.   Along street frontages, sliding doors are prohibited as building
entries. Sliding doors may not be used as a primary means of entrance to any
residential building or residential unit.
      3.   Windows:
FIGURE 2G-44
WINDOW CONFIGURATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2683.png]
 
         a.   Windows in residential buildings or the residential portions of
mixed use buildings shall comply with the following standards:
            (1)   Individual window units that are visible from a public
street, pedestrian street, or public park, plaza or trail shall have a height
that is at least 1.5 times greater than the width of the window unit, as
illustrated in
figure 2G-44 of this section.
            (2)   Individual window units may be located side by side, or
ganged, in a wider window opening, but the width of the opening may not exceed
its height, as illustrated in
figure 2G-44 of this section.
            (3)   Windows may be grouped, but individual window units shall be
separated by minimum three and one-half inch (31/2") trim, as illustrated in
 figure 2G-44 of this section.
            (4)   Bathroom, kitchen, skylights, and decorative windows, such as
stained glass and ocular windows, are not required to meet the above
dimensional standards.
            (5)   Windows on facades shall be double or single hung, hinged
casement, pivoted, projected, or fixed.
            (6)   Windows shall be accentuated with facade treatments,
recesses, and trim appropriate to the wall material and architectural style of
the building. Windows in walls constructed of masonry, stucco, or similar shall
be recessed a minimum of two inches (2") from the facade and accentuated with
sills and lintels or other similar treatment. In walls not constructed of
masonry, stucco or similar, windows must include minimum three inch (3") trim.
If simulated muntins are used they shall be affixed to the exterior of the
windows.
      4.   Story Heights:
         a.   For all mixed use and nonresidential buildings, the minimum
ground floor floor-to-structural ceiling height is fourteen feet (14'). For
live-work townhouses, the minimum ground floor floor- to-structural ceiling
height is eleven feet (11').
         b.   Upper floors shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') floor to floor.
      5.   Building Materials:
         a.   Buildings shall be constructed of durable, high quality
materials.
Table 2G-8 of this section lists allowable exterior finish materials, the
portion of the building on which they are allowed, and any specific standards
that apply. The FBC committee shall review the proposed palette of building
materials to ensure compliance with these standards and to ensure that
materials and colors form a cohesive design for the building as related to the
mass and scale of the building, the building type, frontage condition, and
proposed architectural style.
         b.   All building facades within public view of a street, pedestrian
street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek, or the Iowa River shall use
materials and design features similar to or complementary to those of the front
facade.
TABLE 2G-8
PERMITTED BUILDING MATERIALS
Permitted Permitted Location/Application Of Material
Building  Trim/Accent                 Middle Of Base/Bottom Of Storefront And
Materials Material    Top Of Building Building  Building       Urban Flex
                                                               Frontages
Permitted      Permitted Location/Application Of Material
Building       Trim/Accent Top Of   Middle Of Base/Bottom Of Storefront And
Materials      Material    Building Building  Building       Urban Flex
                                                             Frontages
Architectural  X           X        X         X              X
CMU2
Brick (face/   X           X        X         X              X
veneer)1
EIFS/synthetic
stucco/hand    X           X                                
laid stucco6
Fiber cement   X           X        X         X              X
siding/panels3
Metal panels4  X           X        X         X              X
Precast
concrete       X           X        X         X               
panels5
Reflective
glass/         X                                           
spandrel7
Tile, stone/   X           X        X         X              X
stone veneer1
Translucent,
fritted glass/ X           X        X         X              X
window film8
Transparent    X           X        X         X              X
glass9
Wood/wood      X           X        X         X              X
composite3
 
Notes:
   1.    Any brick or stone veneer must be of a quality, thickness, durability,
and design that faithfully imitates full wythe masonry and allows windows and
entryways to be recessed to meet the standards.
   2.    Shall be used in conjunction with a palette of materials and shall not
comprise more than 33 percent of any facade within public view of a street,
pedestrian street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek frontage, parking
area, or the Iowa River. Except for burnished/polished or glazed units, CMU is
not generally allowed for storefront and urban flex frontages. However, if
approved by the FBC, architectural CMU, such as split face, ground face, and
rock face, may be used as an accent material on the storefront/urban flex
frontage level.
   3.    For buildings that exceed 3 stories in height, these materials shall
only be used in conjunction with a palette of materials and shall not comprise
more than 33 percent of any facade within public view of a street, pedestrian
street, plaza, park, public trail, Ralston Creek frontage, parking area, or the
Iowa River. Not generally allowed for storefront/urban flex front applications;
however, high quality, smooth faced versions may be approved by the FBC as
accent materials.
   4.    Shall be used in conjunction with a palette of materials; shall be a
heavy gauge, nonreflective metal. Durability and maintenance of the material
shall be carefully considered if used on the ground level floor or in high use
areas.
   5.    Shall incorporate horizontal and vertical articulation and modulation,
including, but not limited to, changes in color and texture, or as part of a
palette of materials. This category does not include tilt-up concrete wall
construction, which is not allowed.
   6.    May only be used for architectural detailing above the ground floor.
   7.    Shall be used in limited quantities as an accent material or as a
means of visual screening. Shall not count toward minimum fenestration
requirements.
   8.    May be used for architectural detailing and signage. Other than for
decoration and signage, use of these materials on a storefront level is
discouraged. For storefront and urban flex frontages, if use of these materials
on ground floor windows reduces the transparency and blocks views into the
interior of a building, said windows shall not count toward the minimum
fenestration requirements of the ground floor of the building. Window film
shall not be applied to required storefront windows in a manner that reduces
transparency and blocks views into the interior of the storefront.
   9.    Glass used for storefronts or urban flex frontages should be as clear
and transparent as possible and individual lites for display windows should be
as large as possible to invite views into the interior of the commercial space.
Transom windows are encouraged above storefront display windows. Residential
window types, closely spaced mullions, and punched windows are not allowed for
storefront or urban flex frontages. Low-E glazing will reduce transparency, so
is discouraged for storefronts or urban flex fronts, but if used, the glass
chosen should have a high visible light transmittance and low reflectivity.
      6.   Roof Design:
         a.   The following building types may have flat or pitched roofs;
however, mansard roofs are discouraged and shall not be permitted on single-
story buildings. Buildings over three (3) stories in height shall have flat
roofs.
            (1)   Townhouse.
            (2)   Apartment building.
            (3)   Multi-dwelling building.
            (4)   Live-work townhouse.
            (5)   Commercial building.
            (6)   Mixed use building.
            (7)   Liner building.
            (8)   Civic or institutional building.
         b.   The following building types shall have pitched roofs. Mansard
roofs are not permitted.
            (1)   Cottage home.
            (2)   Row house.
         c.   All roof edges shall be accentuated with eaves in a manner
proportionate to the size of the building and length of the wall. Buildings
with flat roofs shall be enclosed by a parapet wall and decorative cornice.
      7.   Awnings And Canopies:
         a.   Awnings and canopies may project over the public sidewalk with a
minimum eight foot (8') clearance above the sidewalk, but shall not project in
a manner that will interfere with utilities, street trees, or other important
right-of-way features.
         b.   Awnings shall be constructed of a durable material such as canvas
or metal that will not fade or tear easily. Plasticized, rigid, or curved
awnings or mansard style canopies are prohibited. On storefront frontages,
awnings must be open ended to allow views along the frontage.
         c.   Awnings shall not be internally illuminated and any signs shall
be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed downward.
      8.   Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   Outdoor mechanical, electrical, and communication equipment,
including heating, air conditioning, and ventilation equipment; venting and
vent terminations for commercial hoods; electric meters; electrical and
communications equipment and panels; and similar features shall be placed on
the roof or to the rear of buildings. Such equipment shall not be placed in
private frontage areas. Except for venting and vent terminations for commercial
hoods, said equipment may be located along the nonstreet side of buildings, if
it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the FBC Committee that it is
impractical to locate such equipment on the roof or to the rear of the
building. Venting for commercial hoods shall be internal to the building and
terminations shall be located on the roof or may terminate through an exterior
wall that abuts an alley right-of-way. If there is practical difficulty
locating horizontal vent terminations for kitchen fans, bathroom fans, and gas
fireplaces for individual residential dwelling units on the roof or to the rear
or side facades, they may be allowed on front facades as long as they are
designed to blend with the exterior building facade, as approved by the FBC
Committee.
         b.   All such equipment must be screened from public view by
architectural finished screen walls and enclosures consistent and complementary
to the exterior facade of the building.
         c.   If within public view, rooftop mechanical penthouses shall be
designed to complement the design of street-facing building facades and shall
be clad on all sides in the same materials as used on street-facing facades.
         d.   Packaged terminal air conditioner (PTAC) units and other similar
mechanical units that are integrated into and behind the wall plane of a
building and covered and screened from view with a decorative guard that is
integrated into the design of the building wall are allowed on any side of a
building.
         e.   Dumpsters and recycling bins must be located in areas that are
not visible from public streets and may not be located in a right-of-way.
   G.   Building Height Bonus Provisions: The building height bonus provisions
provide an incentive for developments to incorporate features that provide a
public benefit or that further important goals and objective of the downtown
and riverfront crossings master plan according to the eligible bonuses set
forth in this section.
      1.   Review Process: Request for building height bonuses will be reviewed
by the FBC Committee through the design review process according to the
following rules. If Level II design review is required the proposal must also
be approved by the City Council:
         a.   Bonus height up to two (2) additional stories above the
applicable subdistrict height standard may be approved through a Level I design
review.
         b.   A Level II design review is required for a height bonus that
exceeds two (2) stories above the maximum height established for the applicable
subdistrict.
         c.   A Level II design review is required for open space height
transfers, historic preservation height transfers and public right-of-way
height transfers.
         d.   Multiple height bonuses or transfers may be applied to one (1)
site, however, the resulting height may not exceed the following maximums:
            (1)   Fifteen (15) stories maximum for properties within the South
Downtown, University, and Park Subdistricts.
            (2)   Twelve (12) stories maximum for properties within the West
Riverfront Subdistrict that have frontage along the Iowa River.
            (3)   Eight (8) stories maximum for properties within the Central
Crossings and South Gilbert Subdistricts.
            (4)   Five (5) stories maximum for properties within the Gilbert
Subdistrict and properties within the West Riverfront Subdistrict that do not
have frontage along the Iowa River. For properties in the West Riverfront
Subdistrict north of the Iowa Interstate Railroad, seven (7) stories maximum
for property within 200 feet of the railroad right-of-way. However, bonus
height is not allowed on lots that abut a residential zone. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-
20-2016)
            (5)   Height bonuses are not allowed in the Eastside Mixed Use
District and Orchard Subdistrict. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4705,
5-16-2017)
            (6)   In no case shall the building height exceed the maximum
height allowed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
         e.   All requests for bonus height shall meet the applicable approval
criteria. All proposals shall demonstrate excellence in building and site
design, use high quality building materials, and be designed in a manner that
contributes to the quality and character of the neighborhood. The resulting
development must meet all other applicable zoning standards. Bonus height is
granted solely at the discretion of the City based on the quality of the
proposal. For buildings receiving height transfers or granted bonus height,
additional upper floor stepbacks may be required to help reduce the mass and
scale of the building as it relates to surrounding development and public open
space.
      2.   Open Space Height Transfers: The following transfer of development
rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for the development
of needed public open space as envisioned in the downtown and riverfront
crossings master plan:
         a.   Eligibility: The open space height transfer is an option for
sites that meet the following criteria:
            (1)   Minimum size of the open space dedication is twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet; and
            (2)   The site must have sufficient frontage on a public street or
future public street so that it is highly visible and accessible to the public
or is land that can be added to an existing park or land that is suitable for
development into a park node along a stream or river corridor trail; and
            (3)   The site is designated on the riverfront crossings regulating
plan as green space; or if the site is not designated as green space on the
regulating plan, the applicant must demonstrate through a level II design
review process that the site is ideally located to serve the need for public
open space for people living or working in the area and the city parks and
recreation department approves the site.
         b.   Requirements:
            (1)   The area designated for the open space must be dedicated to
the city as a public park.
            (2)   All buildings and structures that will not be retained for
park purposes must be removed and the land graded and seeded to the
satisfaction of the city, unless the city council approves an alternative
arrangement.
         c.   Transfer Of Development Rights:
            (1)   The floor area that results from multiplying the number of
stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict
standards by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more
eligible site(s) within the riverfront crossings district. For example, if the
land being dedicated for public open space is located in the park subdistrict
and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, then one hundred twenty
thousand (120,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 6) may be transferred to
one or more eligible sites and the resulting building or buildings on the
receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective subdistrict,
within the limits established in this section.
            (2)   The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s)
may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
      3.   Historic Preservation Height Transfers: The following transfer of
development rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for the
preservation and adaptive reuse of historic properties:
         a.   Eligibility: The historic preservation height transfer is an
option for sites that meet the following criterion:
            (1)   The site from which the height transfer is requested (sending
site) is designated as an Iowa City landmark, eligible for landmark
designation, registered on the national register of historic places, or listed
as a historically significant building as determined by the survey and
evaluation of the historic and architectural resources for the vicinity.
         b.   Requirements:
            (1)   If the sending site has not already been designated as an
Iowa City landmark, the applicant must apply for and obtain approval of this
designation as a condition of the transfer of development rights; and
            (2)   All historic buildings and structures on the sending site
must be preserved against decay, deterioration, and kept free from structural
defects by the owner or such person, persons, or entities who may have custody
or control thereof, according to the provisions of section
14-3B-7, "Prevention Of Demolition By Neglect", of this title.
         c.   Transfer Of Development Rights:
            (1)   The floor area that results from multiplying the number of
stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict
standards by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more
eligible site(s) within the riverfront crossings district. For example, if the
land being preserved as a historic landmark is located in the central crossings
subdistrict and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, then eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 4) may be transferred to
one or more eligible sites and the resulting building or buildings on the
receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective subdistrict,
within the limits established in this section.
            (2)   The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s)
may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
      4.   Public Right-Of-Way Height Transfers: The following transfer of
development rights and corresponding height bonus provides an incentive for
dedication of land for public rights-of-way necessary to realize the vision of
the Riverfront Crossings master plan:
         a.   Eligibility: The public right-of-way height transfer is an option
for sites that meet the following criterion:
            (1)   The land proposed for dedication (sending site) is needed in
order to construct or improve rights-of-way necessary to realize the vision of
the Riverfront Crossings master plan.
         b.   Requirements:
            (1)   The subject land must be dedicated to the City for use as
public right-of-way.
            (2)   All buildings and structures on the land to be dedicated must
be removed, unless the City Council approves an alternative arrangement.
         c.   Transfer Of Development Rights:
            (1)   The floor area that results from multiplying the number of
stories allowed at the sending site as specified in the applicable subdistrict
standards by the acreage of the sending site may be transferred to one or more
eligible site(s) within the Riverfront Crossings District. For example, if the
land being dedicated for public right-of-way is located in the South Gilbert
Subdistrict and is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, then one
hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet of floor area (20,000 x 6) may be
transferred to one or more eligible sites and the resulting building or
buildings on the receiving sites may exceed the height limit of the respective
subdistrict, within the limits established in this section.
            (2)   The resulting building or buildings on the receiving site(s)
may not exceed the maximums stated within subsection G1d of this section.
      5.   Height Bonus For Class A Office Space: Two (2) additional floors of
building height may be granted for every floor of Class A office space
provided. To qualify for this bonus, the office space must be located on floors
above the ground floor of the building and meet the definition of Class A
office space as stated below. Only nonresidential uses shall be allowed in the
designated Class A office space. As defined by the Building Owners and Managers
Association International (BOMA), Class A office space is space that is of a
quality that is attractive for premier office users with rents above average
for the area. Class A office buildings have high quality standard finishes,
state of the art systems, exceptional accessibility and a definite market
presence. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
      6.   Height Bonus For Public Art: One additional floor of building height
may be granted for a contribution to the City's public art program equal to one
percent (1%) of threshold value of the project. Threshold value is the sum of
all construction costs shown on all building permits associated with the
project, including site preparation. For alterations to existing development,
the threshold value is the sum of all construction costs as defined above plus
the value of existing improvements to the property, as listed in the City
Assessor's records. Funds contributed shall be used by the City for public art
within the Riverfront Crossings District as approved by the Public Art
Committee. (Ord. 18-4770, 11-20-2018)
      7.   Height Bonus For Leadership In Energy And Environmental Design: Up
to four (4) additional floors of building height may be granted for projects
that are designed to meet high standards with regard to energy efficiency and
environmental stewardship, according to LEED or other similar environmental or
energy efficiency rating system. In general, the higher the level of energy
efficiency or environmental stewardship demonstrated, the greater the bonus.
The amount of bonus granted will be based on the overall quality of the
project. Bonus height may also be granted for projects that are designed to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on the environment through the use of
bioswales, rain gardens, greenroofs, rainwater harvesting, and stream bank
stabilization and restoration along Ralston Creek or the Iowa River, as
described in the Riverfront Crossings District subarea plan adopted in April
2011. Any such green feature(s) must be designed using Best Management
Practices and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the design will
be successful given applicable factors, such as soil conditions, access to
sunlight, topography, etc. A long term maintenance plan must accompany any
proposal for such green features.
      8.   Height Bonus For Student Housing: Up to five (5) floors of
additional building height may be granted for projects that are ideally located
and designed to provide a high quality living environment for college students.
         a.   Location: To qualify for this bonus, projects must be located on
land that:
            (1)   Is within the University Subdistrict, South Downtown
Subdistrict, or the West Riverfront Subdistrict; and
            (2)   Is within one thousand feet (1,000') walking distance along
public rights-of-way from the University of Iowa campus as defined for these
purposes and illustrated on the regulating plan, section
14-2G-2,
 figure 2G-1 of this article.
         b.   Management, Design And Amenities:
            (1)   An enforceable plan for on site management and security must
be submitted to and approved by the City;
            (2)   For projects with two hundred (200) or more bedrooms,
professional twenty four (24) hour on site management and security must be
provided. A professionally staffed management office/reception desk must be
provided in the entrance lobby of the building;
            (3)   Interior and exterior usable shared open space must be
provided with amenities that create a high quality living environment for
students. The management plan must include adequate provisions for management,
maintenance, and security of such spaces;
            (4)   A secure bicycle parking/storage area shall be provided and
maintained within the building or parking garage;
            (5)   The owner shall maintain a valid rental permit and comply
with all applicable City codes;
            (6)   The City reserves the right to inspect the property to verify
compliance with these provisions.
      9.   Height Bonus For Hotel Space: One additional floor of building
height may be granted for every floor of high quality hotel space. The
additional building height may be used for additional hotel space or for other
uses. The resulting building must demonstrate excellence in building and site
design as demonstrated through use of high quality building materials,
architectural detailing, building amenities, landscaping and streetscaping
elements, and similar.
      10.   Height Bonus For Workforce Or Affordable Housing: Up to five (5)
floors of additional building height may be granted for projects that designate
a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units within the development
as "affordable housing", as defined in section
14-2G-8 of this article and regulated in accordance therewith.
      11.   Height Bonus For Elder Housing: Up to five (5) floors of additional
building height may be granted for projects where all or a portion of the
dwelling units are designed to provide a high quality living environment for
elders or persons with disabilities. The project must satisfy the following
criteria:
         a.   The development is designed for use and occupancy by elders and/
or persons with disabilities;
         b.   All individual dwelling units and any communal space must be
handicap accessible, as defined in the Iowa Administrative Code;
         c.   No more than ten percent (10%) of all individual dwelling units
within the project can contain more than two (2) bedrooms;
         d.   Prior to issuance of the building permit, the owner must submit
an affidavit to the City that all designated dwelling units will be reserved
for and occupied by elders and/or persons with disabilities;
         e.   The units may be renter or owner occupied. If rented, the owner
shall maintain a valid rental permit, unless the use is licensed by the State
of Iowa; and
         f.   The City reserves the right to inspect the property to verify
compliance with these provisions. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
   H.   Minor Adjustments:
      1.   The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the building placement
and parking, loading, and service area placement standards set forth in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article. Standards greater or lesser
than the ranges allowed may be approved in the following circumstances,
provided the approval criteria listed below are met: (Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017)
         a.   For publicly accessible outdoor plazas;
         b.   For irregular lots that make meeting the requirements impractical
or infeasible;
         c.   For buildings along Ralston Creek;
         d.   For liner buildings, civic, or institutional buildings where
unique building needs or site constraints make it difficult to fully comply
with the standards;
         e.   For buildings along pedestrian streets designed to maximize
access to and views of the Iowa River; or
         f.   For other special circumstances, provided that the intent of the
standard and the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central
District plan, whichever is applicable, is met. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016)
         g.   Approval criteria:
            (1)   There are unique characteristics of the site or neighboring
properties that lend to alternative design approaches or that make it difficult
or infeasible to meet the requirements; and
            (2)   The proposed placement of the building, parking, and service
areas fit the characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, are
consistent with the intent of the standard being modified and the goals of the
Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central District plan, as
applicable, and will not detract from or be injurious to other property or
improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017)
      2.   The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the facade continuity
requirements set forth in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article, for buildings with
forecourts at primary building entries, open air pedestrian passageways
connecting public sidewalks to rear yard parking, or driveways on sites without
secondary street, cross parcel, or alley access to parking and service areas,
or for small or irregularly shaped lots where there is practical difficulty
meeting the standard. In such cases, additional and/or enhanced screening and
landscaping may be required to ensure a pleasant and comfortable pedestrian
environment along street frontages.
      3.   The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the requirements set
forth in section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this article, to accommodate buildings
located on steeply sloped sites or within flood hazard zones, where meeting the
requirements is impractical or infeasible, or to make minor adjustments to
elements of a frontage to ensure they are proportional to the scale of a
building. If warranted and approved, deviations may include the following:
         a.   Floor height of stoops, porticoes, porches or terraces may exceed
the maximum;
         b.   The finished ground floor elevation of the building may exceed
the maximum;
         c.   Garden walls enclosing terraces or forecourts may exceed the
maximum height;
         d.   The terrace frontage may be configured as a stepped terrace with
two (2) levels above grade;
         e.   Allow additional width and depth for portico frontages in order
to create proportional entryways for large multi-dwelling or civic/
institutional buildings; or
         f.   Minor deviations from window coverage standards for storefront
frontages on small buildings located on corner lots, where full compliance on
both frontages may not be feasible.
      4.   Where accessibility standards cannot be met using the standards
herein, the FBC Committee may approve deviations to allow adherence to
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. Deviations may include
lowering the height requirements of frontages and finished ground floor
elevations, and accommodating wheelchair accessible ramps. (Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016)
      5.   The FBC Committee may approve deviations from the facade stepback
requirements set forth in section
14-2G-3, "Subdistrict Standards", of this article or building design standards
set forth in subsection F of this section, provided the following approval
criteria are met:
         a.   The building includes an alternative design solution that equally
or better meets the intent of the specific standard being modified; and
         b.   The building is uniquely designed to fit the characteristics of
the site and the surrounding neighborhood, is consistent with the goals of the
Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Master Plan or Central District plan, as
applicable, and will not detract from or be injurious to other property or
improvements in the vicinity; and
         c.   The building demonstrates excellence in architectural design and
use of durable materials; and
         d.   There are unique characteristics of the site or neighboring
properties that lend to alternative design approaches, or that make it
difficult or infeasible to meet the requirements; or the proposed building is
designed true to a specific architectural style and adherence to the building
design standards would be impractical or compromise the building's
architectural integrity; and
         e.   For requests for waivers of an upper floor stepback requirement,
the building must include an alternative means of visually breaking up the
vertical plane of the building.
      6.   In mid-block locations, the FBC Committee may waive the minimum
building height standard to allow for a 2nd story pedestrian courtyard (an area
surrounded by building facades on at least 3 sides), provided a screen wall
that is at least as tall as the second story building facade is constructed co-
planar or recessed a maximum of three feet (3') from the street-facing facade.
The screen wall may either be constructed of high quality building materials
that faithfully imitate an architecturally- finished exterior building facade
with complementary window openings and articulation, or constructed as a
decorative screen wall with a semi-transparent, open pattern, where the top of
the screen wall aligns generally with the top of the second story. For purposes
of regulating signage, the screen wall will be considered a building wall.
(Ord. 17-4731, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 20-4840, 12-15-2020)
14-2G-8: AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Riverfront Crossings Affordable Housing Requirement: Except for
developments providing affordable housing pursuant to a development agreement
with the City executed prior to June 6, 2016, and except for developments
exclusively providing elder apartment housing, residential uses on land zoned a
Riverfront Crossings zoning designation are required to provide affordable
housing pursuant to Article 14-4F "Affordable Housing." (Ord. 16-4668, 7-5-
2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-4813, 12-3-2019; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
ARTICLE H. FORM-BASED ZONES AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-2H-1: Introduction
14-2H-2: Zones
14-2H-3: Use Standards
14-2H-4: Site Standards
14-2H-5: Civic Space Type Standards
14-2H-6: Building Type Standards
14-2H-7: Architectural Element Standards
14-2H-8: Frontage Type Standards
14-2H-9: Thoroughfare Type Standards
14-2H-10: Affordable Housing Incentives
14-2H-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   This Article H attached to Ord. 21-4866 (Form-Based Zones And
Standards), herein after referred to as this Article, sets forth the standards
for neighborhood design, building form, and land use within the Form-Based
Zones listed herein.
      2.   These standards reflect the community's vision for implementing the
intent of the Comprehensive Plan to ensure development that reinforces the
highly valued character and scale of Iowa City's urban centers, neighborhoods,
and corridors with a mix of housing, civic, retail and service uses in a
compact, walkable, and transit-friendly environment.
      3.   Specifically, these standards are intended to:
         a.   Improve the built environment and human habitat;
         b.   Promote development patterns that support safe, effective, and
multi-modal transportation options, including auto, pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit;
         c.   Reduce vehicle traffic and support transit by providing for a
mixture of land uses, highly interconnected block and street network, and
compact community form;
         d.   Provide neighborhoods with a variety of housing types and levels
of affordability and accessibility to serve the needs of a diverse population;
         e.   Promote the health and sustainability benefits of walkable
environments;
         f.   Generate pedestrian-oriented and pedestrian-scaled neighborhoods
where the automobile is accommodated but does not dominate the streetscapes;
         g.   Reinforce the unique identity of the City and build upon the
local context, climate, and history; and
         h.   Realize development based on the patterns of existing walkable
neighborhoods.
   B.   Zoning Districts:
      1.   The full names and map symbols of the Form-Based Zones are listed
below. When this Article refers to Form-Based Zones, it is referring to all
zones listed in this section. When this Article refers to Neighborhood Form-
Based Zones, it is referring to the T3NE, T3NG, T4NS, and T4NM zones.
         a.   T3 Neighborhood Edge (T3NE).
         b.   T3 Neighborhood General (T3NG).
         c.   T4 Neighborhood Small (T4NS).
         d.   T4 Neighborhood Medium (T4NM).
         e.   T4 Main Street (T4MS).
      2.   The standards applicable to the Riverfront Crossings Districts and
Eastside Mixed Use District are regulated through the provisions in Title 14,
Article G. These are not considered Form-Based Zones.
   C.   Applicability:
      1.   
Table 14-2H-1C-1 outlines when other Chapters and Articles of Title 14 and
other Titles of the municipal code apply to development and improvements within
Form-Based Zones.
      2.   Neighborhood Design:
         a.   Blocks And Streets: Streets are required in the approximate
locations identified in the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan in
compliance with Section
15-3-2 (Streets And Circulation). When designing a new street or reconstructing
an existing street, the design must meet the standards in section
14-2H-9 (Thoroughfare Type Standards).
         b.   Design Sites:
            (1)   Buildings shall be designed in compliance with the design
site width and depth standards of the zone set forth in section
14-2H-2 (Zones).
            (2)   This Article does not require that design sites be platted.
The design site width and depth standards are for the purpose of consistently
achieving pedestrian-oriented and scaled buildings.
      3.   Building, Frontage, And Use Types:
         a.   The following shall be selected for each lot and design site as
allowed in the zone in compliance with the standards listed therein:
            (1)   Only one building type, except for certain building types as
outlined in section
14-2H-6 (Building Types Standards);
            (2)   At least one (1) frontage type; and
            (3)   At least one (1) use type.
         b.   Building types, frontage types, and uses not listed in the zone
are not allowed in that zone.
         c.   There shall be a mix of frontage and building types per block as
outlined in sections
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards).
      4.   Site Standards: When a development requires site plan review in
compliance with Title 18 (Site Plan Review) or when otherwise required by
Section
14-2H-4 (Site Standards), site standard sub-sections apply as follows:
         a.   Screening Standards: The following shall comply with sub-section
14-2H-4B (Screening):
            (1)   All new development; and
            (2)   Improvements to existing development.
         b.   Landscaping And Tree Standards. The following shall comply with
sub-section
14-2H-4C (Landscaping) and Article 14-5E (Landscaping And Tree Standards):
            (1)   All new development; and
            (2)   Improvements to existing development.
         c.   Parking And Loading Standards: The following shall comply with
sub-section
14-2H-4D (Parking And Loading):
            (1)   All new development;
            (2)   Changes in land use; and
            (3)   Changes in intensity of buildings or structures made after
the effective date of this Article that cause an increase or decrease of
twenty-five percent (25%) or greater in:
               (a)   Gross floor area;
               (b)   Seating capacity;
               (c)   Units; and/or
               (d)   Parking spaces.
      5.   Civic Space Type Standards: Development is required to create civic
space(s) in the approximate locations identified on the Comprehensive Plan
Future Land Use Map in compliance with the standards of section
14-2H-5 (Civic Space Type Standards).
      6.   Building Type Standards: The following shall comply with Section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards):
         a.   New buildings (except public safety buildings and utility
buildings);
         b.   Additions over fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area
(except public safety buildings and utility buildings); and
         c.   Facade renovations along front or side street facades (except
public safety buildings).
      7.   Massing, Facade Articulation And Architectural Elements: The
following shall comply with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards):
         a.   New buildings; and
         b.   Building facade renovations facing a street or civic space
(except public safety buildings).
      8.   Frontage Type Standards: The following shall comply with section 14-
2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards):
         a.   New buildings;
         b.   Building facade renovation facing a street or civic space (except
public safety buildings);
         c.   Private property improvements along front or side street; and
         d.   Modifications of pedestrian entrance(s) along front or side
street.
      9.   Sign Type Standards: All signs, regardless of their nature or
location, unless specifically exempted, which are intended to be viewed from a
public right-of-way and from outdoors in areas of public and private property
used for public pedestrian access shall comply with sub-section
14-5B-8H (Sign Standards And Types For Form-Based Zones).
      10.   Thoroughfare Type Standards: The following shall comply with
section
14-2H-9 (Thoroughfare Type Standards):
         a.   The construction of a new thoroughfare and/or when an application
for a plat is proposed.
         b.   Existing privately-owned thoroughfares:
            (1)   Improvement or modification to curb return, pedestrian
crossing, landscaping, or sidewalk;
            (2)   Improvement or modification to on-street parking, or lane
striping; and/or
            (3)   Improvement or modification to right-of-way.
Table 14-2H-1C-1: Application Of Standards In Title 14 (Zoning Code), Title 15
(Land Subdivisions), And Title 18 (Site Plan Review)
Title 14 (Zoning Code)
Chapter Description/Article Applicability To This Chapter (Form-Based Zones And
                            Standards)
Table 14-2H-1C-1: Application Of Standards In Title 14 (Zoning Code), Title 15
(Land Subdivisions), And Title 18 (Site Plan Review)
Title 14 (Zoning Code)
Chapter Description/Article                Applicability To This Chapter (Form-
                                           Based Zones And Standards)
1       Introductory Provision             Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
                                           Standards in this chapter do not
                                           apply to Form-Based Zones. They are
                                           replaced by zones as identified in
2       Base Zones                         section
                                           14-2H-2  (Zones) and uses as
                                           identified in section
                                           14-2H-3  (Uses).
                                           Standards in this chapter do not
                                           apply to Form-Based Zones, except
                                           for those related to protection of
3       Overlay Zones                      sensitive features or historic
                                           resources. Other standards are
                                           replaced by zones as identified in
                                           section
                                           14-2H-2  (Zones).
                                           Standards in this chapter apply to
4       Use Regulations                    Form-Based Zones, except where use
                                           standards are replaced within this
                                           chapter.
5       Site Development Standards          
                                           Standards in this chapter do not
       A. Off-Street Parking And Loading  apply to Form-Based Zones unless
                                           stated otherwise.
       B. Sign Regulations                Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
                                           Standards in this chapter apply to
       C. Access Management Standards     Form-Based Zones unless stated
                                           otherwise.
       D. Intersection Visibility         Standards in this chapter apply to
        Standards                          Form-Based Zones.
                                           Standards in this chapter apply to
       E. Landscaping And Tree Standards  Form-Based Zones unless stated
                                           otherwise.
        F. Screening And Buffering         Standards in this chapter do not
       Standards                          apply to Form-Based Zones unless
                                           stated otherwise.
       G. Outdoor Lighting Standards      Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
       H. Performance Standards           Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
       I. Sensitive Lands And Features    Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
       J. Floodplain Management Standards Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
       K. Neighborhood Open Space         Standards in this chapter apply to
        Requirements                       Form-Based Zones.
6       Airport Zoning                     Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
7       Administration                     Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
8       Review And Approval Procedures     Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
9       Definitions                        Definitions in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
Title 15 (Land Subdivisions)
Chapter Description                        Status
All     Land Subdivision                   Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
Title 18 (Site Plan Review)
Chapter Description                        Status
All     Site Plan Review                   Standards in this chapter apply to
                                           Form-Based Zones.
 
   D.   Rezoning:
      1.   Rezoning to a Form-Based Zone shall follow the zoning map amendment
process (
14-8D-5). Any application for such a rezoning should be submitted concurrently
with an application for a preliminary plat (
15-2-2).
      2.   Approval Criteria: The following criteria must be met or determined
to not be applicable to rezone to a Form-Based Zone:
         a.   The rezoning demonstrates compliance with the Future Land Use Map
of the Comprehensive Plan and any district plan, as applicable, including
consistency between the land use designations and the proposed zones.
Variations from the Future Land Use Map may be approved for Form-Based Zones
where sensitive areas are present, or where circumstances have changed and/or
additional information or factors have come to light such that the proposed
amendment is in the public interest.
         b.   The rezoning demonstrates that the zones are organized in such a
manner to respond appropriately to the various site conditions. When amending
zone boundaries, more intense zones shall be organized around a neighborhood
feature. Examples include a major street (such as a main street or edge drive),
civic space, a transit stop, a civic building, or other locations suitable for
greater intensities.
         c.   The rezoning demonstrates that transitions are appropriate
between Form-Based Zones, such as zone transitions occurring within the block
or across alleys to provide the same zoning on facing blocks.
         d.   The rezoning demonstrates it is designed to suit specific
topographical, environmental, site layout, and design constraints unique to the
site.
   E.   Neighborhood Plan:
      1.   The Neighborhood Plan, submitted as an accompanying document with
the final plat, ensures compliance with the standards in this Article. It shall
substantially conform to the Future Land Use Map included in the Comprehensive
Plan and District Plan, as applicable.
      2.   The Neighborhood Plan shall include the following components in plan
view on application forms provided by the department, along with any additional
information as requested by the City:
         a.   Identify all applicable Form-Based Zones, lots, and design sites.
         b.   Identify all proposed building types pursuant to section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and proposed frontage types pursuant to
section
14-2H-8 (Frontages) for each lot and/or design site.
         c.   Apply thoroughfares in an interconnected network and identify
proposed thoroughfare types pursuant to sections
14-2H-9 (Thoroughfare Type Standards) and
15-3-2 (Streets And Circulation), including all proposed passages (
14-2H-9L) and/or alleys (
14-2H-9K).
         d.   Identify natural open space and civic space types pursuant to
section
14-2H-5 (Civic Space Type Standards) and delineate all proposed buildings,
paved areas, trees, and/or landscaping in civic spaces.
         e.   Identify all connections to existing streets and sidewalks and
lots and design sites on adjacent properties in conformance with block
standards pursuant to section
15-3-4 (Layout Of Blocks And Lots).
      3.   Following adoption of the final plat, the following changes to the
Neighborhood Plan may be administratively approved concurrently with building
permit or site plan review. All requested changes from the original
Neighborhood Plan must be identified on site plans and building plans.
         a.   Substituting one building type for another where the lot and/or
design site meets the requirements of sections
14-2H-2 (Zones) and
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and where the change does not limit the
ability of other lots and/or design sites on the block to change or maintain
their building type.
         b.   Substituting one frontage type for another where the lot and/or
design site meets the requirements of section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards) and where the change does not limit the
ability of other lots and/or design sites on the block to change or maintain
their frontage type.
         c.   Substituting one civic space type for another, including changes
to the design of said civic spaces, where the civic space type meets the
requirements of section
14-2H-5 (Civic Space Type Standards).
         d.   Changing the number, size, and layout of design sites within a
single lot where all modified design sites meet the size and shape requirements
of section
14-2H-2 (Zones). (Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 24-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-2: ZONES:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes the Form-Based Zones that implement
the City’s Comprehensive Plan to generate and support the intended variety and
physical character.
   B.   Sub-Zones: Sub-zones are slightly modified versions of the base Form-
Based Zone. This chapter includes one (1) type of sub-zone:
      1.   Open: The open sub-zone can provide additional flexibility to design
sites located at or near intersections that function or can function as a
neighborhood node of non-residential uses. The open sub-zone is indicated in
the future land use maps of the Comprehensive Plan and is used for either or
both of the following purposes:
         a.   To allow more uses than the base zone allows in specific areas
but within the same form and character of the base zone; and/or
         b.   To more easily allow certain uses that are already allowed in the
base zone.
   C.   T3 Neighborhood Edge Zone (T3NE):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3674.png]
General note: The illustrations above are intended to provide a brief overview
of the zone and are descriptive in nature.
      1.   Intent:
         a.   A walkable neighborhood environment of detached, small- to-large
building footprint, low-intensity housing choices from house large, duplex
side-by-side to cottage court, supporting and within short walking distance of
neighborhood-serving retail, food and service uses.
         b.   The following are appropriate form elements in the zone:
            (1)   House-scale buildings.
            (2)   Detached buildings.
            (3)   Medium-to-large design site width.
            (4)   Small-to-large building footprint.
            (5)   Medium-to-large front setbacks.
            (6)   Medium side setbacks.
            (7)   Up to 2.5 stories.
            (8)   Porch, dooryard and stoop frontage types.
      2.   Sub-Zone(s): None.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3672.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3670.png]
      3.   Building Types:
Primary       Design Site
Building Type Width (A) Depth (B) Standards
Primary         Design Site
Building Type   Width (A) Depth (B)  Standards
House Large     60' min.1 110' min.2 14-2H-6D
                95' max.  180' max.
Duplex Side-by- 60' min.1 100' min.2 14-2H-6F
Side3           75' max.  180' max.
Cottage Court   90' min.1 120' min.2 14-2H-6H
                120' max. 200' max.
1   Min. width may be reduced by 10' if vehicle access is provided from
rear.
2   Min. depth may be adjusted as follows:
   a.   It may be reduced by 10' if utility easement is relocated to alley;
and/or
   b.   It may be reduced by 15' if the design site fronts new civic space
(14-2H-5) not shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
   Min. depth reduction may not exceed 25' total.
3   For fee simple arrangements, no side setback is required between the
units of this building type.
 
      4.   Building Form:
a. Height:
Primary Building1            
   Stories               2.5 stories max.2
   To Roofline3          30' max. (C)
Accessory Structure(s)1      
   Carriage House        2 stories max.
   Other                 1 story max.
Ground Floor Ceiling Height 9' min. (D)
b. Footprint
Depth, Ground-Floor Space   30' min.4 (E)
c. Standards
   (1)   Design Site Coverage defined by max. building size of primary building
type allowed and Carriage House per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and Item 5 (Building Placement) standards of
this zone.
1   See section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) for massing and height standards.
2   ".5" refers to an occupiable attic.
3   Typically measured from average finished grade along the frontage. Solar
energy systems shall not be included in the maximum building height
measurement. See Building Height in Article 14-9A (General Definitions).
4   12' min. for Cottage Court Building Type.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3668.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3666.png]
      15' Utility Easement Area                              15' Utility
Easement Area
      Street (Front: Narrowest Side)                           Street (Front:
Narrowest Side)
      5.   Building Placement:
a. Setback (Distance from ROW/Design Site Line)
Front (Facade Zone)1, 2   (F)
   Interior Design Site25' min.; 35' max.
   Corner Design Site  25' min.; 35' max.
Side Street (Facade        
Zone)1, 2
   Primary Building    20' min.; 25' max. (G)
   Accessory Structure(20' min. (H)
Side                       
   Primary Building    5' min. (I)
   Accessory Structure 5' min. (J)
(s)3
Rear                       
   Primary Building    25' min. (K)
   Accessory Structure(5' min. (L)
b. Building Within Facade Zone
Total length of facade required within or abutting the facade zone, exclusive of
setbacks.
   Front               50% min.
   Side Street         40% min.
c. Standards
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
1   If utility easement is 10' as determined by the applicable abutting
thoroughfare type (
14-2H-9), subtract 5' from required setback.
2   The area between the front and side street design site lines and the
building shall not be paved (except for allowed driveways and pedestrian routes)
and is subject to the requirements in section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards).
3   For Duplex Side-By-Side and Attached Townhouses, no side setback is required
for accessory structures used for parking.
 
      6.   Encroachments Into Setbacks:
 
a. Encroachment Type: Front (M) Side St. (N) Side (O) Rear (P)
   Architectural   5' max.   5' max.      3' max.  5' max.
Features
   Stairs          X         5' max.      2' max.  5' max.
b. Standards:                                       
   (1)   Encroachments are not allowed within utility easement area, ROW,
alley ROW or across a property line.
   (2)   Upper story encroachments on front and side street require 8' min.
of clearance.
   (3)   See Item 8 (Frontages) for allowed frontages and section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards) for further refinements.
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5474.png]
      7.    Parking:
a. Required Spaces:
Residential Uses                                                                    
                                                                                   1 min.
   Studio or 1- 2 bedrooms                                                      per unit
   3 or more bedrooms                                                           2 min.
                                                                                   per unit
Non-Residential Uses                                                                
                                                                                   None
                                                                                   2.5 min./
   1,500 sf.                                                                    1,000 sf.
   > 1,500 sf.                                                                  after
                                                                                   first
                                                                                   1,500 sf.
b. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
                                                                                    
                                                                                   15' min.
                                                                                   behind
                                                                                   face of
Front1                                                                             frontage
   House large                                                                  type or
                                                                                  building
   All other building types                                                     whichever
                                                                                   is closer
                                                                                   to street
                                                                                   (Q)
                                                                                   50' min.
                                                                                   (R)
Side Street                                                                        20' min.
                                                                                   (S)
Side                                                                               5' min.
                                                                                   (T)
Rear                                                                               5' min.
                                                                                   (U)
c. Characteristics:
   Driveway Width                                                               12' max.2
                                                                                   (V)
   Distance between driveways                                                   20' min.
                                                                                   (W)
d. Standards:
   (1)   Parking may be covered or uncovered and may be attached or detached from main body.
   (2)   Parking may be located in rear or side wing in compliance with main body
and wing(s) standards per section                                                   
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards).
   (3)   Porte-cochère allowed if integrated into building facade.           
   (4)   Driveway width along alley may exceed 12'.                           
   (5)   A driveway may be shared between adjacent design sites.              
1   Front access is not allowed in corner design sites.                          
2   With 2' planting strip on each side.                                         
 
      8.   Frontages:
 
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
   Porch projecting    A     A        14-2H-8C
   Porch engaged       A     A        14-2H-8D
   Dooryard            A     A        14-2H-8E
   Stoop               A     A        14-2H-8F
 
      9.   Signage:
 
a. Sign Type:     Standards
   Temporary si14-5B-9
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
   D.    T3 Neighborhood General Zone (T3NG):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3662.png]
      1.     Intent:
         a.    A walk able neighborhood environment of small footprint, low-
intensity housing choices from house small, duplex side-by-side, duplex
stacked, cottage court, multiplex small to townhouse, supporting and within
short walking distance of neighborhood-serving retail and services.
         b.   The following are appropriate form elements in the zone:
            (1)   House-scale buildings.
            (2)   Detached buildings.
            (3)   Small-to-medium design site width.
            (4)   Small building footprint.
            (5)   Medium front setbacks.
            (6)   Medium side setbacks.
            (7)   Up to 2.5 stories.
            (8)   Porch, dooryard and stoop frontage types.
      2.   Sub-Zone(s):
         a.   T3NG-Open: See section
14-2H-3 for additional allowed uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3660.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3658.png]
      3.   Building Types:
Primary       Design Site
Building Type Width (A)   Depth (B) Standards
Primary               Design
                      Site
Building Type         Width (A)  Depth (B)  Standards
a. House-Scale:                            
   House small     50' min.1  100' min.2 14-2H-6E
                      75' max.   180' max.
   Duplex side-by- 60' min.1  100' min.2 14-2H-6F
side5                 75' max.   180' max.
   Duplex stacked  50' min.1  100' min.2 14-2H-6G
                      70' max.   180' max.
   Cottage court   90' min.1  120' min.2 14-2H-6H
                      120' max.  200' max.
   Multiplex small 70' min.1  110' min.2 14-2H-6I
                      100' max.  150' max.
   Townhouse5      25' min.3  100' min.2 14-2H-6K
                      125' max.4 180' max.
1   Min. width may be reduced by 10' if vehicle access is provided from rear.
2   Min. depth may be adjusted as follows:
   (a)   It may be reduced by 10' if utility easement is relocated to alley;
and/or
   (b)   It may be reduced by 15' if the design site fronts new civic space (
14-2H-5) not shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
   Min. depth reduction may not exceed 25' total.
3   Represents 1 townhouse.
4   Represents 3 townhouses.
5   For fee simple arrangements, no side setback is required between the units
of this building type.
 
      4.   Building Form:
a. Height:
Primary Building1             
   Stories                2.5 stories max.2
   To roofline3           30' max. (C)
Accessory Structure(s)1       
   Carriage house         2 stories max.
   Other                  1 story max.
Ground Floor Ceiling         9' min. (D)
b. Footprint:
   Depth, ground-floor spa30' min.4 (E)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Design site coverage defined by max. building size of primary building
type allowed and carriage house per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and Item 5 (Building Placement) standards of
this zone.
1   See section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) for refinements to massing and height
standards.
2   ".5" refers to an occupiable attic.
3   Typically measured from average finished grade along the frontage. Solar
energy systems shall not be included in the maximum building height me asu
rement. See building height in article 14-9A (General Definitions).
4   12' min. for cottage court building type.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3656.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3654.png]
      5.   Building Placement:
a. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front (Facade Zone)1, 2        
   Interior design site    20' min.; 30' max. (F)
   Corner design site      20' min.; 30' max.
Side street (Facade Zone)1, 2  
   Primary building        15' min.; 25' max (G)
   Accessory structure(s)  15' min. (H)
Side                           
   Primary building        5' min. (I)
   Accessory structure(s)3 5' min. (J)
Rear                           
   Primary building        20' min. (K)
   Accessory structure(s)  5' min. (L)
b. Building Within Facade Zone:
Total length of facade required within or abutting the facade zone, exclusive of
setbacks.
   Front                   60% min.
   Side street             50% min.
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance with
section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
1   If utility easement is 10' as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9), subtract 5' from required setback.
2   The area between the front and side street design site lines and the building
shall not be paved (except for allowed drieways and pedestrian routes) and is
subject to the requirements in section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards).
3   For Duplex Side-By-Side and Attached Townhouses, no side setback is required for
accessory structures used for parking.
 
   6.   Encroachments Into Setbacks:
 
a. Encroachment Type Front (M) Side St. (N) Side (O) Rear (P)
   Architectural  3' max.   3' max.      3' max.  5' max.
features
   Stairs         X         3' max.      2' max.  5' max.
b. Standards:
   (1)   Encroachments are not allowed within utility easement area, ROW,
alley ROW or across a property line.
   (2)   See Item 8 (Frontages) for allowed frontages and section 14-2H-8
(Frontage Type Standards) for further refinements.
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5480.png]
 
      7.    Parking:
a. Required Spaces:             
Residential Uses                
   Studio or 1-2 bedrooms   1 min. per unit
   3 or more bedrooms       2 min. per unit
Non-Residential Uses            
   1,500 sf.                None
   > 1,500 sf.              2.5 min./1,000 sf.
                               after first 1,500 sf.
b. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front1                         (Q)
   House small              15' min. behind face of frontage type or building
                            whichever is closer to street
   All other building types 40' min. (R)
Side street                    15' min. (S)
Side                           5' min. (T)
Rear                           5' min. (U)
c. Characteristics:
Driveway width                 12' max.2 (V)
Distance between driveway      20' min. (W)
d. Standards:
   (1)   Parking may be covered or uncovered and may be attached or detached from
main body.
   (2)   Parking may be located in rear or side wing in compliance with main body
and wing(s) standards per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards).
   (3)   Porte-cochère allowed if integrated into building facade.
   (4)   Driveway width along alley may exceed 12'.
   (5)   A driveway may be shared between adjacent design sites.
1   Front access is not allowed in corner design sites.
2   With 2' planting strip on each side.
 
      8.   Frontages:
 
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
   Porch projecting    A     A        14-2H-8C
   Porch engaged       A     A        14-2H-8D
   Dooryard            A     A        14-2H-8E
   Stoop               A     A        14-2H-8F
 
      9.   Signage:
 
a. Sign Type:     Standards
   Awning sign114-5B-8C
   Porch sign1 14-5B-8H-4a
   Portable sig14-5B-8E
   Post sign1  14-5B-8H-4b
   Temporary si14-5B-8B
1    Only in open sub-zone
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
   E.   T4 Neighborhood Small Zone (T4NS):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3650.png]
      1.     Intent:
         a.   A walkable neighborhood environment of small-to- medium-
footprint, moderate-intensity housing choices from cottage court, multiplex
small, courtyard building small to townhouse, supporting and within short
walking distance of neighborhood-serving retail and services.
         b.   The following are appropriate form elements in the zone:
            (1)   House-scale buildings.
            (2)   Detached and attached buildings.
            (3)   Small-to-medium design site width.
            (4)   Small-to-medium building footprint.
            (5)   Small-to-medium front setbacks.
            (6)   Small-to-medium side setbacks.
            (7)   Up to 2.5 stories.
            (8)   Porch, dooryard and stoop frontage types.
      2.   Sub-Zone(s):
         a.   T4NS-Open: See section
14-2H-3 for additional allowed uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3648.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3646.png]
      3.    Building Types :
Primary       Design Site
Building Type Width (A)   Depth (B) Standards
Primary                  Design Site
Building Type            Width (A)   Depth (B)  Standards
a. House-Scale:                                
   Cottage court      90' min.1   120' min.2 14-2H-6H
                         120' max.   200' max.
   Multiplex small    60' min.1   110' min.2 14-2H-6I
                         100' max.   150' max.
   Courtyard building 100' min.1  150' min.2 14-2H-6L
small                    130' max.4  180' max.
b. Block-Scale:
   Townhouse5         18' min.3   100' min.2 14-2H-6K
                         160' max.4  180' max.
1   Min. width may be reduced by 10' if vehicle access is provided from rear.
2   Min. depth may be adjusted as follows:
   (a)   It may be reduced by 10' if utility easement is relocated to alley;
and/or
   (b)   It may be reduced by 15' if the design site fronts new civic space (
14-2H-5) not shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
   Min. depth reduction may not exceed 25' total.
3   Represents 1 townhouse.
4   Represents 4 townhouses.
5   For fee simple arrangements, no side setback is required between the units
of this building type.
 
      4.   Building Form:
a. Height:
Primary Building1          
   Stories             2.5 stories max.2
   To roofline3        30' max. (C)
Accessory Structure(s)1    
   Carriage house      2 stories max.
   Other               1 story max.
Ground Floor Ceiling      9' min. (D)
b. Footprint:
Depth, ground-floor space 30' min.4 (E)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Design site coverage defined by max. building size of primary building
type allowed and carriage house per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and Item 5 (Building Placement) standards of
this zone.
1   See section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) for refinements to massing and height
standards.
2   ".5" refers to an occupiable attic.
3   Typically measured from average finished grade along the frontage. Solar
energy systems shall not be included in the maximum building height
measurement. See building height in article 14-9A (General Definitions).
4   12' min. for cottage court building type.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3644.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3642.png]
      5.   Building Placement:
a. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front (Facade Zone)1, 2        
   Interior design site    15' min.; 30' max. (F)
   Corner design site      15' min.; 30' max.
Side street (Facade Zone)1, 2  
   Primary building        15' min.; 25' max. (G)
   Accessory structure(s)  15' min. (H)
Side                           
   Primary building        5' min.(I)
   Accessory structure(s)3 3' min.(J)
Rear                           
   Primary building        15' min. (I)
   Accessory structure(s)  5' min. (J)
b. Building Within Facade Zone:
Total length of facade required within or abutting the facade zone, exclusive of
setbacks.
   Front                   65% min.
   Side street             55% min.
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance with
section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
1   If utility easement is 10' as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9), subtract 5' from required setback.
2   The area between the front and side street design site lines and the building
shall not be paved (except for allowed drieways and pedestrian routes) and is
subject to the requirements in section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards).
3   For Duplex Side-By-Side and Attached Townhouses, no side setback is required for
accessory structures used for parking.
 
      6.   Encroachments Into Setbacks:
 
a. Encroachment Type      Front (M) Side St. (N) Side (O) Rear (P)
   Architectural featur3' max.   3' max.      5' max.  5' max.
   Stairs              X         3' max.      5' max.  5' max.
b. Standards:
   (1)   Encroachments are not allowed within utility easement area, ROW, alley
ROW or across a property line.
   (2)   Upper stories encroachments on front and side street require 8' min.
of clearance.
   (3)   See Item 8 (Frontages) for allowed frontages and section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards) for further refinements.
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5482.png]
 
      7.    Parking:
a. Required Spaces:           
Residential Uses              
   Studio or 1-2 bedrooms 1 min. per unit
   3 or more bedrooms     1.5 min. per unit
Non-Residential Uses          
   1,500 sf.              None
   > 1,500 sf.            2.5 min./1,000 sf.
                             after first 1,500 sf.
b. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
   Front1                 40' min. (Q)
   Side street            15' min. (R)
   Side                   5' min. (S)
   Rear                   5' min. (T)
c. Characteristics:
   Driveway width         12' max.2 (U)
   Distance between drivew20' min. (V)
d. Standards:
   (1)   Parking may be covered or uncovered and may be attached or detached from
main body.
   (2)   Parking may be located in rear or side wing in compliance with main body
and wing(s) standards per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards).
   (3)   Porte-cochère allowed if integrated into building facade.
   (4)   Driveway width along alley may exceed 12'.
   (5)   A driveway may be shared between adjacent design sites.
1   Front access is not allowed in corner design sites.
2   With 2' planting strip on each side.
 
      8.   Frontages:
 
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
   Porch projecting    A     A        14-2H-8C
   Porch engaged       A     A        14-2H-8D
   Dooryard            A     A        14-2H-8E
   Stoop               A     A        14-2H-8F
 
      9.   Signage:
a. Sign Type: Standards
a. Sign Type:                 Standards
   Awning sign1            14-5B-8C
   Porch sign1             14-5B-8H-4a
   Portable sign           14-5B-8E
   Post sign1              14-5B-8H-4b
   Small identification sig14-5B-8B
   Temporary sign          14-5B-9
1   Only in open sub-zone
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
   F.     T4 Neighborhood Medium Zone (T4NM):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3638.png]
      1.     Intent:
         a.    A walkable neighborhood environment with medium-footprint,
moderate-intensity housing choices from multiplex large, courtyard building
small to townhouse, supporting and within short walking distance of
neighborhood-serving retail and services.
         b.   The following are appropriate form elements in the zone:
            (1)   Primarily house-scale buildings.
            (2)   Detached and attached buildings.
            (3)   Medium design site width.
            (4)   Medium building footprint.
            (5)   Small front setbacks.
            (6)   Small side setbacks.
            (7)   Up to 3.5 stories.
            (8)   Porch, dooryard, stoop, forecourt and terrace frontage types.
      2.   Sub-Zone(s):
         a.   T4NM-Open: See section
14-2H-3 for additional allowed uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3636.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3634.png]
      3.    Building Types:
Primary       Design Site
Building Type Width (A)   Depth (B) Standards
Primary                  Design Site
Building Type            Width (A)     Depth (B)  Standards
a. House-Scale:                                  
   Multiplex large    75' min.1     130' min.2 14-2H-6J
                         100' max.     150' max.
   Courtyard building 100' min.1    150' min.2 14-2H-6L
small                    130' max.     180' max.
b. Block-Scale:
   Townhouse6         18' min.3     100' min.2 14-2H-6K
                         130' max.4, 5 180' max.
1   Min. width may be reduced by 10' if vehicle access is provided from rear.
2   Min. depth may be adjusted as follows:
   (a)   It may be reduced by 10' if utility easement is relocated to alley;
and/or
   (b)   It may be reduced by 15' if the design site fronts new civic space (
14-2H-5) not shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
   Min. depth reduction may not exceed 25' total.
3   Represents 1 townhouse.
4   Represents 4 townhouses.
5   In the open sub-zone, each townhouse may be divided vertically into 3
units.
6   For fee simple arrangements, no side setback is required between the units
of this building type.
 
      4.   Building Form:
a. Height:
Primary Building1          
   Stories             3.5 stories max.2 (C)
   To roofline3        40' max.
Accessory Structure(s)1    
   Carriage house      2 stories max.
   Other               1 story max.
Ground Floor Ceiling      9' min. (D)
b. Footprint:
Depth, ground-floor space 30' min. (E)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Design site coverage defined by max. building size of primary building
type allowed and carriage house per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and Item 5 (Building Placement) standards of
this zone.
1   See section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) for refinements to massing and height
standards.
2   ".5" refers to an occupiable attic.
3   Typically measured from average finished grade along the frontage. Solar
energy systems shall not be included in the maximum building height
measurement. See building height in article 14-9A (General Definitions).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3632.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3630.png]
      5.   Building Placement:
a. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front (Facade Zone)1, 2       
   Interior design site   15' min.; 25' max. (F)
   Corner design site     15' min.; 25' max.
Side street (Facade Zone)1,   
2                            15' min.; 25' max. (G)
   Primary building       15' min. (H)
   Accessory structure(s)
Side                          
   Primary building       5' min. (I)
   Accessory structure(s) 3' min. (J)
Rear                          
   Primary building       15' min. (K)
   Accessory structure(s) 5' min. (L)
b. Building Within Facade Zone:
Total length of facade required within or abutting the facade zone, exclusive of
setbacks.
   Front                  65% min.
   Side street            55% min.
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance with
section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
1   If utility easement is 10' as identified by the applicable abutting
thoroughfare type (
14-2H-9), subtract 5' from required setback.
2   The area between the front and side street design site lines and the building
shall not be paved (except for allowed drieways and pedestrian routes) and is
subject to the requirements in section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards).
3   For Duple Side-By-Side and Attached Townhouses, no side setback is required for
accessory structures used for parking.
 
      6.   Encroachments Into Setbacks:
 
a. Encroachment Type      Front (M) Side St. (N) Side (O) Rear (P)
   Architectural featur3' max.   3' max.      3' max.  5' max.
   Stairs              X         3' max.      2' max.  5' max.
b. Standards:
   (1)   Encroachments are not allowed within utility easement area, ROW, alley
ROW or across a property line.
   (2)   Upper stories encroachments on front and side street require 8' min.
of clearance.
   (3)   See Item 8 (Frontages) for allowed frontages and section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards) for further refinements.
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5484.png]
 
      7.    Parking:
a. Required Spaces:            
Residenti al Uses              
   Studio or 1-2 bedroom s 1 min. per unit
   3 or more bedrooms      1.5 min. per unit
Non-Residential Uses           
   2,000 sf.               None
   > 2,000 sf.             2.5 min./1,000 sf.
                              after first 2,000 sf.
b. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
   Front1                  40' min. (Q)
   Side street             15' min. (R)
   Side                    5' min. (S)
   Rear                    5' min. (T)
c. Characteristics:
   Driveway width          12' max.2 (U)
   Distance between drivewa20' min. (V)
d. Standards:
   (1)   Parking may be covered or uncovered and may be attached or detached from
main body.
   (2)   Parking may be located in rear or side wing in compliance with main body
and wing(s) standards per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards).
   (3)   Porte-cochère allowed if integrated into building facade.
   (4)   Driveway width along alley may exceed 12'.
   (5)   A driveway may be shared between adjacent design sites.
1   Front access is not allowed in corner design sites.
2   With 2' planting strip on each side.
 
      8.   Frontages:
 
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
   Porch projecting    A     A        14-2H-8C
   Porch engaged       A     A        14-2H-8D
   Dooryard            A     A        14-2H-8E
   Stoop               A     A        14-2H-8F
   Forecourt           A     A        14-2H-8G
   Terrace             A     A        14-2H-8J
 
      9.   Signage:
a. Sign Type: Standards
a. Sign Type:                  Standards
   Awning sign1             14-5B-8C
   Porch sign1              14-5B-8H-4a
   Portable sign            14-5B-8E
   Post sign1               14-5B-8H-4b
   Small identification sign14-5B-8B
   Storefront projecting sig14-5B-8C
   Temporary sign           14-5B-9
   Window sign1             14-5B-8E
1   Only in open sub-zone
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
   G.   T4 Main Street Zone (T4MS):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3626.png]
      1.     Intent:
         a.    A walkable, vibrant district of medium-to-large-footprint,
moderate-intensity, mixed-use buildings and housing choices from townhouse and
courtyard building large to main street building, supporting neighborhood-
serving ground floor retail, food and services, including indoor and outdoor
artisanal industrial businesses.
         b.   The following are appropriate form elements in the zone:
            (1)   Block-scale buildings.
            (2)   Attached buildings.
            (3)   Medium design site width.
            (4)   Medium-to-large building footprint.
            (5)   Small-to-none front setbacks.
            (6)   Small-to-none side setbacks.
            (7)   Up to 4 stories.
            (8)   Dooryard, stoop, forecourt, maker shopfront, shopfront,
terrace, gallery and arcade frontage types.
      2.   Sub-Zone(s): None.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3624.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3622.png]
      3.   Building Types:
Primary       Design Site
Building Type Width (A)   Depth (B) Standards
Primary                     Design Site
Building Type               Width (A)     Depth (B)  Standards
a. Block-Scale:
   Townhouse5            18' min.2     100' min.1 14-2H-6K
                            220' max.3, 4 180' max.
   Courtyard building lar100' min.     180' min.1 14-2H-6M
                            150' max.     200' max.
   Main street building  25' min.      100' min.1 14-2H-6N
                            150' max.     200' max.
1   Min. depth may be reduced by 15' if the design site fronts a new civic
space (14-2H-5) not shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive
Plan. Min. depth reductions may not exceed 25' total.
2   Represents 1 townhouse.
3   Represents 8 townhouses.
4   Each townhouse may be divided vertically into 3 units.
5   For fee simple arrangements, no side setback is required between the
units of this building type.
 
      4.   Building Form:
a. Height:
Primary Building1          
   Stories             4 stories max.
   To roofline2        45' max. (C)
Accessory Structure(s)1    
   Carriage house      2 stories max.
   Other               1 story max.
Ground Floor Ceiling      14' min. (D)
b. Footprint:
Depth, ground-floor space 30' min. (E)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Design site coverage defined by max. building size of primary building
type allowed and carriage house per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) and Item 5 (Building Placement) standards of
this zone.
1   See section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards) for refinements to massing and height
standards.
2   Typically measured from average finished grade along the frontage. Solar
energy systems shall not be included in the maximum building height
measurement. See building height in article 14-9A (General Definitions).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3620.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3618.png]
      5.    Building Placement:
a. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front (Facade Zone)            
   Interior design site    0' min.; 10' max. (F)
   Corner design site      0' min.; 10' max.
Side street (Facade Zone)      
   Primary building        0' min.; 10' max. (G)
   Accessory structure(s)  0' min. (H)
Side                           
   Primary building        0' min. (I)
   Accessory structure(s)1 3' min. (J)
Rear                           
   Primary building        10' min. (K)
   Accessory structure(s)  5' min. (L)
b. Building Within Facade Zone:
Total length of facade required within or abutting the facade zone, exclusive of
setbacks.
   Front                   80% min.
   Side street             70% min.
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance with
section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Utility easement required in alley as identified by the applicable abutting
thoroughfare type (
14-2H-9).
1   For Duplex Side-By-Side and Attached Townhouses, no side setback is required for
accessory structures used for parking.
 
      6.   Encroachments Into Setbacks:
 
a. Encroachment Type      Front (M) Side St. (N) Side (O) Rear (P)
   Architectural featurXs        X            X        3' max.
   Stairs              X         X            X        3' max.
b. Standards:
   (1)   Encroachments are not allowed within utility easement area, ROW, alley
ROW or across a property line.
   (2)   Upper stories encroachments on front and side street require 8' min.
of clearance.
   (3)   See Item 8 (Frontages) for allowed frontages and section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Type Standards) for further refinements.
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5486.png]
 
      7.   Parking:
a. Required Spaces:           
Residential Uses              
   Studio or 1-2 bedrooms 1 max. per unit
   3 or more bedrooms     1.5 max. per unit
Non-Residential Uses          
   5,000 sf.              0 max.
   > 5,000 sf.            2 max./1,000 sf. after first 5,000
b. Setback (Distance From ROW/Design Site Line):
Front1                       40' min. (Q)
Side street                  (R)
   75' from front         25' min. (S)
   > 75' from front       5' min.
Side                         0' min. (T)
Rear                         5' min. (U)
c. Characteristics:
Driveway width               12' max.1, 2 (V)
d. Standards:
   (1 )   Parking may be covered or uncovere d and may be attached or detached from
main body.
   (2 )   Parking may be located in rear or side wing in compliance with main body
and wing(s) standards per section
14-2H-6 (Building Type Standards).
   (3 )   Driveway width along alley may exceed 12'.
   (4)   A driveway may be shared between adjacent design sites.
1   With 2' planting strip on each side.
 
      8.   Frontages:
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
a. Private Frontage Type: Front Side St. Standards
   Dooryard            X     A1       14-2H-8E
   Stoop               X     A1, 2    14-2H-8F
   Forecourt           A     A        14-2H-8G
   Maker shopfront     A     A1       14-2H-8H
   Shopfront           A     A2       14-2H-8I
   Terrace             A     A        14-2H-8J
   Gallery             A     A        14-2H-8K
   Arcade              A     A        14-2H-8L
1   At 60' min. from front of design site.
2   Also allowed within open space in courtyard building large.
 
      9.   Signage:
a. Sign Type: Standards
a. Sign Type:                 Standards
   Awning sign             14-5B-8C
   Canopy sign             14-5B-8C
   Directional sign        14-5B-8C
   Masonry wall sign       14-5B-8E
   Porch sign              14-5B-8H-4a
   Portable sign           14-5B-8E
   Post sign               14-5B-8H-4b
   Small identification sig14-5B-8B
   Storefront projecting si14-5B-8C
   Temporary sign          14-5B-9
   Wall mural painted sign 14-5B-8E
   Window sign             14-5B-8E
 
      Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-
2025)
14-2H-3: USE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   It is the intent of this section to establish appropriate standards
for location, design, and operation of uses to assure that they will be
developed in a manner consistent with the purpose of the Form-Based Zone where
they are allowed.
      2.   This section provides additional standards for certain uses and
activities to ensure compatibility with site features and existing uses.
    B.   Allowed Uses:
      1.   Uses Allowed:
         a.   
Table 14-2H-3B-1 (Uses) indicates for each Form-Based Zone whether a principal
land use is permitted (P), allowed with provisions (PR), or allowed by special
exception (S). Specific land uses are grouped into the categories and subgroups
listed in
Table 14-2H-3B-1 (Uses).
         b.   
Table 14-2H-3B-1 (Uses) includes cross-references to applicable specific use
standards for each use. Where necessary and appropriate, the cross-reference
indicates the conventional zone use standards that must be followed.
         c.   Each use listed in
Table 14-2H-3B-1 (Uses) is defined in Chapter 4 (Use Regulations) of Title 14
(Zoning Code). If a use is only applicable within areas established in
compliance with this Article, the use is defined in Chapter 14-9 (Definitions).
      2.   Accessory Uses Allowed:
         a.   
Table 14-2H-3B-2 (Accessory Uses) indicates for each Form-Based Zone where
accessory uses are allowed.
         b.   
Table 14-2H-3B-2 (Accessory Uses) includes cross-references to applicable
specific use standards for each use. Where necessary and appropriate, the
cross-reference indicates the conventional zone use standards in Title 14
(Zoning Code) that apply.
Table 14-2H-3B-1: Uses
Use Categories T3NE T3NG T3NG-O T4NS T4NS-O T4NM T4NM-O T4MS Specific Standards
Table 14-2H-3B-1: Uses
Use Categories                            T3NE T3NG T3NG- T4NS T4NS- T4NM T4NM- T4MS Specific
                                                    O          O          O          Standards
Residential Uses
Household Living Uses                                                                 
   Detached Single-Family Dwellings    P    P    P     -    -     -    -     -     
   Detached Zero Lot Line Dwellings    PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    -    -     -    14-4B-4A-
                                                                                     4
   Group Households                    PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR2  14-4B-4A-
                                                                                     6
   Live/Work                           -    -    -     PR   PR    PR   PR    PR2  14-2H-3C-
                                                                                     2
   Missing Middle Housing              P    P    P     P    P     P    P     P2    
Group Living Uses                                                                     
   Assisted Group Living               -    -    -     S    S     S    S     PR2  14-4B-4A-
                                                                                     8(RM- 44)
   Independent Group Living            -    -    -     -    -     S    S     S2   14-4B-4A-
                                                                                     9(RM- 44)
   Fraternal Group Living              -    -    -     -    -     S    S     S2   14-4B-4A-
                                                                                     10(RM-44)
Commercial Uses
Eating and Drinking Establishments        -    -    PR/S1 -    PR/S1 -    PR/S1 P    14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     10(CN-1)
Office Uses                                                                           
   General Office                      -    -    P1    -    P1    -    P1    P     
   Medical/Dental Office               -    -    P1    -    P1    -    P1    P     
Retail Uses                                                                           
   Sales Oriented                      -    -    P1    -    P1    -    P1    P     
   Personal Service Oriented           -    -    P1    -    P1    -    P1    P     
   Alcohol Sales Oriented              -    -    -     -    S1    -    S1    S    14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     15
   Hospitality Oriented                PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     18(CN-1)
   Tobacco Sales Oriented              -    -    PR1   -    PR1   -    PR1   PR   14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     25
   Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses -    -    -     -    -     -    -     PR/S 14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     7
   General Animal Related Commercial Us-s   -    -     -    S1    -    S1    PR   14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     2(CN- 1)
Commercial Parking                        -    -    -     -    -     -    -     PR2  14-4B-4B-
                                                                                     9
Institutional And Civic Uses
Community Service Uses                                                                
   Community Service - Shelter         -    -    -     S    S     S    S     S2   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     5(RM-44)
   General Community Service           -    -    -     S    S     S    S     PR   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     3(CN-1)
   Day-care Uses                       S    S    S     PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     7
Educational Facilities                                                                
   General                             S    S    S     PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     10
   Specialized                         -    -    -     -    -     PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     12(CN-1)
   Park And Open Space Uses            PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     15
   Religious/Private Group Assembly UseS    S    S     PR   PR    PR   PR    PR2  14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     16(CO-1)
Other Uses
   Temporary Uses                      PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4D-2
   Community Garden                    PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-2H-3C-
                                                                                     1
   Communication Transmission Facility PR   PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   PR    PR   14-4B-4E-
Uses                                                                                 4a
   Basic Utility Uses                  -    -    -     PR3  PR3   PR3  PR3   -    14-4B-4D-
                                                                                     1(CN-1)
1   Max 1,500 sf. per building; shall not be open to the public between the hours of 11:00
P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
2   Not allowed on the ground floor within 30' of the sidewalk. Allowed on ground floor along
side streets if at least 60' from the front of the design site.
3   Use must be completely within enclosed building.
 
Table 14-2H-3B-2: Accessory Uses
Use Categories T3NE T3NG T3NG-O T4NS T4NS-O T4NM T4NM-O T4MS Specific Standards
Table 14-2H-3B-2: Accessory Uses
Use Categories   T3NE T3NG T3NG-O T4NS T4NS-O T4NM T4NM-O T4MS Specific
                                                               Standards
Accessory
Dwelling Units   PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR    
(ADUs)1
Accessory Retail -    -    -      -    -      -    -      PR   14-4C-2B
Sales
Accessory Uses
Within Parks And PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2C
Open Spaces Uses
Bed And
Breakfast        PR   PR   PR     -    -      -    -      -    14-4C-2D
Homestays
Bed And          PR   PR   PR     -    -      -    -      -    14-4C-2E
Breakfast Inns
Childcare Homes  PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2G
Communication
Towers,
Antennas, And    PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2H
Satellite                                                      (residential)
Recieving
Devices
Daycare          PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2I
Decks And
Patios,          PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2J-2
Uncovered
Fences, Walls,   PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-2H-4B
And Hedges
Home Occupations PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2M
Mechanical       PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2N
Structures
Off Street       -    -    -      PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2O
Loading
Outdoor Dumpster PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2Q
Areas
Outdoor Lighting PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-4C-2R
                                                               4-3-1 (RFC-
Outdoor Service  -    -    PR     -    PR     -    PR     PR   G within 100' of
Areas                                                          a residential
                                                               zone)
Swimming Pools,                                                14-4C-2T
Hot Tubs, And    PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     -    (Residential
Tennis Courts                                                  Zones)
Signs            PR   PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   PR     PR   14-5B-8H
Small Wind
Energy           -    -    -      -    -      -    -      PR   14-4C-2Y (CC-2)
Conversion
Systems
Rooftop Services -    -    -      -    -      -    -      PR   14-4C-2AA (CN-1)
Areas
1   ADUs attached to the primary building must comply with sub-section
14-4C-2A. ADUs that are detached from the primary building units must comply
with the carriage house requirements, see sub-section
14-2H-6C.
 
   C.   Standards For Specific Uses:
      1.   Community Gardens:
         a.   General Standards:
            (1)   Only the following buildings and structures are allowed on-
site:
               (a)   Stands for sale of produce grown on-site limited in size
to one hundred twenty (120) square feet;
               (b)   Sheds for storage of tools limited in size to one hundred
twenty (120) square feet;
               (c)   Greenhouses, consisting of buildings made of glass,
plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated, limited in size to one
hundred twenty (120) square feet and designed in compliance with setbacks for
accessory structures; and
               (d)   Other small hardscape areas and amenities (including, but
are not limited to, benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds,
compost or waste bins, picnic tables, seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art,
rain barrels, and children's play areas).
            (2)   The combined area of all structures shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the community garden site area.
            (3)   On-site storm water systems and irrigation shall be
consistent with applicable City standards.
            (4)   See sub-section
14-2H-5H (Community Garden) for additional standards.
         b.   Limitations On Use:
            (1)   Retail is allowed on-site but only for retail of produce
grown on-site.
            (2)   Outdoor storage of tools and materials is not permitted.
         c.   Maintenance Required: Maintenance of community gardens shall
ensure that no conditions constituting a nuisance are created, including that
water and fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property. If conditions
constituting a nuisance are created, the owner or other individual(s)
responsible for the community garden shall ensure that it is replaced with
landscaping in compliance with all applicable standards in Title 14 (Zoning
Code) and/or seeded.
      2.   Live/Work:
         a.   General Standards: These standards establish regulations for the
construction and operation of live/work units and for the reuse of existing
commercial and industrial buildings to accommodate live/work opportunities
where allowed in the zone. Live/work differs from home occupations in that the
"work" component of the live/work occupancy may:
            (1)   Include employment of persons not living in the residential
portion;
            (2)   Function predominately as work space with limited living
facilities;
            (3)   Have a separate designated access or private entrance
specifically for the business use;
            (4)   Include alterations or features not customarily found in
residential units;
            (5)   Have window displays; and
            (6)   Include food handling, processing, or packing.
         b.   Limitations On Use: The non-residential component of a live/work
unit shall be one of the following uses:
            (1)   Sales oriented retail;
            (2)   Personal service oriented uses, except for dry cleaners,
taxidermists, and crematoriums;
            (3)   Daycare uses;
            (4)   Bed and breakfast homestays; or
            (5)   Office uses limited to dental practices, general medical
practices, insurance, real estate or travel agencies, accounting practices and
law offices.
         c.   Occupancy Standards: The "live" component of a live/work unit
shall be the principal residence of at least one (1) individual employed in the
business conducted within the live/work unit.
         d.   Operation Standards:
            (1)   No clients or deliveries to the live/work unit are permitted
before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M.
            (2)   Sale Or Rental Of Portion Of Unit: No portion of a live/work
unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial or industrial space for
any person not living in the premises or as a residential space for any
household where no members of said household work in the same unit.
            (3)   Noise and other standards shall be those applicable to
commercial properties in the applicable zone. However, storage of flammable
liquids or hazardous materials beyond what is normally associated with a
residential use is prohibited.
            (4)   On-Premises Sales: On-premises retail sales must clearly be
subordinate to the primary use of the live/work unit. On-premises sales are
limited to products manufactured, processed, or fabricated in the live/work
unit or associated with the principal use of the live/work unit. Occasional
open studio programs and gallery shows are also allowed.
            (5)   Nonresident Employees: Up to three (3) persons who do not
reside in the live/work unit may work in the unit.
            (6)   Client And Customer Visits: Client and customer visits to
live/work units are limited to ten (10) per day to ensure compatibility with
adjacent commercial or industrial uses, or adjacent residentially-zoned areas.
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 23-4917, 11-21-
2023; Ord. 24-4941, 12-10-2024
14-2H-4: SITE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   General: This section is intended to ensure that development of
property within Form-Based Zones accomplishes the following:
         a.   Makes a positive contribution to the development pattern of the
area;
         b.   New or altered structures are compatible with the design and use
of existing structures on neighboring properties;
         c.   Respects the existing conditions and safety of neighboring
properties; and
         d.   Does not adversely affect neighboring properties, with "adversely
affect" meaning to impact in a substantial, negative manner the habitability or
enjoyability of these properties.
      2.   Screening: Standards for screening, fences, and walls are adopted to
help conserve and protect property, assure safety and security, enhance
privacy, attenuate noise, and improve the visual environment of the
neighborhood.
      3.   Landscaping: Standards for landscaping are adopted to help protect
and enhance the environmental and visual quality of the community, enhance
privacy, and control dust.
      4.   Parking And Loading: Standards for and limits on the development of
motor vehicle and bicycle parking, and loading and access drives, are adopted
to help ensure that development accomplishes the following:
         a.   Establishes and/or reinforces the character and scale of
walkable, urban neighborhood environments, where development supports and is
within a short walking distance of shopping, food and services;
         b.   Ensures the provision of appropriately designed bicycle parking,
in order to increase bicycle trips and reduce motor vehicle trips per capita;
         c.   Appropriately limits, screens and landscapes motor vehicle
parking, to protect and enhance the environmental and visual quality of the
community, enhance privacy, attenuate noise, and control dust; and
         d.   Reduces motor vehicles trips per capita to and from development.
    B.   Screening:
      1.   Applicability: Screening in all Form-Based Zones is subject to the
standards set forth in this sub-section and in section
14-4C-2L (Fences, Walls, And Hedges). Standards in Article 14-5F (Screening And
Buffering Standards) only apply where stated otherwise.
      2.   Design Standards For Screening: Screening shall comply with the
following:
         a.   Height Maximums: Screening shall not exceed the maximum height
identified in
Table 14-2H-4B-1 (Maximum Screening Height).
         b.   Screening Height Measurement: Screening height shall be measured
as the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the screen
and the top edge of the screen material.
Table 14-2H-4B-1: Maximum Screening Height
Zone Item Maximum Height Allowed
          Front Side St. Side Rear
Table 14-2H-4B-1: Maximum Screening Height
Zone                    Item                Maximum Height Allowed
                                            Front   Side St. Side     Rear
                        Fences              4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
T3 Neighborhood Edge    Free Standing Walls 4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
                        Landscaping         4' max. 4' max.  No max.  No max.
                        Fences              4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
T3 Neighborhood General Free Standing Walls 4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
                        Landscaping         4' max. 4' max.  No max.  No max.
                        Fences              4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
T4 Neighborhood Small   Free Standing Walls 4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
                        Landscaping         4' max. 4' max.  No max.  No max.
                        Fences              4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
T4 Neighborhood Medium  Free Standing Walls 4' max. 4' max.  8' max.  8' max.
                                            4' max. 4' max.  No max.  No max.
                        Fences              X       X        10' max. 10' max.
T4 Main Street          Free Standing Walls X       X        10' max. 10' max.
                        Landscaping         3' max. 3' max.  No max.  No max.
Key: X = Not Allowed
 
      3.   Screening On Retaining Walls: The total height of screens and the
retaining walls that they are mounted on or attached to is up to six feet (6').
      4.   Mechanical Equipment Screening:
         a.   Mechanical equipment exempt from screening:
            (1)   Free-standing or roof-mounted solar equipment; and
            (2)   Vents over thirty inches (30") in height and located on a
roof.
         b.   New installation or relocation of existing mechanical equipment
shall be screened in compliance with this sub-section.
            (1)   Roof-Mounted Equipment: Building parapets or other
architectural elements in the building's architecture style shall screen roof-
mounted equipment.
               (a)   New buildings shall be designed to provide a parapet or
other architectural element that is as tall or taller than the highest point on
any new mechanical equipment to be located on the roof of the building;
               (b)   For existing buildings with no or low parapet heights,
mechanical equipment shall be surrounded on all sides by an opaque screen wall
as tall as the highest point of the equipment. The wall shall be
architecturally consistent with the building and match the existing building
with paint, finish, and trim cap detail; and
               (c)   All new roof screens are subject to Title 18 Site Plan
Review.
            (2)   Wall- And Ground-Mounted Equipment:
               (a)   Shall not be located between the face of the building and
the street;
               (b)   All screen devices shall be as high as the highest point
of the equipment being screened. Equipment and screening shall be in compliance
with the setbacks of the zone; screening shall be architecturally compatible
and include matching paint, finish and trim cap of the building; and
               (c)   All new mechanical screens for ground or wall-mounted
equipment are subject to Title 18 Site Plan Review.
   C.   Landscaping:
      1.   Applicability: Landscaping in all Form-Based Zones is subject to the
standards set forth in this sub-section and to the general landscaping
standards located in Article 14-5E (Landscaping And Tree Standards). Standards
for landscaping in parking areas shall be in combination with sub-section
14-2H-4D (Parking And Loading).
      2.   Landscape Plan And Timing: A landscape plan shall be submitted for
developments either at site plan review or building permit processes. The
landscaping required by this sub-section shall be installed as part of the
development or improvement requiring the landscaping.
      3.   Design Standards:
         a.   Acceptable required landscaping materials are defined as follows:
            (1)   Shrubs, of one-gallon size or larger;
            (2)   Street trees, of 15-gallon size or larger, and double-staked;
            (3)   Ground cover; and
            (4)   Decorative non-living landscaping materials including, but
not limited to sand, stone, gravel, wood or water may be used to satisfy a
maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of required landscaping area when approved
by the Director.
         b.   Species Selection: Native and drought tolerant species are
encouraged to increase native plants and pollinator species. Tree diversity
shall be incorporated using a maximum of five percent (5%) of any one species
and maximum of ten percent (10%) of any one genus of tree unless otherwise
approved by the Director. Trees should also be spatially distributed to avoid
monoculture rows or blocks of any one species or genus. Shrubs and ground cover
should also be diverse and spatially distributed to avoid large monoculture
plantings.
         c.   Separation: Any landscaped area shall be separated from an
adjacent vehicular area by a wall or curb at least six inches (6") higher than
the adjacent vehicular area.
         d.   Existing Vegetation: Every effort shall be made to incorporate
mature on-site trees into the required landscaping.
         e.   Maintenance: Required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat,
clean and healthy condition. This shall include pruning, mowing of lawns,
weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary,
and the appropriate watering of all plantings.
   D.   Parking And Loading:
      1.   Applicability: On-site parking is allowed in all Form-Based Zones
subject to the standards set forth in this this sub-section. Standards in
Article 14-5A (Off-Street Parking And Loading) apply, except where superseded
by this sub-section or section
14-2H-2 (Zones).
      2.   Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces:
         a.   The number of motor vehicle parking spaces required is listed in
Item 7 (Parking) of the zone pursuant to Section
14-2H-2 (Zones).
         b.   On-site loading space(s) is not required.
      3.   General Parking Standards:
         a.   Sharing Of Non-Residential Parking Required:
            (1)   If on-site parking spaces for non-residential uses are
provided, such spaces shall be made available for use by the general public
during at least one (1) of the following time periods:
               (a)   Monday through Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.; or
               (b)   Monday through Friday, 5:00 P.M. to 11:00 P.M. and all day
on Saturday and Sunday.
            (2)   Owners and operators of these shared spaces are required to
post a sign identifying that the spaces are shared along with other information
as needed by the owner/operator.
         b.   Larger Vehicle Parking: Commercial vehicles more than seven and
one-half feet (7½') in height may not be stored in any Form-Based Zone unless
the standards of special vehicle parking and storage requirements are met
pursuant to sub-section14-5A-5L (Special Vehicle Parking And Storage
Requirements).
         c.   Storage Of Unregistered Or Inoperable Motor Vehicles: Automotive
vehicles, trailers, or vehicles of any kind or type, requiring licenses, but
without current plates or inoperable, shall be only parked within completely
enclosed buildings.
         d.   Cargo Or Freight Container: Portable cargo or freight storage
containers in any Form-Based Zone for purposes of loading or unloading, may be
parked or stored on-premise for a period not to exceed ten (10) days in any one
calendar year.
      4.   Traffic-Minimizing Parking Standards:
         a.   Carshare Parking Spaces:
            (1)   Carshare spaces shall be provided in the amounts specified in
Table 14-2H-4D-1 (Required Carshare Parking Spaces).
Table 14-2H-4D-1: Required Carshare Parking Spaces
Use Carshare Parking Spaces Required
Table 14-2H-4D-1: Required Carshare Parking Spaces
Use                                    Carshare Parking Spaces Required
Residential                             
0 - 49 units                           None
50 - 100 units                         1
101 or more units                      2+ 1 per additional 200 units
Office-General, Office- Medical/Dental  
10,000 sf                              None
> 10,000 sf                            1/10,000 sf
 
      5.   Parking Spaces, Design Site Design And Layout:
         a.   Access: Parking lot access and design is subject to the following
standards:
            (1)   All on-site parking facilities shall be designed with an
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or an alley to cause the
least interference with traffic flow.
            (2)   Parking spaces in any parking lot or parking structure shall
not be designed or located so as to allow a vehicle to enter or exit a parking
space directly from a public street. Ingress to and egress from parking spaces
shall be from an on-site aisle or driveway, except parking spaces within design
sites may be designed or located so as to allow a vehicle to enter or exit a
parking space directly from a public alley or rear lane.
         b.   Driveways:
            (1)   Access To Driveways:
                (a)   Driveway access to and from developments of two (2) or
fewer dwelling units onto public streets shall be where practical by forward
motion of the vehicle; and
               (b)   Driveway access to and from developments of three (3) or
more dwelling units onto public streets shall be by forward motion of the
vehicle.
            (2)   Driveways shall extend to and include the area between the
design site line and the edge of the street pavement.
         c.   Materials:
            (1)   All on-site parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced
with materials as approved by the City Engineer and maintained in compliance
with the City standards.
            (2)   The use of pervious or semi-pervious parking area surfacing
materials, include, but are not limited to "grasscrete," or recycled materials
including, but not limited to glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block and
concrete, is subject to approval by the Director and City Engineer. Where
possible, such materials should be used in areas in proximity to and in
combination with on-site stormwater control devices.
         d.   Landscaping, Fencing, And Screening: The landscaping, fencing and
screening standards identified in
Table 14-2H-4D-3 (Required Parking Lot Landscaping) shall be applied with the
standards of sub-section
14-2H-4B (Screening) and sub-section
14-2H-4C (Landscaping).
            (1)   
Table 14-2H-4D-3 outlines required parking lot landscaping. Parking lot
landscaping must include the required minimum landscaped medians and must meet
the minimum percentage landscape requirement. The landscaped medians can count
toward the minimum percentage requirement.
Table 14-2H-4D-3: Required Parking Lot Landscaping
Number Of Parking Spaces Percent Of Gross Parking Area Required To Be
                         Landscaped
Table 14-2H-4D-3: Required Parking Lot Landscaping
Number Of Parking Spaces  Percent Of Gross Parking Area Required To Be
                          Landscaped
   6 or fewer          Curbed, landscaped median minimum 5' in width between
                          every 5 spaces, property line, and building(s).
                          4%; curbed, landscaped median minimum 5' in width
   7 to 15             between every 5 spaces, property line, and building
                          (s).
                          8%; curbed, landscaped median minimum 5' in width
   13 to 30            between every 5 spaces, property line, and building
                          (s).
                          12%; curbed, landscaped median minimum 5' in width
   31 to 70            between every 5 spaces, property line, and building
                          (s).
                          16%; curbed, landscaped median minimum 5' in width
   71 and over         between every 5 spaces, property line, and building
                          (s).
Required Shade Trees       
   Amount              1 tree per 2,700 sf of gross design site area, minus
                          buliding coverage (footprint).
   Pot Size            15 gallon
   Caliper             1.25" minimum
   Height At Installati6' - 8' minimum
   Characteristics     High branching, broad headed, shading form.
   Location            Evenly spaced throughout parking lot to provide
                          uniform shade.
   Required Border     6" high curb or equivalent.
   Border And StormwateCurb shall include breaks every 4' to provide
                          drainage to retention and filtration areas.
                          5' min. in any direction; any vehicle overhang
   Tree Well Size      requires the minimum planter area width to be
                          expanded by an equivalent dimension.
   Car Overhangs       Shall be prevented by stops.
 
            (2)   Parking and loading areas in the T4MS zone shall be screened
from adjacent zones by a six foot (6') wall, fence, or evergreen.
            (3)   Parking area screening is not required when adjacent to an
alley.
            (4)   For the portion of a parking area over which photo-voltaic
solar collectors are installed where they also function as shade structures,
the minimum standard for trees shall be waived, and shrubs and ground covers
shall be planted for every eight (8) parking spaces.
         e.   Location: Location of on-site parking areas in all Form-Based
Zones is regulated by minimum setbacks in section
14-2H-2 (Zones) and the following:
            (1)   Parking lots with twenty (20) or fewer spaces shall include a
minimum five foot (5') wide sidewalk between the building and parking area; and
            (2)   Parking lots with more than twenty (20) spaces shall include
a minimum five foot (5') wide sidewalk, and minimum five foot (5') wide
landscaping between the building and the parking area.
            (3)   The above does not apply to the rear of buildings in areas
designed for unloading and loading of materials.
         f.   Size Of Parking Lot: Parking lots larger than one-quarter of an
acre in size shall be broken down into smaller parking areas with planted
landscape areas with a minimum width of fifteen feet (15') between them to
minimize the perceived scale of the total field of stalls.
         g.   Tandem Parking: Tandem parking is allowed in all Form-Based Zones
for all uses as follows.
            (1)   Tandem spaces shall comply with size requirements in sub-
section
14-5A-5C (Parking, Stacking Space Size, And Drive Dimensions);
            (2)   For residential parking, tandem parking only allowed for the
spaces assigned to each unit; and
            (3)   For non-residential parking, tandem parking allowed subject
to on-site parking management.
      6.   Bicycle Parking Standards:
         a.   Applicability: Bicycle parking standards apply in all Form-Based
Zones.
         b.   Number Of Bicycle Parking Spaces And Standards: Bicycle parking
shall be provided in compliance with the standards of Article 14-5A (Off Street
Parking And Loading Standards).
            (1)   Buildings with three (3) or more units are subject to the
multi-family use bicycle parking standards.
            (2)   Bicycle parking is not required of single family and two (2)
family uses, and cottage court developments, see sub-section
14-2H-6H (Cottage Court).
   E.   Adjustments To Standards:
      1.   Allowed Adjustments: This sub-section allows flexibility to adjust
certain standards of this article. Adjustments shall be processed as part of
the preliminary plat and final plat processes per Title 15 (Land Subdivisions)
or as minor adjustments during the site plan and/or building permit review
process, as applicable. Minor adjustments may be approved where the required
findings are met as identified in
Table 14-2H-4E-1. Standards may be adjusted as identified in this sub-section.
      2.   Minor Modifications: Additional flexibility is provided through the
minor modification process subject to standards at Section
14-4B-1 (Minor Modifications).
Table 14-2H-4E-1: Adjustments To Standards
Eligible Standards And Allowed Required Findings Adjustment/Amount Of
Adjustments                                      Adjustment
Table 14-2H-4E-1: Adjustments To Standards
Eligible                                                                                            Adjustment/
Standards And   Required Findings                                                                   Amount Of
Allowed                                                                                             Adjustment
Adjustments
Design Site                                                                                         
Design Site
Dimensions                                                                                          
(Depth/Width)
Decrease in the
minimum         1   The adjustment accommodates an existing feature including, but not limited, tUp to 10%
required or     a tree or utility; and                                                              of the
increase the    2   An existing or new design site can still be developed in compliance with the standard.
maximum         standards of the zone.
allowed.
                1   Demonstrates that one or more of the following special circumstances apply to
                the property, which make it impractical to comply with the subject regulation:
                   a   The adjustment is needed to avoid a regulated sensitive area.
                   b   The adjustment is needed to reduce the amount of grading needed due to the
                property's existing topography.
                   c   The alignment of an existing street that must be extended creates a
Increase the    configuration that makes compliance impractical due to irregularly shaped blocks.
maximum            d   Corner design sites within non-rectangular blocks (see figure below).   
allowed.        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/
                0-0-0-5490.png]
                 
                2   The building(s) complies with the setbacks of the zone.
                3   The adjustment fits the characteristics of the site and the surrounding
                neighborhood.   No Limit
                 
Building                                                                                            
Setbacks
Building Within                                                                                     
Facade Zone
Reduction of
the minimum     1   The adjustment accommodates an existing feature including, but not limited, to
amount of       a tree or utility.                                                                  Up to 20%
building        2   The proposed development is visually compatible with adjacent development andof the
required within the intended physical character of the zone.                                        standard.
the facade
zone.
Building                                                                                            
Footprint
Size of Main                                                                                        
Body or Wing(s)
                1   The adjustment accommodates an existing feature including, but not limited, to
Increase in the a tree or utility.                                                                  Up to 10%
allowed length  2   The wing(s) maintains the required 5' offset from the main body.             of the
or width.       3   The building complies with the setbacks of the zone.                         standard.
                4   The proposed development is visually compatible with adjacent development and
                the intended physical character of the zone.
Parking                                                                                             
Front Setback1                                                                                      
Reduction in    1   The adjustment accommodates an existing feature including, but not limited, to
the required    a tree or utility.                                                                  Up to 10%
parking         2   If accessed from the street, the driveway complies with the Form-Based Zone  of the
setback.        standards.                                                                          standard.
                3   The ground floor space is in compliance with the Form-Based Zone standards.
Characteristics                                                                                     
Increase in     1   The adjustment is needed to access a parking area for a building with 3 or moUp to 18'
driveway width  units.                                                                              driveway
                2   Alley access is not feasible.                                                width
Screening                                                                                           
Maximum
Screening                                                                                           
Height
Increase in the
total height of
screens and the 1   There will be little or no impact on the adjoining properties or the         Up to 33%
retaining walls surrounding neighborhood.                                                           of the
that they are   2   The height is necessary to achieve the objectives of this sub-section or is  standard.
mounted on or   required for health and safety.
attached to
beyond 6'.
Affordable                                                                                          
Housing
Zones (                                                                                             
14-2H-2)
                                                                                                    Building
                                                                                                    type design
                                                                                                    site depth
                                                                                                    may be
                                                                                                    adjusted by
                                                                                                    up to 15'3;
                                                                                                    or
                1   The adjustment is in a building that contains Affordable Housing units.2     Building
Select one of   2   The adjustment fits the characteristics of the site and the surrounding      type design
the following   neighborhood.                                                                       site width
minor           3   The adjustment is consistent with the intent of the standard being adjusted amay be
adjustments.    the goals of the Comprehensive and District Plans.                                  adjusted by
                                                                                                    up to 15%;
                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                    Minimum
                                                                                                    amount of
                                                                                                    building
                                                                                                    required
                                                                                                    within the
                                                                                                    facade
Building Type
Standards (                                                                                         
14-2H-6)
                                                                                                    Building
                                                                                                    main body
                                                                                                    and wing
                                                                                                    standards
                                                                                                    may be
                                                                                                    adjusted by
                1   The adjustment is in a building that contains Affordable Housing units.2     up to 15%;
Select one of   2   The adjustment fits the characteristics of the site and the surrounding      or
the following   neighborhood.                                                                        
minor           3   The adjustment is consistent with the intent and the standard being adjusted Maximum
adjustments.    and the goals of the Comprehensive and District Plans.                              building
                                                                                                    height may
                                                                                                    be
                                                                                                    increased
                                                                                                    by up to
                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                    stories.4
                                                                                                     
Additional
Minor                                                                                               
Adjustments
Select an                                                                                           An
additional                                                                                          additional
minor                                                                                               minor
adjustment each                                                                                     adjustment
for the two                                                                                         to each of
sets of minor   The Affordable Housing units are income restricted to households making 50% or less the minor
adjustments for of the Area Median Income.2                                                         adjustments
affordable                                                                                          described
housing                                                                                             for
described                                                                                           Affordable
above.                                                                                              Housing
                                                                                                    above.
1   In compliance with section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Standards).
2   In compliance with section
14-2H-10 (Affordable Housing Incentives).
3   This may be combined with other reductions in section
14-2H-2 (Zones) up to a combined maximum of 25'.
4   With this adjustment, the building height may exceed the maximum standards for primary buildings found in
item 4a (Building Form; Height) of section
14-2H-2 (Zones) by 0.5 stories and by 5'.
 
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-5: CIVIC SPACE TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes the standards applicable to land in
the public realm (publicly or privately owned) for civic gathering purposes,
including civic spaces and civic buildings. These standards supplement the
standards for each Form-Based Zone.
   B.   General Civic Space Type Standards:
      1.   Standards And Characteristics: Each civic space is described as to
its purpose and intent along with standards and characteristics regarding
general physical character, uses, size and location. Characteristics are
considered standards unless stated otherwise.
      2.   Process: Civic spaces are delineated during the subdivision process
(Title 15) and are finalized in the Neighborhood Plan (14-2H-1D). These areas
shall comply with the future land use maps of the Comprehensive Plan.   
   3.   Open Space Required: As required by Chapter 14-5K (Neighborhood Open
Space Requirements), development sites are required to dedicate land to the
City for public open space or pay a fee in-lieu to be determined with the City.
Civic space may be privately or publicly owned. However, private civic space
does not satisfy neighborhood open space obligations.
      4.   Public Access And Visibility: Public access and visibility are
required along public parks, civic uses, and natural open spaces, including
creeks and drainages and stormwater management areas as required through access
easements granted during the subdivision process. Civic spaces shall be fronted
by:
         a.   Single-loaded frontage streets (with development on one side and
open space on the other);
         b.   Bike and pedestrian paths; or
         c.   Other methods of frontage that provide similar access and
visibility to the open space allowed in the zone.
      5.   Building Frontage Along Or Adjacent To A Civic Space: The facades on
building design sites attached to or across a street from a civic space shall
be designed as a "front" on to the civic space, in compliance with Item 5
(Building Placement) and Item 8 (Frontages) of the zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3614.png]
      6.    Stormwater Management Through Civic Space: Civic spaces in Form-
Based Zones should serve the additional purpose of helping to contribute to
stormwater management of new development. This may be accomplished as follows:
         a.   Stormwater is to be directed to civic space(s).
         b.   Except for plazas, playgrounds, and passages, each civic space
should accommodate stormwater while primarily being designed as a gathering
space for people.
      7.   Commercial Uses And Civic Spaces: Commercial use of civic spaces may
be allowed for Outdoor Service Areas (
4-3-1).
      8.   Photos: All photos are illustrative, not regulatory.
   C.    Greenway:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3612.png]
      1.    Description: A linear space three (3) or more blocks in length for
community gathering, bicycling, running, or strolling, defined by tree-lined
streets typically forming a one-way couplet on its flanks and by the fronting
buildings across the street. Versions of this civic space type have a street
only on one side in response to site conditions that prevent the one-way
couplet. Greenways serve an important role as a green connector between
destinations.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Formal or informal dominated by landscaping and trees with
integral stormwater managment capacity.
         b.   Hardscape path.
         c.   Spatially defined by tree-lined streets and adjacent buildings.
         d.   Typical uses include passive recreation, walking/running, and
formal or informal seating.
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Size: Min. three (3) continuous blocks in length.
         b.   Width: Fifty feet (50') min.
         c.    Shall be flanked by one-way streets on two (2) longest sides.
This standard is not required where the greenway is adjacent to an existing
arterial.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3610.png]
   D.   Green:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3608.png]
      1.    Description: A large space available for unstructured and limited
amounts of structured recreation.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Accessory structure(s): < 5,000 gsf; fountains, benches.
         b.   Informal or formal with integral stormwater management capacity.
         c.   Primarily planted areas with paths to and between recreation
areas and civic buildings.
         d.   Spatially defined by tree-lined streets and adjacent buildings.
         e.   Typical uses include unstructured passive and active recreation,
civic uses, and temporary commercial uses.
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Size: 300' x 300' min.
         b.   Streets required on at least two (2) sides of the green.
         c.   Facades on design sites attached to or across a street shall
"front" on to the green.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3606.png]
   E.   Plaza:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3604.png]
      1.   Description: A community-wide focal point primarily for civic
purposes and commercial activities.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Accessory structure(s): < 1,500 gsf; fountains, benches.
         b.   Formal; urban.
         c.   Hardscaped and planted areas in formal patterns.
         d.   Spatially defined by buildings and tree-lined streets.
         e.   Typical adjacent uses include civic uses and commercial uses in
support of civic uses. Typical uses include civic uses and passive recreation.
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Size: 100' x 100' min.
         b.   Streets required on two (2) of the plaza's sides.
         c.   Facades on design sites attached to or across a street shall
"front" on to the plaza.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3602.png]
   F.   Pocket Park/Plaza:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3600.png]
      1.    Description: A small-scale space, serving the immediate
neighborhood, available for informal activities in close proximity to
neighborhood residences, and civic purposes, intended as intimate spaces for
seating or dining.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.    General Character:
         a.   Accessory structure(s): < 200 gsf.
         b.   Informal or formal, with integral stormwater managment capacity.
         c.    Combination of planted areas and hardscape.
         d.   Spatially defined by building frontages and adjacent street
trees.
         e.   Walkways along edges or across space.
         f .   Typical adjacent uses include civic uses, commercial uses in
support of civic uses, and residential uses. Typical uses include civic uses
and passive recreation and outdoor seating.
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Size: 50' x 100' min.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3598.png]
   G.    Playground:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3596.png]
      1.   Description : A small-scale space designed and equipped for the
recreation of children. These spaces serve as quiet, safe places protected from
the street and typically in locations where children do not have to cross any
major streets. An open shelter, play structures, or interactive art and
fountains may be included. Playgrounds may be included within all other civic
space types.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Focused toward children.
         b.   Play structure, interactive art, and/or fountains.
         c.   Shade and seating provided.
         d.   May be fenced.
         e.   Spacially defined by trees with integral stormwater management
capacity.
         f.   Typical uses include active and passive recreation and casual
seating.
      3.   Standards:
         a .   Size: 40' x 60' min.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3594.png]
   H.    Community Garden:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3592.png]
      1.   Description: A small-scale space designed as a grouping of garden
plots available to nearby residents for small-scale cultivation. Community
gardens may be fenced and may include a small accessory structure for storage.
Community gardens may be included within all other civic space types.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Accessory Structures: < 2,000 gsf.
         b.   Plants beds (in-ground or raised).
         c.   Decorative fencing, when fencing is present.
         d.   Spacially defined by adjacent buildings and street trees.
         e.   Typical uses include food production, passive creation.
      3.   Standards:
         a.    Size: No minimum; within any design site as allowed by the zone.
         b.    See section
14-2H-3C-1 (Community Garden) for use standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3590.png]
   I.    Passage:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3588.png]
      1.   Description: A pedestrian pathway that extends from the public
sidewalk into a civic space and/or across the block to another public sidewalk.
The pathway is lined by non-residential shopfronts and/or residential ground
floors and pedestrian entries as allowed by the zone.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      2.   General Character:
         a.   Formal, urban.
         b.   No accessory structure(s).
         c.   Combination of hardscape and landscape planters.
         d.   Spacially defined by building frontages.
         e.   Trees and shrubs in containers and/or planters.
         f.   Typical adjacent uses include civic uses and commercial uses in
support of civic uses in T4MS or ground floor residential uses in T3NE, T3NG,
T4NS, T4NM; movable seating and/or outdoor dining may be used in T4NM-O and
T4MS.
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Size: 20' min. overall with 15' min. clear width between or
through buildings.
         b.   Dooryards, porches, patios, and sidewalk dining not allowed to
encroach into the minimum required width.
         c.   See sub-section
14-2H-9L (Passage) for additional standards.
         d.   Ground floor residential in T3NE, T3NG, T4NS, T4MS (side street
only) and 60' min. from front of design site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3586.png]
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
14-2H-6: BUILDING TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.    Purpose: This section sets forth standards for development of
individual building types to achieve the intended physical character of each
zone and provide housing choices and small businesses as amenities within
walkable neighborhoods.
   B.   General Building Type Standards:
      1.   Scale: Building types are categorized into house-scale buildings and
block-scale buildings. The individual types within these two (2) categories are
determined by the intended physical character of each Form-Based Zone. See
Figure 14-2H-6B-1 (Example Of House-Scale And Block-Scale Buildings) for
further details.
      2.   Design Site Size: The design site size standards for each building
type in section
14-2H-2 (Zones) generate pedestrian-oriented buildings that accommodate the
automobile while not letting it visually dominate the fronts of buildings and
streetscapes. The design site size standards identify the range of design site
sizes on which the given building type is allowed to be built.
      3.   Building Types Per Design Site: Each design site shall contain only
one primary building type, except as follows:
         a.   Where allowed by the zone and as allowed in sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House), one (1) carriage house is allowed in addition to the
primary building type;
         b.   Certain building types may consist of multiple individual
buildings per design site as specified in Item 2 of each building type. For an
example of a building type where a design site may include multiple individual
buildings, see Cottage Court (
14-2H-6H).
      4.   Building Types Per Parcel: More than one (1) building type is
allowed on a parcel that contains multiple design sites that meet the standards
of this section. See Figure 14-2H-6B-2 (Example of Multiple Design Sites On An
Existing Parcel).
      5.   Location Of Frontage: Each building type shall have at least one (1)
frontage type along the front street, side street or a civic space. The Cottage
Court building is only required to have a frontage type on the court. The
primary building entrance shall be through said frontage type.
      6.   Diversity Of Building Types: Except in the T4MS zone, there shall be
a mix of at least two (2) different primary building types within each block,
using only the types allowed in the zone.
      7.   Number Of Units: The standard regarding the minimum number of units
per building listed in Item 2 (Number Of Units) only applies to residential
uses. Where a building type is occupied by a nonresidential use, only the
maximum number of units per building listed in Item 2 (Number Of Units)
applies.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3584.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3582.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3580.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3578.png]
   C.    Carriage House:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3576.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3574.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.    An accessory structure located at the rear of a design site,
above the garage, that provides a small residential unit (accessory dwelling
unit), home office space, or other small commercial or service use, as allowed
by the zone. The carriage house is an accessory building type, not a primary
building type.
         b.   Not allowed with a cottage court (
14-2H-6H).
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per building        1 max.
Buildings per design site 1 max.
                          
House-scale building       
T3NE                      A
T3NG                      A
T4NS                      A
T4NM                      A
T4MS                      A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3572.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3570.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
         a.   Height:
 
                      T3NE T3NG T4NS T4NM T4MS
Max. Number of Stories 2    2    2    2    2
 
         b.   Main Body1:
 
Width                             32' max. (A)
Depth                             24' max. (B)
Separation from primary building2 15' min. (C)
1   Includes garage story.
2   Carriage house may be connected to primary building by an uninhabitable
space including, but not limited to a breezeway.
 
         c.   Standards:
            (1)   Carriage house shall not be taller or have a larger footprint
than the primary building to which it is accessory.
            (2)   Carriage house must comply with the ownership and occupancy
standards of sub-section
14-4C-2A (Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)).
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types: Frontage type not required.
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at side street, alley or internal to
design site. (D)
         b.   The main entrance shall not be through a garage.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone.
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space: Not required.
   D.   House Large:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3568.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3566.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.    A medium-to-large-sized detached building with one unit, medium-
to-large setbacks, a rear yard, and located in a low-intensity walkable
neighborhood.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        1 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              A
T3NG                              X
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3564.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3562.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:               T3NE
   Max. number of     2.5
stories
b. Main Body1:            
   Width              55' max. (A)
   Depth2             55' max. (B)
c. Wing(s)1:              
   Width              24' max. (C)
   Depth              24' max. (D)
   Separation between 15' min.
wings
   Offset from main bo5' min.3, 4 (E)
d. Standards:             
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub- section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   Rooftop room allowed on uppermost roof per sub-section
14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
3   Except when used for parking, front parking setback shall comply with
standards in Item 7 (Parking) of the zone.
4   Except at a corner of two building faces where neither of those faces front a
public right-of-way, then the minimum is 0'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(F)
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (G)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space: Area per unit: 400 sf min. (H)
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (2)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (3)   Required private open space may only be paved witih
decorative paving.
   E.    House Small:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3560.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3558.png]
      1.   Description:
         a.   A small-to-medium-sized detached building with one unit, small-
to-medium setbacks, a rear yard, and located within a low-intensity walkable
neighborhood.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        1 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3556.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3554.png]
      3.    Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:               T3NG
   Max. number of     2.5
stories
b. Main Body1:            
   Width              35' max. (A)
   Depth2             45' max. (B)
c. Wing(s)1:              
   Width              24' max. (C)
   Depth              24' max. (D)
   Separation between 15' min.
wings
   Offset from main bo5' min.3, 4 (E)
d. Standards:             
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub- section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   Rooftop room allowed on uppermost roof per sub-section
14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
3   Except when used for parking, front parking setback shall comply with
standards in Item 7 (Parking) of the zone.
4   Except at a corner of two building faces where neither of those faces front a
public right-of-way, then the minimum is 0'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(F)
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (G)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space: Area per unit: 400 sf min. (H)
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (2)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (3)   Required private open space may only be paved witih
decorative paving.
   F.   Duplex Side-By-Side:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3552.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3550.png]
      1.    Description:
         a .   A small-to-medium-sized detached building with small-to-medium
setbacks and a rear yard. The building consists of two (2) side-by-side units,
both facing the street and within a single-building massing. This type has the
appearance of a small-to-medium single-family home and is scaled to fit within
lower-intensity neighborhoods.
      2.    Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        2 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              A
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3548.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3546.png]
      3.    Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:                T3NE T3NG
   Max. number of stori2.5  2.5
b. Main Body1:
   Width2              48' max. (A)
   Depth3, 4           40' max. (B)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in
compliance with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub- section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   Rooftop room allowed on uppermost roof per sub-section
14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When units are rear loaded and only one story in height, the max. main
body width may be increased to 60'.
3   When units are rear loaded and only one story in height, the max. main
body depth may be increased to 70'.
4   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased to 45'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(C)
         b.   Each unit shall have an individual entry facing the street on, or
within ten feet (10') of the front facade.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (D)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Area per unit: 225 sf min. (E)
            (2)   Dimension: 15' min.
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Open space not required if buildling is located within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet of a civic space.
            (2)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (3)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (4)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   G.    Duplex Stacked:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3544.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3542.png]
      1.   Description:
         a.   A small-to-medium-sized detached building with small-to-medium
setbacks and a rear yard. The building consists of two (2) stacked units, both
facing the street and within a single-building massing. This type has the
appearance of a small-to-medium single-family home and is scaled to fit within
lower-intensity neighborhoods.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        2 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3540.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3538.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:               T3NG
   Max. number of     2.5
stories
b. Main Body1:            
   Width              36' max. (A)
   Depth2             40' max. (B)
c. Wing(s)1:              
   Width              15' max. (C)
   Depth              20' max. (D)
   Separation between 15' min.
wings
   Offset from main bo5' min. (E)3, 4
d. Standards:             
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub- section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   Rooftop room allowed on uppermost roof per sub-section
14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
3   Except when used for parking, front parking setback shall comply with
standards in Item 7 (Parking) of the zone.
4   Except at a corner of two building faces where neither of those faces front a
public right-of-way, then the minimum is 0'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side steet or passage.
(F)
         b.   Each unit shall have an individual entry facing the street on, or
within ten feet (10') of the front facade.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (G)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Area per unit: 225 sf min. (H)
            (2)   Dimension: 15' min.
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Open space not required if buildling is located within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet of a civic space.
            (2)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (3)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (4)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   H.    Cottage Court:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3536.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3534.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.    A grouping of three (3) to nine (9) small, detached buildings
arranged to define a shared court open to the street. The shared court is comm
on, private open space and takes the place of a private rear yard, thus
becoming an important community-enhancing element. This type is scaled to fit
within low-to-moderate-intensity neighborhoods and in non-residential contexts.
         b.   Synoynm: Bungalow Court.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        1 max.1
Primary buildings per design site 3 min.; 9 max.
1   Most rear cottage (i.e. cottage furthest from the street and located at
the rear of the design site) may be a building with up to three (3) units.
House-scale building               
T3NE                              A
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              A
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3532.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3530.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:                           T3NE T3NG T4NS
   Max. number of stories         1.5  1.5  1.5
   Max. height to mid- point of ro18'  18'  18'
b. Main Body1:
   All Cottages
      Width                    32' max. (A)
      Depth2                   30' max. (B)
   Most Rear Cottage
      Width                    40' max. (C)
      Depth                    30' max. (D)
      Separation between cottag10' min. (E)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in
compliance with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Shared court shall be accessible from front street. (F)
         b.   Main entrance location to units from shared court, front street,
side street, or passage. (G)
         c.   Pedestrian connections shall link all buildings to the public
ROW, shared court, and parking areas.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (H)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
         c.   Spaces may be individually accessible by the units and/or a
common parking area located at rear side of design site.
      7.   Open Space:
         a .   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Width: 15' min. (I)
            (2)   Depth: 60' min. (3 - 4 units) (J)
            (3)   Size: 70' min. (5 - 9) units
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (2)   Shared court(s) may be used for stormwater managment if
designed as integral site element (rain garden or bioswale) and does not
visually detract from the frontage of each cottage facing the court.
            (3)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   I.    Multiplex Small:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3528.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3526.png]
      1.   Description:
         a.   A medium-sized detached building that consists of three (3) to
six (6) side-by-side and/or stacked units, typically with one shared entry or
individual entries along the front. This type has the appearance of a medium-
sized single-family house and is scaled to fit as a small portion of low-to-
moderate-intensity neighborhoods.
         b.   Synonym: Triplex to Sixplex.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        3 min.; 6 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              A
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3524.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3522.png]
      3.    Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:                  T3NG T4NS
   Max. number of stories2.5  2.5
b. Main Body1:
   Width                 50' max. (A)
   Depth2                50' max. (B)
c. Wing(s)1:
   Width                 20' max. (C)
   Depth                 30' max. (D)
   Separation between win15' min.
   Offset from main body 5' min. (E)
d. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in
compliance with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(F)
         b.   Each unit may have an individual entry from the sidewalk.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (G)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Area: 225 sf min. (H)
            (2)   Dimension: 15' min.
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Open space not required if building is located within seven
hundred fifty (750) linear feet of a civic space.
            (2)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (3)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (4)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   J.   Multiplex Large:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3520.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3518.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.   A medium-to-large-sized detached building that consists of seven
(7) to twelve (12) side-by-side and/or stacked units, typically with one shared
entry or individual entries along the front for the ground floor units. This
type is scaled to fit in within moderate-intensity neighborhoods or as a small
portion of lower-intensity neighborhoods.
         b.   Synonym: Mansion apartment.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        7 min.; 12 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
                                  
House-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              X
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              A
T4MS                              X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3516.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3514.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:               T4NM
   Max. number of     3.5
stories
b. Main Body1:            
   Width              60' max. (A)
   Depth2             60' max. (B)
c. Wing(s)1:              
   Width              20' max. (C)
   Depth              40' max. (D)
   Separation between 15' min.
wings
   Offset from main bo5' min. (E)
d. Standards:             
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Stoop            14-2H-8F
Forecourt        14-2H-8G
Terrace          14-2H-8J
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(F)
         b.   Units located in the main body shall be accessed by a common
entry along the front street.
         c.   On corner design sites, units in a secondary wing may enter from
the side street.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (G)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Area: 225 sf min. (H)
            (2)   Dimension: 15' min.
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Open space not required if building is located within seven
hundred fifty (750) linear feet of a civic space.
            (2)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (3)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (4)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   K.    Townhouse:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3512.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3510.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.    A small-to-large sized, typically attached, building with a rear
yard that consists of two (2) to eight (8) townhouses placed side-by-side. Each
townhouse consists of one (1) unit or, up to three (3) stacked units as allowed
by the zone. As allowed by the zone, the house-scale townhouse type may be
detached.
         b.   Synonym: Rowhouse.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        1 max.
                                 3 max. in T4NM-O; T4MS
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
House-scale building: attached - 2 townhouses min. 3 townhouses max., detached
- 2 townhouses minimum
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              A
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              X
Block-scale building: attached - 4 townhouses min. 8 townhouses max.
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              X
T4NS                              A
T4NM                              A
T4MS                              A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3508.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3506.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:                 T3N G T4NS T4N M T4M S
   Max. number of storie2.5   2.5  3.5   3.5
b. Main Body1:
   Width                18' min.; 30' max. (A)
   Depth2               50' max. (B)
   Max. width per buildi90'   120' 160'  200' (C)
c. Wing(s)1:
   Width                1 5' m ax. (D)
   Depth                15' max. (E)
   Separation between   8' min. (F)
wings3
d. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   In T4NM-O and T4MS, each townhouse may be divided vertically into 3
units.
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
3   No separation is required for wings used for parking, when entirely behind
attached townhomes.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Dooryard         14-2H-8E
Stoop            14-2H-8F
Terrace          14-2H-8J
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(G)
         b.   Each unit shall have an individual entry facing a street.
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (H)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Area per primary building: 64 sf min. (H)
            (2)   Dimension: 8' min.
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Driveways shall not be included in private open space
calculation.
            (2)   Required private open space shall be located behind the main
body of the building.
            (3)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   L.    Courtyard Building Small:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3504.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3502.png]
      1 .   Description :
         a.    A building that consists of multiple attached and/or stacked
units, accessed from a shared courtyar d. The shared court is common, private
open space and takes the place of a rear yard. This type is typically
integrated as a small portion of lower-intensity neighborhoods or more
consistently into moderate-to-high-intensity neighborhoods.
         b.   Synonym: Courtyard apartment.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building   10 min.; 16 max.
Primary buildings per design 1 max.1
site
1   Primary building may be designed as up to two adjacent buildings not
more than 15' apart.
House-scale building          
T3NE                         X
T3NG                         X
T4NS                         A
T4NM                         A
T4MS                         X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3500.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3498.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:                T4NS T4NM
   Max. number of stori2.5  3.5
b. Main Body1:
   Width               100' max. (A)
   Depth2              100' max. (B)
c. Standards:
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in
compliance with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
   (3)   Rooftop room allowed on uppermost roof per sub-section
14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
2   When a porch is designed to extend the full width of the front facade
(excluding garages), the maximum main body depth may be increased by 5'.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Porch projecting 14-2H-8C
Porch engaged    14-2H-8D
Stoop            14-2H-8F
Terrace          14-2H-8J
The above frontage types are also allowed within courtyard(s) in compliance
with courtyard size requirements.
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(C)
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (D)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Width: 30' min. (E)
            (2)   Depth: 50' min. (F)
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Courtyard(s) shall be accessible from the front street.
            (2)   Multiple courtyards are required to be connected via a
passage through or between buildings.
            (3)   Building shall define at least three (3) sides of the
couryard.
            (4)   Courtyard(s) may be used for stormwater management if
designed as integral site element (rain garden or bioswale) and does not
visually detract from the frontage of each building facing the courtyard.
            (5)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
   M.    Courtyard Building Large:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3496.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3494.png]
      1.    Description:
         a.   A building that consists of multiple attached and/or stacked
units, accessed from one or more shared courtyards. The shared court is common,
private open space. This type is typically integrated into moderate-to- high-
intensity neighborhoo ds and on main street contexts.
         b.    Synonym: Courtyard apartment.
      2.    Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        18 min.; 24 max.
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.1
1   Primary building may be designed as up to three adjacent buildings not
more than 15' apart.
                                  
Block-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              X
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T4MS                              A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3492.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3490.png]
      3.    Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:           T4MS
   Max. number of 3.5
stories
b. Main Body1:        
   Width          100' max. (A)
   Depth          140' max. (B)
c. Standards:         
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
 
Stoop     14-2H-8F
Shopfront 14-2H-8I
Terrace   14-2H-8J
Gallery   14-2H-8K
The above frontage types are also allowed within courtyard(s) in compliance
with courtyard size requirements.
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Main entrance location at front street, side street or passage.
(C)
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (D)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Width: 30' min. (E)
            (2)   Depth: 70' min. (F)
         b.   Standards:
            (1)   Courtyard(s) shall be accessible from the front street.
            (2)   Multiple courtyards are required to be connected via a
passage through or between buildings.
            (3)   Building shall define at least three (3) sides of the
courtyard.
            (4)   Courtyard(s) may be used for stormwater management if
designed as integral site element (rain garden or bioswale) and does not
visually detract from the frontage of each building facing the courtyard.
         (5)   Required private open space may only be paved with decorative
paving.
         (6)   Ground floor of building(s) shall align with at least seventy-
five percent (75%) of the courtyard(s) perimeter.
   N.   Main Street Building:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3488.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3486.png]
      1.   Description:
         a.   A small-to-large-sized building, typically attached, but may be
detached, intended to provide a vertical mix of uses with ground-floor retail,
office or service uses and upper-floor service or residential uses. This type
makes up the primary component of neighborhood and downtown main streets,
therefore being a key component to providing walkability.
      2.   Number Of Units:
Units per primary building        Unrestricted1
Primary buildings per design site 1 max.
1   Number of units restricted by Iowa City's adopted Building Code, Fire
Code, and Housing Code standards.
                                  
Block-scale building               
T3NE                              X
T3NG                              X
T4NS                              X
T4NM                              X
T 4 M S                           A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3484.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3482.png]
      3.   Building Size And Massing:
a. Height:           T4MS
   Max. number of 3.5
stories
b. Main Body1:        
   Width          200' max. (A)
   Depth          120' max. (B)
c. Standards:         
   (1)   Facades facing a street or civic space must be designed in compliance
with section
14-2H-7 (Architectural Element Standards).
   (2)   Maximum one carriage house is allowed per sub-section
14-2H-6C (Carriage House).
1   In compliance with the standards of the zone.
 
      4.   Allowed Frontage Types:
Dooryard1        14-2H-8 E
Stoop            14-2H-8 F
Forecourt        14-2H-8 G
Maker shopfront1 14-2H-8 H
Shopfront        14-2H-8 I
Terrace          14-2H-8 J
Gallery          14-2H-8 K
Arcade           14-2H-8 L
1   Only on neighborhood (side) streets and min. 60' from front of design
site.
 
      5.   Pedestrian Access:
         a.   Upper floor units shall be accessed by a common entry along the
front street. (C)
         b.   Ground floor units may have individual entries along the
neighborhood (side) street if min. sixty feet (60') from main street. (D)
         c.   On corner design sites, units may enter from the side street. (E)
      6.   Vehicle Access And Parking:
         a.   Driveway and parking location shall comply with standards in Item
7 (Parking) of the zone. (D)
         b.   Alley access is required if alley exists.
      7.   Open Space:
         a.   Private Open Space:
            (1)   Not required. (Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 23-4917,
11-21-2023; Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-7: ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes standards that supplement the zones
standards to further refine the intended building form and physical character.
   B.   Overview:
      1.   Massing And Facade Articulation Standards: Facades on a street or
civic space shall be designed in compliance with the standards of this section.
      2.   General Standards:
         a.   On corner buildings, front and side street facades shall have
equal architectural treatment.
         b.   Ground floor glazing on residential buildings shall be fifteen
percent (15%) minimum with a minimum of one (1) window on the ground floor of
each building elevation. Attached garages are excluded from this standard and
calculation. Ground floor glazing on shopfronts shall be seventy-five percent
(75%) minimum.
         c.   Stairs must be integrated into the conditioned floor area of the
building, as defined in the Iowa City Building Code, and cannot protrude beyond
the building footprint. In addition, stairs must be designed in compliance with
section
14-2H-8 (Frontage Types).
      3.   Photos: All photos are illustrative, not regulatory.
   C.    Tripartite Facade Articulation:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3480.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3478.png]
      1.    Description: Tripartite architecture uses architectural elements to
delineate the base, middle and top. The ground floor facade composes the base.
The building element and features above or including the uppermost occupied
floor, including parapet walls and eaves, compose the top.
      2.   Applicability: Buildings of at least two (2) stories.
      3.   Standards/General Character: Requires three (3) distinct sections:
         a.   Base: The base of a building shall be distinguished from the
middle through the use of string courses, cornice expression, or installation
of awnings or canopies. (A)
         b.   Middle: For a building that is two (2) stories or less, a middle
section is not required; only a top and a base. (B)
         c.   Top: For a building that is three (3) or more stories, the top
shall be delineated with some form of cornice expression, either with trim
material, brackets and panels, eave details, or accentuated masonry. (C)
         d.   Where the exterior wall material changes along the vertical plane
of a building, the materials must be separated by a horizontal band, such as a
belt course, soldier course, or band board or other trim appropriate to the
building materials being used.
   D.    Architectural Recession(s):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3476.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3474.png]
      1.    Description: Architectural recessions modulate the apparent size
and scale of a building by recessing a portion(s) of the facade as an
architectural element(s) or space(s) from the plane(s): a recessed entry from
the sidewalk, a loggia or recessed balcony cut into the plane of the facade.
      2.   Applicability: Buildings of at least two (2) stories and over fifty
feet (50') long, except for the House Large (
14-2H-6D), House Small (
14-2H-6E), Duplex Side-by-Side (
14-2H-6F), and Duplex Stacked (
14-2H-6G) building types.
      3.   Standards/General Character:
 
Recession Height:        If ground floor is recessed, recession shall extend
                         through the building mass (A)
Recession Width:          
   Buildings 50' - 10012' min. (distributed in up to 2 locations) (B)
    long              20' min. (distributed in at least 2 locations)
   Buildings > 100' long
Depth:                   16" min. (C)
 
   E.   Corner Element:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3472.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3470.png]
      1.     Description: A corner element gives visual importance to corner
and further shape the public realm.
      2.     Applicabilit y: Optional architectural element for main street
building types (
14-2H-6N) where the building is over seventy-five feet (75') long.
      3.     Standards/General Character:
 
Footprint:       10' x 10' min. (A)
Projection from  3' min. (B)
facade
Top story height 14' max.1 (C)
1   Corner element may exceed maximum height allowed by the zone by up to
10' when the height story on the building is at the maximum height allowed
by the zone.
 
   F.    Rooftop Room:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3468.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3466.png]
      1.   Description: A rooftop room is a small enclsoed or unenclosed room
on the uppermost roof of house-scale buildings.
      2.   Applicability: Optional architectural element as allowed by Item 3
(Building Size And Massing) of the building type.
      3.   Standards/General Character:
a. Standards:                             
   Interior clear dimensions          12' max. (A)
   Floor-to-ceiling height            10' max. (B)
   Overall height                     14' max. (C)
   Side setback from building edge    5' min. (D)
   Rear setback from building edge    15' min. (E)
   Opening or glazing on each side of 75%
room
b. General Character :                    
   (1 )    Materials shall be consistent with the primary building.
   (2 )    Exterior acess allowed in complian ce with Title 17 Building and
Housing Code, and Title 7, the Fire Code, Chapter 7-1 of the Iowa City Code of
Ordinances.
   (3)   Roof shall be consistent with roof style of primary building.
   (4)   Openings shall be vertically proportioned or square.
   (5)   Openings may be glazed.
   (6)   Shutters, when present, shall be of sufficient width to cover the
adjacent opening.
 
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-8: FRONTAGE TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes standards for all frontages.
Frontages are the components of a building that provide the transition and
interface between the public realm (street and sidewalk) and the private realm
(yard or building).
   B.   General Frontage Type Standards:
      1.   Nomenclature: The names of the frontage types indicate their
particular configuration or function and are not intended to limit uses within
the associated building. For example, a porch may be used by non-residential
uses including, but not limited to a restaurant or office as allowed by the
zone.
      2.   Allowable Frontage Types:
         a.   Frontage types not listed in Item 8 (Frontages) of the zone are
not allowed in that zone.
         b.   Each building may have multiple frontage types in compliance with
the allowed types in Item 4 (Allowed Frontage Types) of each building type.
Frontage types not listed in Item 4 (Allowed Frontage Types) of the building
type are not allowed on that building type.
      3.   Location: Each frontage type shall be located in compliance with the
facade zone per Item 5 (Building Placement) of the zone (section
14-2H-2) and with the building type location of frontage standard (sub-section
14-2H-6B-5).
      4.   Entries And Access:
         a.   Along street frontages and passages, sliding doors are prohibited
as building entries. Sliding doors may not be used as a primary means of
entrance to any building or residential unit.
         b.   Access to entrance doors of individual dwelling units located
above the ground floor level must be provided from an enclosed lobby or
corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially enclosed exterior stairways are
not allowed as the primary means of access to dwelling units located above the
ground level floor of the building. This provision does not preclude the use of
fire egress structures.
         c.   Dwelling units on the ground floor and their entrances must be
connected to adjacent public right-of-ways, and to parking areas and other on-
site facilities.
      5.   Diversity Of Frontage Types: Except in the T4MS zone, there shall be
a mix of at least two (2) different frontage types within each block, using
only the types allowed in the zone.
      6.   Standards: Standards are stated for the front of a design site and
are to be adjusted for side street facades in compliance with the setbacks of
the zone.
   C.   Porch Projecting:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3464.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3462.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade of the building is set back from the
front design site line with a covered structure encroachin g into the front
setback. The resulting setback area can be defined by a fence or hedge to
spatially define the edge of the street. The porch may be one (1) or two (2)
stories and is open on three (3) sides.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3460.png]  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-5492.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Width                   12' min.1 (A)
Depth                   (B)
                       6' min.
Height, Clear           8' min. (C)
Stories                 2 stories max.1
Pedestrian Access Width 3' min. (D)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9). (E)
1   Width reduce to 8' when applied to Cottage Court (
14-2H-6H) building type. Story height maximum reduced to 1 story.
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Porch shall be open on three (3) sides and have a roof. Clear
glass may be installed between the porch columns if the minimum size of
individual panes is twelve inches (12").
   D.   Porch Engaged:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3456.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3454.png]
      1.    Description: A portion of the main facade of the building projects
into the front setback to create an area for a covered structure that projects
from the rest of the facade. The porch may project into the front setback. The
resulting yard may be defined by a fence or hedge to spatially define the edge
of the street. The porch may be one (1) or two (2) stories and may have two (2)
or three (3) adjacent sides that are engaged to the building with at least one
(1) side open.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3452.png]     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-5494.png]
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
      2.   Size:
Width                                12' min. (A)
Depth                                (B)
                                     6' min.
Height, Clear                        8' min. (C)
Stories                              2 stories max.
Pedestrian Access Width              3' min. (D)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9). (E)
Encroachment Area of Building Facade  
   Depth                          6' max. (F)
   Width                          1/3 min. of overall building facade1 (G)
1   May not exceed porch clear width ( (A) )
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Porch shall be open at least on one (1) side and have a roof.
         b.   Clear glass may be installed between the porch columns if the
minimum size of individual panes is twelve inches (12").
   E.    Door yard:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3448.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3446.png]
      1.   Description: The main facade of the building is set back from the
front design site line, which is defined by a low wall, hedge, or other allowed
screening, creating a small private area between the sidewalk and the facade.
Each dooryard is separated from adjacent dooryards. The dooryard may be raised
or at grade.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5496.png]
 
      2.   Size:
 
Depth                                            10' min.1 (A)
Length                                           15' min. (B)
Depth of recessed entries                        3' max.(C)
Pedestrian Access Width                          3' min.(D)
Height of dooryard fence/wall above finish level 36" max.(E)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9). (G)
1   Reduce to 8' when applied to Cottage Court (
14-2H-6H) building type.
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   For live/work, retail, service, and restaurant uses, the
shopfront frontage type is to be applied.
         b.   Each dooryard shall provide access to only one (1) ground floor
entry.
   F.    Stoop:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3440.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3438.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade of the building is near the front
design site line with steps to an elevated entry. The stoop is elevated above
the sidewalk to provide privacy along the sidewalk-facing rooms. Stoop landings
may be accessed via stairs, ramp, or a sloped walkway.
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5498.png]
 
      2.   Size:
 
Width                                                    5' min. (A)
Depth                                                    3' min. (B)
Height, Clear                                            8' min. (C)
Stories                                                  1 story max.
Finish level above average finished grade along frontage 12" min. (D)
Depth of recessed entries                                3' max. (E)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (
14-2H-9). (F)
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Stairs may be perpendicular or parallel to the building facade.
         b.   Ramps shall be parallel to facade or along the side of the
building.
         c.   Sloped walkways shall connect to the public sidewalk or driveway.
         d.   Entry doors are covered or recessed to provide shelter from the
elements.
         e.   Gates are not allowed.
         f.   All doors shall face the street.
   G.    Forecourt:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3432.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3430.png]
      1.   Description: The main facade of the building is at or near the front
design site line and a portion is set back, extending the public realm into the
design site for an entry court or shared garden space for housing, or as an
additional shopping or restaurant seating area within retail and service areas.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5500.png]
 
      2.   Size:
 
Width                  15' min. (A)
Depth                  15' min. (B)
Ratio, height to width 2:1 max. (C)
Height from sidewalk   12" max. (D)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (14-2H-9). (E)
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   May be utilized to group several entries at a common elevation in
compliance with the zone ground floor finish level standards.
         b.   The proportions and orientation of these spaces shall comply with
Figure 14-2H-8G-1 below for solar orientation and user comfort.
      c.    Other frontage types as allowed in the zone may be applied to the
front of the building and/or within the forecourt.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3424.png]
   H.    Maker Shopfront:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3422.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3420.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade of the building is at or near the
front design site line with an at-grade or elevated entrance from the sidewalk.
This type is only allowed on side streets from the adjacent main street and is
intended for industrial artisan businesses to show their activity to people
passing by on the sidewalk, as well as for retail sales of products made on-
site. The maker shopfront may include a decorative roll-down or sliding door,
including glazing and an awning that overlaps the sidewalk.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3418.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3416.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Distance between glazing                                          10" max. (A)
Ground floor glazing between sidewalk and finished ceiling height 50% min.
Depth of recessed entries                                         No max.
 
      3.   Awning:
 
Depth             5' min. (B)
Setback from curb 2' min. (C)
Height, Clear     8' min. (D)
 
      4.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Rounded and hooped awning are not allowed.
         b.   Glazing shall be clear and highly transparent. Reflective
(mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Low-E glazing will reduce
transparency, so is discouraged, but if used, the glass chosen should have a
high visible light transmittance and low reflectivity. Such windows must allow
views into the interior space.
   I.   Shopfront:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3414.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3412.png]
      1.     Description: The main facade of the building is at or near the
front design site line with at-grade entrance along the sidewalk. This type is
intended for service, retail, or restaurant use and includes substantial
glazing between the shopfront base and the ground floor ceiling and may include
an awning that overlaps the sidewalk.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3410.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3408.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Distance between glazing                           2" max. (A)
Ground floor glazing between sidewalk and finished 75% min.
ceiling height
Depth of recessed entries                          5' max.
Shopfront base                                     6" min.; 30" max. (B)
 
      3.   Awning:
 
Depth             5' min. (C)
Setback from curb 2' min. (D)
Height, Clear     8' min. (E)
 
      4.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Residential types of windows are not allowed.
         b.   Rounded and hooped awning are not allowed.
         c.   Glazing shall be clear and highly transparent. Reflective
(mirrored) or colored glass is not permitted. Low E-glazing will reduce
transparency, so is discouraged, but if used, the glass chosen should have a
high visible light transmittance and low reflectivity. Such windows must allow
views into the interior space.
   J.    Terrace:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3406.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3404.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade is at or near the front design site
line with steps leading to an elevated area providing public circulation along
the facade to connect multiple entrances. This type is used to provide outdoor
areas along the sidewalk for housing or to accommodate an existing or intended
grade change for retail, service or office uses.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3402.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3400.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Depth of Terrace            (A)
   Residential           8' min.
   Non-residential       12' min.
Finish level above sidewalk 24" max. (B)
Distance between stairs     25' max. (C)
Utility easement area as identified by the applicable abutting thoroughfare
type (14-2H-9). (D)
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Terrace shall also follow the standards for the shopfront
frontage type, when the shopfront frontage type is an allowed frontage type in
the zone.
         b.   Where the frontage type requires the ground floor to be flush
with the sidewalk, the terrace shall be considered to be the sidewalk.
         c.   Low walls used as seating are allowed.
         d.   Terrace shall be along the facade to connect multiple entrances.
   K.    Gallery:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3398.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3396.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade of the building setback from the front
design site line and an at- grade covered structure, typically articulated with
colonnade or arches, covers an area not in the right-of-way. This type may be
one (1) or two (2) stories. When used in nonresidential settings, the shopfront
type is included; when used in residential settings, stoops, dooryards, and
forecourts are included.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3394.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3392.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Depth, Clear               8' min. (A)
Ground floor height, clear 12' min. (B)
Height                     2 stories max. (C)
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Galleries shall also follow the standards for the shopfront
frontage type. (D)
         b.   Habitable space. (E)
         c.   Second story of gallery may be used as deck and may be covered by
a roof. (F)
         d.   Galleries shall have a consistent depth.
         e.   Galleries are not allowed to project over the sidewalk in the
public right-of-way.
   L.    Arcade:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3390.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3388.png]
      1.    Description: The main facade of the building is setback from the
front design site line and the upper floor(s) contain habitable space
overlappin g the area below not in the right-of-way. When used in
nonresidential settings, the shopfront type is included; when used in
residential settings, stoops, dooryards, and forecourts are included.
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
      General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3386.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3384.png]
      2.   Size:
 
Depth, Clear               10' min. (A)
Ground floor height, clear 12' min. (B)
Height                     3 stories max. (C)
 
      3.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Arcades shall also follow the standards for the shopfront
frontage type. (D)
         b.   Habitable space. (E)
         c.   Arcades shall have a consistent depth.
         d.   Arcades are not allowed to project over the sidewalk in the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-9: THOROUGHFARE TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The provisions of this section are established to accomplish the
following:
         a.   Provide a range of thoroughfare types to support the intended
physical character of each zone.
         b.   Provide only thoroughfares that are multi-modal and
interconnected in a network that disperses vehicular traffic with multiple
routes to destinations.
         c.   Ensure that streets serve the needs of all users (automobiles,
transit and service vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists).
   B.   General Thoroughfare Type Standards:
      1.   This section identifies the allowed thoroughfare types consistent
with the intended physical character of each Form-Based Zone.
      2.   The individual standards of each thoroughfare type in this section
may be adjusted as part of the subdivision process. In considering adjustments,
the Director of Public Works and the Director of Neighborhood and Development
Services shall find that the proposed adjustment meets all of the following
criteria:
         a.   Supports the intended physical character of the zone abutting the
thoroughfare(s).
         b.   Maintains multiple modes of transportation (transit, pedestrians,
bicycles, automobiles).
         c.   Maintains sidewalks at least six feet (6') wide.
         d.   Maintains on-street parking for a majority of each block face.
         e.   Maintains regularly spaced street trees.
      3.   Street trees shall be installed in the right-of-way by the owner.
         a.   Where adjacent property will remain undeveloped, street trees
shall be planted prior to acceptance of public improvements.
         b.   Where adjacent property will be developed, trees shall be planted
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each adjacent lot, with the
following exception:
            (1)   Where street trees cannot be installed prior to occupancy or
commencement of a use due to seasonal conditions that may reduce survivability,
the building official may grant a delay of installation until the seasonal
calendar dates of June 1 or November 1, whichever occurs first, and the
property owner must place in an escrow account, established with the City, an
amount which will cover one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of
plants and installation.
   C.    Main Street With Median:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3382.png]
      1.    Application:
 
Movement Type Slow
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      100' (A)
Pavement Width 50' (25' each side) (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      2 @ 10' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      2 @ 7' (D)
Parking Lanes      2 @ 8', marked (E)
Median/Turn Pocket 10' (F)
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
Planter Type             7' x 10' tree well
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
Walkway Type             20' min. sidewalk (G)
Curb Type                Raised
 
 
T 3 N E X
T 3 N G X
T 4 N S X
T 4 N M X
T 4 MS  A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   D.   Main Street Without Median:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3380.png]
      1.   Application:
 
Movement Type Slow
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      80' (A)
Pavement Width 36' (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      2 @ 10' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      None
Parking Lanes      2 @ 8', marked (D)
Median/Turn Pocket None
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
Planter Type             7' x 10' tree well
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
Walkway Type             20' min. sidewalk (E)
Curb Type                Raised
 
 
T3NE X
T3NG X
T4NS X
T4NM X
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   E.    Avenue 2 Without Parking:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3378.png]
      1 .   Application:
 
Movement Type Slow
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      100' (A)
Pavement Width 35' (17'-6" each side) (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      2 @ 11' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      2 @ 6' (D)
Parking Lanes      None
Median/Turn Pocket 20' (E)
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
                         Continuous planter; (F)
Planter Type                15'-6" min. one side;
                            11'-6" min. one side
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
                         Sidewalk; (G)
Walkway Type                6' min. one side1;
                            10 min. one side1
Curb Type                Raised
Utility Easement         15' from ROW (H)
1   Plus 1' clearance from utility easement.
 
 
T3NE X
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   F.    Avenue 2 With Future Parking:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3376.png]
      1.   Application:
 
Movement Type Slow
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      100' (A)
Pavement Width 50' (25' each side) (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes          2 @ 11' (C)
Bicycle Lanes          2 @ 6' (D)
Parking Lanes (Future) 2 @ 7' (E)
Median/Turn Pocket     20' (F)
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
                         Continuous planter;
Planter Type                8' min. one side;
                            4' min. one side
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
                         Sidewalk; (D)
Walkway Type                6' min. one side1;
                            10' min. one side1
Curb Type                Raised
Utility Easement         15' from ROW (H)
1   Plus 1' clearance from utility easement.
 
 
T3NE X
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   G.   Avenue 3:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3374.png]
      1.    Application :
 
Movement Type Slow
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      100' (A)
Pavement Width 34' (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes          2 @ 11' (C)
Bicycle Lanes          2 @ 6' (D)
Parking Lanes (Future) None
Median/Turn Pocket     None
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
                         Continuous planter; (E)
Planter Type                24' min. one side;
                            18' min. one side
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
                         Sidewalk; (F)
Walkway Type                10' min. one side;
                            5' min. one side1
Sidewalk/Planting1       34' min. one side; (G)
                         10'-6" min. one side
Curb Type                Raised
Utility Easement         15' from ROW (H)
1   Plus 2' clearance from utility easement.
 
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   H.    Avenue 4:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3372.png]
      1.    Application:
 
Movement Type Free
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      87' (A)
Pavement Width 33' (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      2 @ 11' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      None
Parking Lanes      None
Median/Turn Pocket 11', painted (D)
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Swale
Planter Type             24' min. continuous planter (E)
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
                         Sidewalk; (F)
Walkway Type                10' min. one side;
                            5' min. one side1
Curb Type                None
Utility Easement         15' from ROW (G)
 
 
T3NE X
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   I.   Neighborhood Street 1 With Parking Both Sides:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3370.png]
      1.    Application:
 
Movement Type Yield
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      70' (A)
Pavement Width 28' (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      1 @ 12' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      None
Parking Lanes      2 @ 8', unmarked (D)
Median/Turn Pocket None
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
Planter Type             14' min. continuous planter (E)
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
Walkway Type             5' min. sidewalk1 (F)
Curb Type                Raised
Where required, one side is open space without buildings in compliance with
the Regulating Plan maps in the Comprehensive Plan. (G)
Utility Easement         10' from ROW (H)
1   Plus 2' clearance from utility easement.
2   6 feet minimum if near park, civic space or school.
 
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   J.    Neighborhood Street 2 With Parking One Side:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3368.png]
      1.   Application:
 
Movement Type Yield
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
 
ROW Width      70' (A)
Pavement Width 26' (B)
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      1 @ 18' (C)
Bicycle Lanes      None
Parking Lanes      1 @ 8', unmarked (D)
Median/Turn Pocket None
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
Drainage Collection Type Curb and gutter
Planter Type             14' min. continuous planter (E)
Landscape Type           Trees at 30' o.c. avg.
Walkway Type             5' min. sidewalk1 (F)
Curb Type                Raised
Where required, one side is open space without buildings in compliance with
the Regulating Plan maps in the Comprehensive Plan. (G)
Utility Easement         10' from ROW (H)
1   Plus 2' clearance from utility easement.
2   6 feet minimum if near park, civic space or school.
 
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS X
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   K.   Alley:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3366.png]
      1.    Application:
 
Movement Type Yield
 
      2.    Overall Widths:
 
a. Widths:                
   ROW Width          20' (A)
   Pavement Width     20' (B)
b. Additional Standards:  
   (1)   A camfered corner of 5' is required where two alleys connect.
   (2)   Garage doors shall be setback min. 3' from ROW; max. 5'.
   (3)   Pedestrians share 20' section with vehicles and bicycles.
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      1 @ 20' (B)
Bicycle Lanes      None
Parking Lanes      None
Median/Turn Pocket None
 
      4.   Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Drainage Collection Type Valley gutter
Planter Type             Planter min. 5' x 10' between driveways (C)
Landscape Type           Trees at 50' o.c. avg.
Walkway Type             None (D)
Curb Type                Rolled or flush
 
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
   L.   Passage:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3364.png]
      1.   Application:
 
Movement Type Pedestrian/Bicycle
 
      2.   Overall Widths:
a. Widths:                
   ROW Width          20' (A)
   Pavement Width     10' (B)
b. Additional Standards:  
   (1)   Side/front street adjoining design sites to comply with section
14-2H-9 (Frontage Standards).
   (2)   Pedestrians share 10' section with bicycles.
   (3)   See sub-section
14-2H-5I (Passage) for additional standards.
   (4)   Passage shall be open to the public at all times.
 
      3.   Lane Assembly:
 
Traffic Lanes      None
Bicycle Lanes      10', unmarked (B)
Parking Lanes      None
Median/Turn Pocket None
 
      4.    Public Frontage Assembly:
 
Planter Type   Continuous planter min. 5' wide between access to design sites
               (C)
Landscape Type Trees at 50' o.c.
Walkway Type   Multipurpose path
 
 
T3NE A
T3NG A
T4NS A
T4NM A
T4MS A
Key: A = Allowed X = Not Allowed
 
(Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
14-2H-10: AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES:
   A.   Affordable Housing Bonus: Residential uses in Form-Based Zones are
eligible to utilize affordable housing bonuses pursuant in Article 14-4F
"Affordable Housing." (Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 3
OVERLAY ZONES
ARTICLE A. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (OPD)
SECTION:
14-3A-1: Purpose
14-3A-2: Applicability
14-3A-3: Approval Procedures
14-3A-4: Approval Criteria
14-3A-5: Approval Criteria For Sensitive Areas Developments
14-3A-6: Additional Approval Criteria For Manufactured Housing Parks
14-3A-7: Exceptions
14-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The planned development overlay zone (OPD) is established to permit flexibility
in the use and design of structures and land in situations where conventional
development may be inappropriate and where modification to requirements of the
underlying zone will not be contrary to the intent and purpose of this title,
inconsistent with the comprehensive plan, as amended, or harmful to the
surrounding neighborhood. The OPD zone is intended to:
   A.   Provide flexibility in the design, placement and clustering of
buildings; mixture of land uses; use of open space; traffic circulation and
parking; and related site and design considerations;
   B.   Encourage the preservation and best use of existing landscape features
through development that is sensitive to the natural features of the
surrounding area;
   C.   Promote efficient land use with smaller utility and street networks
while maintaining pedestrian oriented street frontages;
   D.   Encourage and preserve opportunities for energy efficient development;
   E.   Promote an attractive and safe living environment compatible with
surrounding residential developments;
   F.   Provide an alternative method for redeveloping older residential areas;
and
   G.   Encourage infill development. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-2: APPLICABILITY:
A planned development overlay rezoning may be requested, provided the property
meets the zoning and size limitations listed below and falls into one or more
of the following categories of planned developments:
   A.   Zoning:
      1.   The property on which the planned development is requested must be
zoned residential or commercial, except as specified in subsection A2 of this
section.
      2.   A sensitive areas development is allowed or may be required on any
property, regardless of the underlying base zone, in order to protect regulated
sensitive features while facilitating reasonable development of the remainder
of the property for uses allowed in the underlying base zone.
   B.   Size Limitation:
      1.   To qualify for a planned development overlay rezoning, properties
must contain an undeveloped area of two (2) acres or more, except for the
following situations.
      2.   Development of areas containing less than two (2) acres but more
than one acre qualify for a planned development overlay rezoning where the
existence of environmentally sensitive areas or natural features, the age of
existing development, scenic assets or the fact that the land is completely
surrounded by development makes a planned development more appropriate and
efficient than conventional development. Except as allowed in subsection B3 of
this section, commercial and institutional uses are prohibited in planned
developments containing less than two (2) acres.
      3.   When a sensitive areas development is required, there is no size
limitation.
   C.   Categories Of Planned Developments:
      1.   Sensitive Areas Development: A planned development containing
regulated sensitive features according to the provisions of
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title.
      2.   Conservation Development: A planned development in which a portion
of the land area is designated as permanent open space for the purpose of
preserving natural or cultural features and resources as follows:
         a.   Development that protects or preserves environmental features not
otherwise regulated by this title, but which are significant to the
neighborhood or community. For example, such a plan might preserve an important
view shed, protect wildlife areas or other unique natural features of the site.
         b.   Development that preserves cultural and historic features such as
historic sites, historic buildings, and archaeological sites, particularly
those that are designated or that would qualify for historic designation
according to the provisions of
chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of
this chapter.
         c.   Development in which the site and the buildings are specifically
oriented and designed for the conservation of energy and other resources.
      3.   Neo-Traditional Development: A planned development that is
characterized by lot configurations, street patterns, streetscapes, and
neighborhood amenities similar to neighborhoods platted prior to 1950.
      4.   Mixed Use Development: A planned development that contains a mix of
residential and commercial uses designed in such a manner that such uses
complement one another to form a more urban neighborhood.
      5.   Infill Development: Development or redevelopment on land that is
surrounded by existing development where the constraints of the existing
infrastructure, buildings, or site make it more difficult to develop the
property.
      6.   Alternative Ownership Development:
         a.   Manufactured Housing Parks: Manufactured housing parks, where the
dwelling unit owner leases the lot on which the dwelling is located from a
separate individual or organization.
         b.   Condominium Development: Condominium developments, where multiple
units are located on the same lot. Dwelling units are typically owned
individually and the structures, common areas, and facilities are owned by all
dwelling unit owners on a proportional, undivided basis. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-3A-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Applications for planned developments must be submitted according to the
procedures for planned development overlay rezonings as set forth in chapter 8,
"Review And Approval Procedures", of this title. The proposed development must
meet the applicable approval criteria listed in the following sections. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-4: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Applications for all planned developments will be reviewed for compliance with
the standards of this section, except for sensitive areas developments that
comply with all underlying zoning and subdivision regulations. If, however,
modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision regulations have been
requested as a part of a sensitive areas development, the standards of this
section will apply.
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   The density and design of the planned development will be compatible
with and/or complementary to adjacent development in terms of land use,
building mass and scale, relative amount of open space, traffic circulation and
general layout.
      2.   The development will not overburden existing streets and utilities.
      3.   The development will not adversely affect views, light and air,
property values and privacy of neighboring properties any more than would a
conventional development.
      4.   The combination of land uses and building types and any variation
from the underlying zoning requirements or from city street standards will be
in the public interest, in harmony with the purposes of this title, and with
other building regulations of the city.
   B.   Ownership: At the time of preliminary OPD plan approval, the developer
must submit evidence of ownership of the property to be developed or of a
legally binding executed option agreement for purchasing all of the property.
   C.   Land Uses Allowed: A mixture of land uses are allowed in planned
developments that might not otherwise be allowed with the underlying zoning.
Land uses proposed must meet all of the dimensional and site development
standards of the underlying base zone, unless a modification is specifically
approved during the planned development process. The following provisions
provide standards for uses that might not otherwise be allowed in the
underlying zone:
      1.   Uses Allowed On Properties Zoned Residential: A mixture of housing
types, including single-family, two-family, and multi- family dwellings, is
encouraged in all residentially zoned planned developments. To help assure that
the various building types are compatible with one another, similar
architectural elements, scale, massing, and materials should be used and the
following standards must be followed:
         a.   Single-Family And Two-Family Uses:
            (1)   Unless modified as allowed in subsection C1a(3) of this
section, attached and detached zero lot line dwellings must comply with the
specific approval criteria for attached and detached zero lot line dwellings in
the RS-12 zone as set forth in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title. Townhouse style condominiums must also meet
these approval criteria. In addition, the following provisions apply:
               (A)   Main entrances to dwelling units must be clearly
demarcated by one of the following means: covered porch or canopy; transom and
sidelight windows; pilasters and pediment; or other significant architectural
treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does
not meet this standard.
               (B)   If multiple townhouse style condominium buildings are
located on a common lot, the buildings must be separated by a distance of at
least twenty feet (20').
               (C)   If the underlying base zone is RS-5 or RS-8, the
requirement that attached single-family dwellings are only allowed on corner
lots with each main entrance oriented toward a different street applies in all
planned developments in order to encourage a mix of residential uses. If
multiple two-unit buildings will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot
lines must be illustrated on the plan for purposes of determining where the
corner units would be located according to base zone standards. This corner lot
standard may only be waived if convincing evidence is submitted that the
configuration of the property or other existing physical condition of the lot
makes the application of this standard impractical. If this standard is waived
the units must be designed and located in a manner that prevents monotony by
varying aspects such as facade detailing, window pattern, building materials,
and color.
            (2)   Two-family uses must comply with the standards for two-family
uses as set forth in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title. In addition, the following provisions will
apply:
               (A)   Main entrances to dwelling units must be clearly
demarcated by one of the following means: covered porch or canopy; transom and
sidelight windows; pilasters and pediment; or other significant architectural
treatment that emphasizes main entrances. Simple trim around the doorway does
not meet this standard.
               (B)   If multiple two-family buildings are located on a common
lot, the buildings must be separated by a distance of at least twenty feet
(20').
               (C)   If the underlying base zone is RS-5 or RS-8, the
requirement that two-family uses are only allowed on corner lots with each main
entrance oriented toward a different street applies in all planned developments
in order to encourage a mix of residential uses. If multiple two-unit buildings
will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot lines must be illustrated on the
plan for purposes of determining where the corner units would be located
according to base zone standards. This corner lot standard may only be waived
if convincing evidence is submitted that the configuration of the property or
other existing physical condition of the lot makes the application of this
standard impractical. If this standard is waived the units must be designed and
located in a manner that prevents monotony by varying aspects such as facade
detailing, window pattern, building materials, and color.
               (D)   Garages and off street parking areas must be located and
designed so that they do not dominate the streetscape according to the
standards specified in subsection K1c(2) of this section.
            (3)   Minimum lot area, lot width, lot frontage, and setbacks
required in the underlying base zone may be reduced in order to provide the
opportunity for a variety of single-family and two- family dwelling types.
However, any such modification to the underlying zoning requirements must be
noted on the plan and the development must comply with the standards listed in
subsection E, "Zoning Requirements", of this section.
         b.   Multi-Family And Group Living Uses: If multi-family or group
living uses are proposed, they must comply with the multi-family site
development standards set forth in
chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family Residential Zones", of this title. When
located adjacent to single-family and duplex structures, multi-family buildings
should be of a scale, massing and architectural style that is compatible with
adjacent lower density residential development.
         c.   Commercial Uses: Commercial uses are not permitted in planned
developments that are less than two (2) acres in size on property that is zoned
residential. In larger residentially zoned developments, where commercial uses
are proposed, they must comply with the following standards:
            (1)   Any commercial development proposed must comply with the CN-
1 site development standards as set forth in
chapter 2, article C, "Commercial Zones", of this title.
            (2)   Mixed use buildings, which include residential dwellings and
commercial uses, are encouraged.
            (3)   Any commercial development proposed must be of a scale suited
to serve the residents of the immediate development and adjacent neighborhoods.
            (4)   Commercial development should be designed to serve as a focal
point of the overall development and is encouraged to incorporate open spaces
such as town squares.
            (5)   Commercial development should be designed so that the
material, massing and architectural style is compatible with adjacent
residential development.
         d.   Institutional Uses: Institutional uses, such as educational
facilities, religious institutions, and childcare centers, are only allowed if
they are listed as an allowed use in the underlying base zone.
      2.   Uses Allowed On Property Zoned Commercial:
         a.   On property zoned commercial, development must comply with the
commercial site development standards of the underlying base zone as set forth
in
chapter 2, article C, "Commercial Zones", of this title.
         b.   Residential uses are only allowed in such planned developments if
residential uses are listed as an allowed use in the underlying commercial
zone. Residential uses must comply with the requirements specified for such
uses in the underlying base zone, unless modifications are specifically
approved through the planned development process.
      3.   Uses Allowed On Property Zoned Industrial Or Research Park: A
planned development is not allowed on properties that are zoned industrial or
research park unless the property contains regulated sensitive areas according
to the provisions of
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title. Uses
allowed in such a planned development are limited to those uses allowed in the
underlying base zone. Such uses must comply with the requirements and standards
specified in the underlying base zone, unless modifications are specifically
approved through the planned development process.
   D.   Maximum Residential Density:
      1.   The City will approve a residential density based on the underlying
density allowed in the base zone and what is compatible with the natural
topography of the site and with surrounding development. The residential
density for a planned development may not exceed the value specified in
table 3A-1, located at the end of this subsection, except as allowed by
subsection
14-3A-4D3 or section 14-4F. Actual residential density allowed, however, may be
less than the maximum expressed in the table due to the topographical
constraints of the property, the scale of the project relative to adjacent
development, and the dimensional, site development, and other requirements of
this title.
      2.   For purposes of this article, "net land area" is defined as total
land area minus public and private street rights of way. When calculating net
land area, the land area devoted to alley and private rear lane rights of way
need not be subtracted from the total land area.
      3.   Sustainability Density Bonus: The maximum residential density that
is required by
Table 3A-1 may be increased by ten percent (10%) of the applicable requirement
for each of the following provisions that is met, up to a maximum of twenty-
five percent (25%). This bonus may be used in conjunction with subsection
14-5A-4F10 (Sustainability Parking Reduction).
         a.   A solar energy system is installed onsite where the size is equal
to at least forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the roofs of all
buildings.
         b.   All uses within the development utilize electricity for one
hundred percent (100%) of their regular energy consumption after construction.
         c.   All buildings within the development are constructed to the most
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code standards
published by the International Code Council.
Table 3A-1: Maximum Residential Density
Underlying Base Zone Dwelling Units Per Acre Of Net Land Area
Underlying Base Zone Dwelling Units Per Acre Of Net Land Area
RR-1                 1
RS-5                 5
RS-8                 8
RNS-12               8
RS-12                13
MU                   24
CO-1                 15
CN-1                 24
CC-2                 15
RM-12                15
RNS-20               24
RM-20                24
RM-44                43
PRM                  49*
 
*Density bonuses are available in the PRM zone that would increase the allowed
density beyond the figure in this table.
   E.   Zoning Requirements:
      1.   All planned developments must comply with all the applicable
requirements and standards of this title, unless specifically waived or
modified under the provisions of this article.
      2.   Variations in the dimensional requirements of the underlying base
zone may be necessary in order to facilitate the provision of desired
neighborhood amenities or open space; to preserve or protect natural, historic,
or cultural features; to achieve compatibility with surrounding development; or
to create a distinctive or innovative neighborhood environment for area
residents. Therefore, the dimensional requirements of the underlying base zone
may be modified or waived, provided the standards for modified developments set
forth in subsection K of this section are met.
      3.   In order to accommodate the various types of manufactured housing,
the minimum building width specified in the underlying base zone may be waived
for manufactured housing parks.
      4.   In order to avoid development on or near regulated sensitive areas,
parking requirements for commercial and industrial uses may be reduced.
However, parking requirements for residential uses within the development may
not be reduced other than through a special exception approved by the board of
adjustment according to the procedures and approval criteria set forth in this
title for such an exception.
   F.   Dedication Of Public Right Of Way: All proposed dedications of land for
public use, including land dedicated for recreational use, shall be approved,
in writing, by appropriate departments of the city prior to city council
approval of the planned development. All land dedications for public use shall
conform to the requirements of city ordinances.
   G.   Streets: Planned developments shall provide for the continuation and
extension of streets and public sidewalks in accordance with current city
standards. Requests for modifications to city street standards will be
evaluated according to the provisions of subsection K of this section.
   H.   Pedestrian Facilities:
      1.   On Site Pedestrian Facilities: To assure that pedestrians have
adequate access throughout a development, a pedestrian network plan must be
developed so that residents and visitors have access to public streets and
sidewalks, building entrances, parking areas, shared open spaces, natural
areas, and other amenities.
      2.   Pedestrian Facilities Along Streets: Sidewalks must be provided
along all public and private streets according to city standards. Particular
emphasis must be given to maintaining or establishing pedestrian oriented
street frontages. Pedestrian oriented streets are those that are designed to
provide a safe, comfortable environment for pedestrians. Important elements
include sidewalks that are separated and buffered from vehicular traffic with
limited interruption from driveways; the provision of street trees; and
buildings that visually address the street with visible doors and windows.
Buildings with blank facades along the street, long stretches of repetitive
building designs, surface parking lots, and other expanses of paving are
contrary to a pedestrian oriented street.
   I.   Tree Requirements: For any planned development that contains attached
single-family dwellings, two-family uses, multi-family uses, group living uses,
or lease lots for manufactured housing, a landscape plan must be submitted with
the preliminary plan illustrating how the requirements of
chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this title will be
met.
   J.   Open Space:
      1.   Public Open Space Requirement:
         a.   Residentially zoned planned developments must dedicate land for
public open space, pay a fee in lieu of land for public open space, or a
combination thereof, as set forth in
chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this title.
         b.   In the event that the dedicated open space land will contain
amenities, such as trails, that will serve the residents of the proposed
development, the city may require such amenities be installed by the developer
with the costs shared jointly by the developer and city based on an estimate of
proportional use by the residents of the proposed development. The timing of
such improvements shall be determined and set forth in a development agreement
between the developer and the city.
      2.   Private Shared Open Space:
         a.   In the event open space land, in addition to that required by
chapter 5, article K of this title, is to be retained under private ownership,
the developer must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the
procedures to be followed for maintaining the areas and for financing
maintenance costs. Such costs shall be shared by all owners of property located
within the planned development through the use of an owners' association or
other entity satisfactory to the city. Any costs incurred by the city due to
failure of this designated entity to meet its obligations under the provisions
of this subsection J2a shall be assessed against, and will become a lien on all
individual properties located within the planned development in favor of the
city.
         b.   The intended purpose of any private, shared open space proposed
for a planned development must be set forth in the plan. Such land must be
suitably improved for its intended purpose. The timing of such improvements
shall be set forth in a legally binding instrument as described in the
subsection J2a of this section.
      3.   Protected Sensitive Areas: Protected sensitive areas and their
required buffers should be incorporated into the design of the development as
public open space dedicated to the city or private open space held in common by
an owners' association. Where protected features and/or their required buffers
are incorporated into individual lots, they must be included within a recorded
conservation easement or protected by restrictive covenants with the city that
are recorded and run with the land.
   K.   Standards For Modified Developments: The following standards are to be
used by the city when evaluating a planned development when modifications to
the underlying zoning requirements or to city street standards are requested.
For single-family uses, townhouse style multi-family uses and two-family uses
that will be located on a common lot, imaginary lot lines must be illustrated
on the plan for purposes of determining when modifications to the underlying
dimensional standards are being requested. When applying the standards, the
city will weigh the specific circumstances surrounding each application, and
strive for development solutions that best promote the spirit, intent and
purpose of this article and of
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title and of the
goals, policies and objectives of the adopted district plan for the area in
which the proposed development is located, while permitting development of the
property for reasonable, beneficial uses. Modifications that the city deems as
contrary to public safety will not be approved.
      1.   Modifications To Zoning Requirements:
         a.   Minimum setbacks may be reduced if the following conditions are
met:
            (1)   The setbacks proposed will provide adequate light, air, and
privacy between dwellings and between dwellings and public rights of way.
            (2)   Sufficient setbacks are incorporated to provide the
opportunity for adequate private open space for each dwelling unit.
            (3)   The setbacks proposed will provide sufficient area for
utilities and street trees.
            (4)   If front setbacks are reduced, measures should be taken to
preserve privacy within residential dwellings and to provide a transition
between the public right of way and private property. To ensure privacy within
single-family and two-family dwellings for which setbacks are reduced, the
first floor must be elevated at least thirty inches (30") above the grade of
the adjacent public sidewalk. Other methods to increase privacy are also
encouraged, such as use of front porches.
            (5)   Residential buildings that are located in close proximity to
each other must be designed to preserve privacy. This can be achieved by
placement of windows to prevent direct views into the windows of adjacent
residential dwelling units. In addition, balconies and air conditioning units
may not be located along a building wall that is within twenty feet (20') of a
building wall of an adjacent principal building on the same lot, if the wall of
the adjacent building contains window or door openings into dwelling units.
Proximity of building walls will be subject to all current building code fire
protection requirements.
         b.   The maximum building height and building coverage may be modified
or waived, provided the design of the development results in sufficient light
and air circulation for each building and adequate, accessible open space for
all residents of the development. When the underlying base zone is single-
family residential, at least thirty five percent (35%) of the net land area in
a planned development shall remain free of buildings, parking and vehicular
maneuvering areas.
         c.   Minimum lot area, lot width, and lot frontage requirements may be
reduced. However, due to the concentration of dwelling units that will occur if
these dimensional requirements are reduced, the following conditions must be
met:
            (1)   The proposed modifications will not result in increased
traffic congestion or a reduction in neighborhood traffic circulation. To
mitigate for the concentration of dwellings, shorter block lengths may be
appropriate, and the location of driveways and pedestrian facilities must be
carefully planned.
            (2)   Garages and off street parking areas must be located so that
they do not dominate the streetscape. Alley or private rear lane access will be
required, unless garages are recessed behind the front facade of the dwelling
in a manner that allows the residential portion of the dwelling to predominate
along the street.
 Figure 3A.1 below illustrates some options for garage placement for detached
and attached dwelling units. Other options meeting these standards are also
acceptable.
Figure: 3A.1 - Garage Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2685.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2687.png]
 
            (3)   If garages are located with access to the street, the
development must be designed so that there is adequate right of way and front
yard area available to accommodate street trees and front yard landscaping. The
widths of driveways may need to be reduced and garages set back an adequate
distance to accommodate these elements.
      2.   Modifications To Street Standards:
         a.   Right Of Way Width: Street right of way widths may be reduced
below those otherwise required by the subdivision regulations if the proposed
planned development provides sufficient area within the right of way for
required street trees and public and private utilities.
         b.   Pavement Widths For Local Streets: Requests for reductions to
street pavement widths for local streets will be considered if streets are
designed to promote pedestrian oriented frontages and safe access for emergency
vehicles. For example, this might be achieved through the use of alleys or
private rear lanes. Depending on the width of the proposed street and the
anticipated traffic, additional off street parking clusters may be required.
Any separate off street parking areas must be screened to the S2 standard.
         c.   Private Streets:
            (1)   Private streets in single-family and two-family residential
areas are discouraged. Requests for private streets in these areas will be
carefully scrutinized and will only be approved if the proposed private street
serves as a shared access to a cluster or small group of housing units and does
not support any through traffic. In addition, adequate provisions must be made
for street maintenance, snow removal, and garbage service according to the
provisions listed in subsection K2c(3) of this section.
            (2)   Private streets in multi-family, commercial, and industrial
areas may be allowed; provided, that the responsibilities for maintenance, snow
removal, and garbage service is clearly established according to the provisions
of subsection K2c(3) of this section.
            (3)   If private streets are approved, the developer must submit a
legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed for
maintaining private streets and providing garbage service and snow removal, and
for financing these services. Such costs shall be shared by all owners of
property located within the planned development through the use of an owners'
association or other entity satisfactory to the city. Any costs incurred by the
city due to failure of this designated entity to meet its obligations under the
provisions of this subsection K2c(3) shall be assessed against, and will become
a lien on all individual properties located within the planned development in
favor of the city.
   L.   Other Conditions: Other conditions may be imposed if found necessary to
protect and promote the best interests of the surrounding property or the
neighborhood. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Improvement of traffic circulation for vehicles and pedestrians in
the proposed development and adjoining properties and streets.
      2.   Specific landscaping requirements to maintain privacy or reduce
impacts on adjoining properties.
      3.   Joint use of private open space or amenities by adjoining property
owners. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4366,
12-1-2009; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-3A-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR SENSITIVE AREAS DEVELOPMENTS:
For properties containing regulated sensitive features, a sensitive areas
development plan must be submitted that demonstrates compliance with the
applicable standards of
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-6: ADDITIONAL APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS:
A manufactured housing park must comply with the following standards:
   A.   Minimum Area: The development must be at least two (2) acres in size.
   B.   Lot Requirements: The plan must clearly delineate individual lease lots
within the development. Each individual lease lot must meet the dimensional
standards of the underlying base zone, except for variations approved through
the planned development process as set forth in this article.
   C.   Additional Setback Requirements: A thirty foot (30') setback must be
provided between any dwelling unit and the edge of the planned development
except where abutting an arterial street, in which case, a forty foot (40')
building setback is required.
   D.   Minimum Space Between Units: At least a twenty foot (20') building
separation between manufactured housing units shall be provided, except with
respect to manufactured housing units parked end to end. End to end separation
must be at least fifteen feet (15').
   E.   Parking: Nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') hard surfaced off street
parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of two (2) parking spaces per
unit. At least one off street parking space shall be located on each
manufactured housing lease lot. The other required parking space may be located
in a common parking area with convenient access to the manufactured housing
unit. Parking spaces may not be located in the front setback or within ten feet
(10') of an adjacent manufactured housing unit. Separate parking areas must be
set back at least ten feet (10') from any lease lot line and at least twenty
feet (20') from any edge of the planned development. Separate parking areas
must be screened to the S2 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
   F.   Sanitary Sewers: The sewerage system shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with applicable city codes or specifications approved
by the city. Provision shall be made for plugging the drain when a manufactured
housing unit does not occupy the space.
   G.   Additional Requirements For Solid Waste Handling:
      1.   Collection Stations: Unless individual solid waste collection is
provided for each lease lot within the development, dumpsters or collection
stands consisting of a holder or rack on an impervious slab must be provided
within three hundred feet (300') of every manufactured housing space they
serve. Container stands must be designed to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate
cleaning around them. Collection stands must be screened from adjacent
dwellings to the S3 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
      2.   Collection Receptacles: Collection receptacles shall be provided in
quantities adequate to permit disposal of all solid waste.
   H.   Accessory Structures And Facilities:
      1.   Manufactured Housing Sales: Sales of manufactured housing units is
allowed as an accessory use in conjunction with the management office.
Manufactured housing units, which are not currently located on lease lots, may
not be displayed on site.
      2.   Equipment And Materials Storage: Maintenance materials and equipment
shall be stored either in a permanent structure or in yards fenced in with a
minimum six foot (6') high fence of solid construction.
      3.   Tenant Storage: Storage facilities for tenants of the manufactured
housing park may be provided on individual manufactured housing lease lots or
in shared compounds located within the park. Any shared storage facility or
compound must be screened from view of adjacent streets, neighboring lease
lots, and neighborhood developments to at least the S2 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3A-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The approval criteria contained in this article are to be used by the city as
minimum requirements for evaluating planned developments. However, such
criteria are not intended to restrict creativity and an applicant may request
modifications to the planned development approval criteria. The city will use
the following criteria when evaluating any such request:
   A.   The modification will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
title and the city comprehensive plan.
   B.   The modification will generally enhance the proposed planned
development and will not have an adverse impact on its physical, visual or
spatial characteristics.
   C.   The modification shall not result in a configuration of lots or a
street system that is impractical or detracts from the appearance of the
proposed development.
   D.   The modification will not result in danger to public health, safety or
welfare by preventing access for emergency vehicles, by inhibiting the
provision of public services, by depriving adjoining properties of adequate
light and air, or by violating the purposes and intent of this title or the
city's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. HISTORIC DISTRICT AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY
SECTION:
14-3B-1: Historic District Overlay Zone
14-3B-2: Conservation District Overlay Zone
14-3B-3: Historic Review
14-3B-4: Certificate Of Economic Hardship
14-3B-5: Compliance With Certificate Required
14-3B-6: Remedy Of Dangerous Conditions
14-3B-7: Prevention Of Demolition By Neglect
14-3B-1: HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The historic district overlay (OHD) zone is used to designate
local historic landmarks and historic districts. The purpose of this overlay
zone is to:
      1.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public by protecting, enhancing and perpetuating historic landmarks and
districts of historic, architectural and cultural significance;
      2.   Safeguard the city's architectural, historic and cultural heritage
by preserving historic buildings and neighborhoods;
      3.   Provide for design review of new construction or alteration of
existing resources to assure compatibility with the existing character of
historic neighborhoods and preserve the historic integrity of the resource;
      4.   Stabilize and improve property values by encouraging reinvestment in
historic neighborhoods;
      5.   Foster civic pride in the legacy and beauty of past achievements;
and
      6.   Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness to tourists and
visitors, thereby supporting and stimulating business.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   The city council may designate by ordinance areas of the city as
historic districts or local historic landmarks. The process of designation is
considered an overlay rezoning. A historic district overlay rezoning is
required to designate historic districts and local historic landmarks. The
procedures for historic district overlay rezonings are set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title.
      2.   There are typically many properties within a designated historic
district or that have been designated as local historic landmarks that are
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or are eligible for listing
on the National Register. However, properties listed on the National Register
are not subject to the regulations of this article unless they are located
within a designated historic district or have been designated as a local
historic landmark by the city council.
   C.   Descriptions:
      1.   Historic districts are geographically cohesive areas with
significant concentrations of buildings and other resources that possess a high
degree of historic integrity and convey a distinct sense of time and place and
that have been designated as a historic district by the city council pursuant
to the applicable procedures outlined in this title. To qualify for designation
as a historic district, the subject area must contain abutting pieces of
property under diverse ownership that meet approval criteria of subsections C1a
and C1b of this section and at least one of approval criteria of subsection
C1c, C1d, C1e or C1f of this section.
         a.   Are significant to American and/or Iowa City history,
architecture, archaeology and culture; and
         b.   Possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials and
workmanship; and
         c.   Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
         d.   Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
or
         e.   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, method
of construction; or represent the work of a master; or possess high artistic
values; or represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
         f.   Have yielded or may likely yield information important in
prehistory or history.
      2.   A historic landmark is any building, structure, object, area of land
or element of landscape architecture with significance, importance or value
consistent with the approval criteria listed in subsection C1 of this section
for historic districts and that has been designated as a local historic
landmark by the city council pursuant to the applicable procedures outlined in
this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010; Ord. 12-
4478, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4498, 10-23-2012; Ord. 13-4513, 1-8-2013; Ord. 13-4523,
4-23-2013; Ord. 14-4585, 6-3-2014; Ord. 14-4592, 8-19-2014; Ord. 14-4599, 10-
21-2014; Ord. 16-4662, 4-19-2016; Ord. 22-4884, 8-2-2022)
14-3B-2: CONSERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The conservation district overlay (OCD) zone is used to
designate conservation districts. The purpose of this overlay zone is to:
      1.   Conserve the unique characteristics of older neighborhoods and
resources, including their architectural, historical and aesthetic qualities;
      2.   Provide for design review of new construction or alteration of
existing resources to assure compatibility with the existing character of older
neighborhoods and preserve the historic integrity of the resource;
      3.   Encourage the retention, rehabilitation and appropriate maintenance
of existing buildings, structures and sites in older neighborhoods;
      4.   Stabilize property values and encourage reinvestment in older
neighborhoods; and
      5.   Protect the environmental setting of historic landmarks and historic
districts through the designation of conservation districts adjacent to
historic landmarks and historic districts.
   B.   Authority: The city council may designate by ordinance areas of the
city as conservation districts. The process of designation is considered an
overlay rezoning. A conservation overlay rezoning is required to designate
conservation districts. The procedures for conservation district overlay
rezonings are set forth in chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation
Commission Approval Procedures", of this title.
   C.   Descriptions: A conservation district is a geographically cohesive area
that is similar to a historic district in character. However, because it has
fewer properties that retain a high degree of historic integrity or contribute
to a distinct sense of time and place, it does not currently qualify as a
historic district. Because these areas are still considered worthy of
protection, the city council may designate them for conservation. To qualify
for designation as a conservation district, the subject area must contain
abutting pieces of property under diverse ownership, the built portions of
which, by majority, are at least fifty (50) years old, but according to a
historic resources survey, sixty percent (60%) or less of the structures are of
a quality, integrity and condition that qualify for historic district
designation. The properties within the subject area must also meet one of the
following additional criteria:
      1.   They represent the traditional character of Iowa City neighborhoods
through architectural characteristics, building scale, building setback and
streetscape design; or
      2.   They exemplify a pattern of neighborhood settlement or development
significant to the cultural history or tradition of Iowa City; or
      3.   They represent unique or unusual physical character that creates a
distinctiveness. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010; Ord.
22-4884, 8-2-2022)
14-3B-3: HISTORIC REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of the historic review process is:
      1.   To ensure that material changes to exterior features of landmarks
and properties in historic and conservation districts do not substantially
alter or destroy the defining architectural character of a building, site or
neighborhood.
      2.   To provide property owners, contractors and consultants with
technical assistance and design alternatives to ensure that proposed projects
conform with the applicable historic preservation guidelines.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   If a material change that requires a regulated permit, as defined in
chapter 9, article B, "Historic Preservation Definitions", of this title, is
proposed for any property located in a historic or conservation district or to
a property that has been designated a historic landmark, historic review is
required. A minor, intermediate, or major review will be conducted as
applicable, and as set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title, and if approved, will result in the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness or a certificate of no material effect. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
      2.   For purposes of this article, a "material change" is any act that
adds new materials or otherwise modifies an exterior feature of a property.
"Material changes" include alterations to the exterior features of a building
or structure, demolition of a building or structure, demolition of a portion of
a building or structure, and new construction on a property, including
construction of any new street access drives. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
      3.   Normal repairs or maintenance that do not involve material changes
for which a regulated permit is required are exempt from historic review. For
example, changes made in the color of the exterior surfaces of a building are
considered normal maintenance and repair and are therefore not subject to
historic review.
   C.   Approval Criteria: Applications for historic review will be reviewed
for compliance with the following guidelines and standards, which are published
in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended:
      1.   Historic Districts And Landmarks: For properties located within a
historic district or designated a historic landmark:
         a.   "Secretary Of Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation", 1990
edition or subsequent revision thereof.
         b.   "Iowa City Guidelines For Historic Preservation".
         c.   Individual district guidelines:
            (1)   "Longfellow Neighborhood District Guidelines".
            (2)   "College Hill Neighborhood District Guidelines".
            (3)   "Woodlawn District Guidelines".
            (4)   "Northside Neighborhood District Guidelines".
      2.   Conservation Districts: For properties located within a conservation
district:
         a.   "Iowa City Guidelines For Historic Preservation".
         b.   Individual district guidelines:
            (1)   "Longfellow Neighborhood District Guidelines".
            (2)   "College Hill Neighborhood District Guidelines".
      3.   Multi-Family And Two-Family Uses: For properties located within a
historic or conservation district in which alterations, additions or new
construction will result in two (2) or more dwelling units, the property must
meet the central planning district multi-family standards in addition to any
applicable guidelines and standards listed above.
   D.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission
regarding an application for historic review in a historic district or for a
historic landmark may appeal the action to the city council. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for
historic review in a conservation district may appeal the action to the board
of adjustment. Procedures for such appeals are set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-4: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
After receiving written notification from the commission of the disapproval of
a certificate of appropriateness, the owner of record may apply for a
certificate of economic hardship if he or she believes that the application of
the provisions of this article would result in economic hardship to the extent
that the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return. The review and
approval procedures for a certificate of economic hardship are set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title. The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of
the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
   A.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if required
to comply with the requirements and standards specified in this article. It is
not sufficient to show that the potential return will be reduced as a result of
these regulations, but rather it must be demonstrated that the resulting
reduction would be near confiscation.
   B.   The owner's situation is unique or peculiar to the property in
question, and the situation is not shared with other landowners in the area nor
due to general conditions in the neighborhood.
   C.   The hardship is not of the property owner's or applicant's own making.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-5: COMPLIANCE WITH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of no material
effect, or a certificate of economic hardship is authorization to make only
those material changes specified in the approved application. It shall be the
duty of the building official or designee to inspect, from time to time, any
work performed pursuant to such a certificate to ensure compliance with the
requirements of such certificate. If it is found that such work is not being
carried out in accordance with the certificate, the building official shall
issue a stop work order. Any material change at variance with that authorized
by the certificate shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject
to any enforcement action and penalties allowed herein. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-3B-6: REMEDY OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
   A.   Except for emergencies as determined by the building official pursuant
to the ordinances of the city, city enforcement agencies and departments must
give the historic preservation commission at least thirty (30) days' notice of
any proposed order for remedying conditions determined to be dangerous to life,
health or property which may affect the exterior features of any building or
structure located in a historic district, conservation district or that has
been designated a historic landmark.
   B.   The commission may require that material changes not adversely affect
the exterior features of a building in cases where the danger to life, health
or property may be abated without detracting from the exterior features of the
building. In such cases, it is the responsibility of the commission and the
city enforcement agency or department to cooperate with the property owner in
an attempt to achieve a preservation solution whereby the dangerous conditions
will be corrected with minimal adverse impact on exterior features. Such plan
shall be approved by the commission and shall be signed by the chair of the
commission, the property owner and the head of the city enforcement agency or
department.
   C.   If a solution acceptable to the commission, the city enforcement agency
or department and the property owner cannot be reached within thirty (30) days
or a period of time acceptable to the city enforcement agency or department,
the agency or department shall proceed to issue and enforce its proposed order.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3B-7: PREVENTION OF DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT:
   A.   Duty To Maintain: All buildings and structures that contribute to a
conservation or historic district, or that are listed or are eligible for
listing on the National Register of Historic Places, regardless of whether they
are in a designated historic or conservation district, must be preserved
against decay, deterioration, and kept free from structural defects by the
owner or such person, persons, or entities who may have custody or control
thereof. Accordingly, all such buildings and structures must be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of section
17-5-19, "Responsibilities Of Owners Relating To Maintenance And Occupancy Of
Premises", of this code.
   B.   Determination And Action:
      1.   The historic preservation commission may file a petition with the
building official requesting investigation of any applicable building or
structure suspected of neglect or deterioration according to the standards
referenced in subsection A of this section. The building official will proceed
with investigation and may take any enforcement action necessary to correct or
prevent further violation.
      2.   Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of the property owner(s) or other
responsible person(s), duly notified, to take the corrective action(s)
specified by the building official within the time allotted, the building
official may institute any and all legal or equitable remedies along with
penalties provided by law for said violations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE C. DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
14-3C-1: Purpose
14-3C-2: Applicability
14-3C-3: Design Review
14-3C-4: Compliance Required
14-3C-5: Revisions To Approved Design Plans
14-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of design review is to:
   A.   Assure compatibility with the defining characteristics of the
surrounding area or to preserve the integrity of existing neighborhoods or to
support a unifying theme for a particular development or area in order to spur
economic growth.
   B.   Provide for careful review of new construction or alteration of
existing structures in areas of the City where the existing built environment
is expressive of the architectural traditions of Iowa City and the unique
physical features of the area or to provide guidance in areas where there is a
lack of any defining physical or aesthetic qualities but in which the City
wishes to establish such qualities.
   C.   To provide property owners, contractors and consultants with technical
assistance and design alternatives to ensure that proposed projects conform
with the applicable standards.
   D.   Enhance the social, cultural, economic, environmental and aesthetic
development of the community by encouraging both harmonious and innovative
design.
   E.   Promote orderly community growth and protect property values.
   F.   Recognize that land use regulations aimed at these objectives provide
not only for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens, but also
for their comfort and prosperity, and for the beauty and balance of the
community. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3C-2: APPLICABILITY:
The City Council may designate buildings, areas, and structures within the City
that are subject to design review. The Council may also designate Design Review
Districts that contain contiguous parcels of real property, the built portions
of which are expressive of the defining architectural and other physical and
aesthetic properties that give evidence to the physical traditions of Iowa City
and the unique features of the area; or are areas that lack any defining
physical or aesthetic qualities but are places where the City wishes to
establish such qualities.
   A.   Designated Areas, Buildings, And Structures: Projects located in the
following areas are subject to the design review process:
      1.   Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14: Exterior alterations or new
construction occurring on all parcels that were acquired and/or disposed of by
the City as part of the urban renewal project known as Iowa R-14 are subject to
design review. Design review is also required for public right-of-way
improvements occurring within and adjacent to the urban renewal area designated
as Urban Renewal Project R-14.
      2.   City Plaza: Design review is required for all projects designated as
requiring such review by title 10, chapter 5, "City Plaza", of this Code. Any
public improvements to City Plaza are also subject to design review.
      3.   Other Public-Private Partnership Agreements: Projects specifically
designated as requiring design review pursuant to a development agreement
between a private property owner and the City, such as for urban renewal
parcels and other properties receiving public tax abatements or subsidies.
      4.   Central Planning District: Any exterior alterations to, additions
to, or new construction of two-family uses, multi- family uses, group living
uses, and institutional/civic uses located on a property in the Central
Planning District, are subject to design review according to the rules of
applicability and standards contained in section
14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this title. (See Central
Planning District map located in section
14-2B-6 of this title.)
      5.   PRM Zone: All exterior alterations to, additions to, or new
construction on properties located within the PRM Zone are subject to design
review according to the rules of applicability and standards contained in
section
14-2B-6, "Multi-Family Site Development Standards", of this title.
      6.   Towncrest Design Review District: Any exterior alterations to,
additions to, or new construction of buildings and structures, or alterations
or additions to site development, such as parking areas, landscaping,
screening, lighting, and access on property within the boundaries of the
Towncrest Design Review District, as illustrated on the map below, are subject
to design review. However, on property zoned Single-Family Residential, new
construction, alterations, or additions to single-family uses, including
alterations or additions to site development associated with said uses, are
exempt from design review.
         a.   Towncrest Design Review District Map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2715.png]
 
      7.   Design Review For Riverfront Crossings Districts: Any exterior
alterations to, additions to, or new construction of buildings and structures,
or alterations or additions to site development, including, but not limited to,
parking areas, landscaping, screening, lighting, and access on property zoned
to a Riverfront Crossings Code designation shall be subject to design review as
specified in subsection 14-2G-1D, "Design Review", of this title.
      8.   Rooftop Service Areas: Rooftop service areas as set forth in chapter
4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   B.   Requests For Advice:
      1.   The City Council may request advice and recommendations from the
Design Review Committee on projects located outside of designated areas.
      2.   Property owners in the CB-10 and CB-5 Zones may request advice from
the Design Review Committee for projects located outside of designated areas,
but such advice will be purely advisory.
   C.   Exemptions: Ordinary maintenance or repairs that do not involve changes
in architecture and general design, arrangements, texture, material, or color
are exempted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; Ord. 15-4641,
9-15-2015; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; Ord. 19-4779, 2-
19-2019; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
14-3C-3: DESIGN REVIEW:
Where design review is required pursuant to this article, such review shall be
conducted and approved in accordance with the following levels of review prior
to issuance of any building permit. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
   A.   Levels Of Design Review:
      1.   Level I Review:
         a.   A level I review will be conducted for the following designated
areas, properties, and structures:
            (1)   City Plaza.
            (2)   Sidewalk cafes.
            (3)   Central Planning District.
            (4)   PRM Zone.
            (5)   Certain public-private partnership agreements; level of
review is pursuant to the specific development agreement.
            (6)   Minor exterior alterations, such as window placement, and
color, that do not substantially change the building concept of a Council
approved plan under Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14.
            (7)   Towncrest Design Review District.
            (8)   Design review for Riverfront Crossings Districts.
            (9)   Certain building height bonus provisions as specified in
subsection
14-2G-7G of this title.
            (10)   Rooftop service areas as set forth in chapter 4, article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         b.   Applications for level I review will be reviewed and approved,
modified, or disapproved by the staff Design Review Committee or, in the case
of Riverfront Crossings Districts, by the Form Based Code Committee, in
accordance with chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of
this title.
      2.   Level II Review:
         a.   A level II review will be conducted for the following designated
areas, properties, and structures:
            (1)   Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14, except for minor exterior
alterations, such as signage, window placement, and color, that do not
substantially change the building concept of the Council approved plan. Such
minor alterations will be subject to level I review.
            (2)   Certain public-private partnership agreements; level of
review is pursuant to the specific development agreement.
            (3)   Structures designed with certain building height bonuses
allowed pursuant to subsection
14-2G-7G of this title.
         b.   Applications for level II review will be reviewed by the staff
Design Review Committee with their recommendation forwarded to the City Council
for approval, modification, or disapproval according to the procedures for
design review contained in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval
Procedures", of this title.
   B.   Approval Criteria: Applications for design review will be reviewed for
compliance with the guidelines and standards as referenced below:
      1.   Urban Renewal Project, Iowa R-14: Design review subject to the
design guidelines listed in subsection C of this section.
      2.   City Plaza: Design review subject to design guidelines listed in
subsection C of this section.
      3.   Other Public-Private Partnership Agreements: Design review
guidelines for each such project that is specifically designated as requiring
design review will be pursuant to the development agreement between the private
property owner and the City. In the absence of such guidelines, the design
guidelines listed in subsection C of this section will be used.
      4.   Sidewalk Cafes: Design review subject to the design guidelines
listed in subsection C of this section, and any additional requirements and
guidelines listed in title 10, chapter 3 of this Code.
      5.   Central Planning District: Design review according to the applicable
multi-family site development standards set forth in chapter 2, article B,
"Multi-Family Residential Zones", of this title.
      6.   PRM Zone: Design review according to the applicable multi- family
site development standards set forth in chapter 2, article B, "Multi-Family
Residential Zones", of this title.
         7.   Towncrest Design Review District: Design review according to the
applicable design provisions within the "Towncrest Urban Renewal Area Design
Plan Manual" and according to the applicable standards listed in subsection C
of this section. For purposes of design review, Towncrest Drive shall be
considered a street, with buildings, parking areas, pedestrian amenities,
landscape screening, and other streetscape elements designed and located to
appropriately address Towncrest Drive as a street frontage as illustrated in
the "Towncrest Urban Renewal Area Design Plan Manual".
         8.   Riverfront Crossings District Design Review: Riverfront Crossings
District design review according to subsection
14-2G-1D of this title.
         9.   Rooftop Service Areas: Rooftop service areas allowed as
provisional uses according to approval criteria set forth in chapter 4, article
C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   C.   Design Review Guidelines: When reviewing a project subject to design
review, the Design Review Committee and City Council will adhere to the
following guidelines, if applicable as stated in subsection B of this section.
In no case shall these guidelines be used to attempt to replace or override the
other requirements of this title.
      1.   Definitions:
   COMPATIBILITY: Harmony in the appearance of buildings, structures and
landscape developments along the same streetscape.
   HARMONY: An aesthetically pleasing image resulting from an arrangement of
various architectural and landscape elements along the same streetscape.
   LANDSCAPE: Elements of nature, topography, buildings and other manmade
objects viewed in relation to one another.
   MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES: Structures, other than buildings, visible from
public ways. Examples include memorials, antennas, sheds, shelters, fences and
walls, transformers and drive-up facilities.
   SCALE: The relationship of the size of elements to one another and to the
human figure.
   SCREENING: Structures and/or plantings that conceal an area from view of a
public way.
   STREET FURNITURE: Manmade objects, other than buildings, that are part of
the streetscape. Examples include benches, litter containers, planting
containers, sculptures, vending machines and newspaper dispensers.
   STREETSCAPE: The scene of a public street or way composed of natural and
manmade elements, including buildings, paving, plantings, street furniture and
miscellaneous structures.
      2.   Building Design:
         a.   The project evaluation will be based on the architectural
concepts of the design and the project's relationship to and compatibility with
the defining characteristics of the buildings and site features of the
surrounding area, or alternatively, in areas proposed for redevelopment or
revitalization, the proposed building(s) will be evaluated according to the
goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be to strengthen or preserve the
integrity of the existing area or to support a new architectural theme or set
of unifying characteristics for a particular development or area. (See
figure 3C.1 of this section.)
Figure 3C.1 - Unified Architectural Theme
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2717.png]
 
         b.   Architecturally significant buildings proposed for renovation or
rehabilitation should retain the original architectural style and the essential
and prominent features and materials of the original facade.
         c.   Alignment of the horizontal and vertical architectural features
on building fronts is desirable so as to enhance the visual continuity of the
streetscape. (See
figure 3C.2 below.)
Figure 3C.2 - Alignment Of Architectural Features
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2719.png]
 
         d.   The development of the first floor level should provide visual
interest to and interaction with pedestrians through the use of such features
as windows, doors, and lighting. Blank stretches of wall will be discouraged.
Figure 3C.3 - Pedestrian Oriented Streetscape
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2721.png]
 
         e.   Exterior lighting and fixtures should blend with the
architectural design. They should provide adequate illumination for safety
purposes without excess glare.
         f.   Colors should be an integral part of the architectural style.
         g.   Rooftop equipment should blend with building design or be
screened.
      3.   Relationship Of Building(s) To Site:
         a.   The project should integrate with adjoining properties, provide a
transition between the project and pedestrian uses, and provide appropriate
landscaping.
Figure 3C.4 - Integration Of Pedestrian Amenities And Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2723.png]
 
         b.   Parking and service areas should blend with the street frontage
or be screened from public view.
         c.   The scale of each building should be compatible along a street
frontage to preserve the character of the street or to create the desired
streetscape anticipated by the development plan or agreement. Rhythm and
proportion of buildings, doors, windows and other projections should be
considered. (See
 figure 3C.2, located at the end of subsection C2c of this section.)
         d.   Building materials, colors, textures, lines and masses should
harmonize with adjoining buildings and sites, or alternatively, in areas
proposed for redevelopment or revitalization, the proposed building materials,
colors, textures, lines and masses should be in harmony with the architectural
theme or goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be to strengthen or
preserve the integrity of the existing area or to support a new architectural
theme or set of unifying characteristics for a particular development or area.
         e.   Site grading work should blend with surrounding site grades.
      4.   Landscaping:
         a.   Landscaping should enhance and complement architectural features
and improve the visual and aesthetic quality of the streetscape.
         b.   Plants should be protected by appropriate curbs, raised planting
surfaces, tree guards or other devices when located in areas where plants may
be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic.
Figure 3C.5 - Tree Guard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2725.png]
 
         c.   Paved areas, such as sidewalks and parking spaces, should be
designed to facilitate the safe and efficient circulation of pedestrians and
vehicles.
         d.   Service yards, trash receptacles and storage areas should be
screened by buildings, fencing, plantings, walls or an appropriate combination
of these.
         e.   Existing natural features should be maintained and incorporated
into site design if possible.
         f.   Street furniture and miscellaneous structures should be
integrated with the architectural concept and be located and designed to be
convenient and functional for the public. Their design should be compatible
with surrounding buildings and streetscape in scale, materials and color
scheme. Alternatively, in areas proposed for redevelopment or revitalization,
the proposed street furniture and miscellaneous structures should be integrated
with the architectural theme or goals of the revitalization plan, whether it be
to strengthen or preserve the integrity of the existing area or to support a
new architectural theme or set of unifying characteristics for a particular
development or area.
      5.   Canopies And Awnings:
         a.   Canopies and awnings must respect the style and character of the
structure on which they are located, particularly in the material and color.
         b.   The highest point of a canopy/awning or its superstructure must
not be higher than the midpoint of the space between the second story
windowsills and the top of the first floor storefront window or transom. (See
 figure 3C.7 of this section.)
Figure 3C.7 - Awnings And Canopies
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2727.png]
 
         c.   Along sidewalks and pedestrianways, canopies and awnings should
project a sufficient distance from the building wall to be functional, i.e., to
provide shade and weather protection for pedestrians and to prevent reflective
glare on storefront windows that may block views into the storefront or display
window.
   D.   Appeals: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the design review committee regarding a level I design review
application may appeal such decision to the board of adjustment according to
the applicable procedures for appeals set forth in chapter 8, article C, "Board
Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 11-4421, 2-1-2011; Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015;
Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
14-3C-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Approved applications for design review authorize only those changes in
appearance set forth in such approved applications and no other changes in
appearance. It will be the duty of the building official or designee to
inspect, from time to time, any work performed pursuant to such an approved
application to ensure compliance with the requirements of such application. If
it is found that such work is not being carried out in accordance with the
approved application, the building official will issue a stop work order and
may deny issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Any change in appearance at
variance with that authorized by the approved application shall be deemed a
violation of these regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-3C-5: REVISIONS TO APPROVED DESIGN PLANS:
If the building application deviates from approved design review applications,
the director of housing and inspection services or designee will inform the
design review committee, who will then determine if the proposed changes are
substantive. Substantive changes to an approved application for design review
require submittal of those changes to the design review committee and approval
thereof according to the applicable design review procedures. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
CHAPTER 4
USE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. USE CATEGORIES
SECTION:
14-4A-1: Purpose
14-4A-2: Classifying Uses
14-4A-3: Residential Use Categories
14-4A-4: Commercial Use Categories
14-4A-5: Industrial Use Categories
14-4A-6: Institutional And Civic Uses
14-4A-7: Other Use Categories
14-4A-1: PURPOSE:
This article classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the
basis of common functional, product, or physical characteristics. The use
categories provide a systematic basis for assignment of present and future uses
to zones. Certain use categories are broken down into subgroups if further
distinction is needed. The decision to permit, permit with provisions, or allow
by special exception a particular use or use category in the various zones is
based on the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan and the stated
purposes of the base zones. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4A-2: CLASSIFYING USES:
   A.   Use Characteristics:
      1.   Land uses are assigned to the use category that most closely
describes the nature of the principal use. A number of the most common uses are
listed under the "examples" subsection for each use category. In some zones,
developments may have more than one principal use. Developments may also have
one or more accessory uses. For uses not listed as examples, the following is a
list of factors to be considered when classifying a use into a particular
category, and is also used to determine whether the activities constitute
principal uses or accessory uses:
         a.   The description of the use or activities in comparison to the
stated characteristics of each use category;
         b.   The intensity of the activity or use in comparison to the stated
characteristics of each use category;
         c.   The amount of site or floor area and equipment devoted to the use
or activity;
         d.   The presence of and amount of sales from each use or activity;
         e.   The customer type for each use or activity. For example, do
individual customers come to the site or does the firm primarily sell goods or
services to other firms?
         f.   The number of employees involved in the use or activity;
         g.   The hours of operation;
         h.   The building and site arrangement;
         i.   The type of vehicles used for the activity;
         j.   The number of vehicle trips generated by the use or activity;
         k.   How the use advertises itself;
         l.   Whether the use or activity would be likely to be found
independent of the other activities on the site;
         m.   Whether the use is subordinate to and serves another use in the
development;
         n.   Whether a use is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the
principal building or use served;
         o.   Whether the use contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of occupants, customers, or employees of a principal use; and
         p.   Any other relevant evidence regarding use or activity that would
help to classify a particular land use.
      2.   In cases where a specific use is not listed as an example, the
director of housing and inspection services shall determine the appropriate
category for a use based on the factors listed in subsection A1 of this
section.
      3.   In cases of dispute, the zoning code interpretation panel will issue
a written use determination. Such determination may be appealed to the board of
adjustment according to the procedures outlined in
chapter 8, article C, "Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title.
If an appeal is made, the board of adjustment shall determine whether the city
has made an error in classifying the subject use based on the facts in evidence
and the factors listed in subsection A1 of this section.
      4.   Any use that cannot be clearly classified within an existing use
category by the procedures noted above is prohibited, unless incorporated into
this title by a zoning code text amendment, the procedures for which are
outlined in
chapter 8, article D, "Planning And Zoning Commission Approval Procedures", of
this title. A specific use that cannot be classified into an existing use
category shall not be listed as permitted, provisional, or a special exception
in any zone without first establishing a new use category within this article
by zoning code text amendment.
   B.   Use Of Examples:
      1.   The "examples" subsection under each use category provides a list of
examples of specific uses that are included in the use category. These lists
may not be exhaustive of all the specific uses that might be included in a use
category.
      2.   The names of uses on the lists are generic. They are based on the
common meaning of the terms and not on what a specific use may be called. For
example, a use with the business name "Wholesale Liquidators", that sells
mostly to individual consumers, would be included in the sales oriented retail
category rather than the wholesale sales category, because the actual activity
on the site matches the description of the sales oriented retail category.
   C.   Accessory Uses:
      1.   For reference purposes, a list of accessory uses commonly associated
with a particular use category is included under a subsection entitled
"Accessory Uses". Accessory uses and their associated regulations and
requirements are addressed in detail in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
      2.   A use that is accessory to a principal use in one instance may, in
other circumstances, be considered a principal use. For example, a large
business may provide an in-house daycare center for employees. This daycare
center would be considered an accessory use. However, a daycare center would be
considered a separate principal use if it were not affiliated with another
business or use on the property.
   D.   Exceptions: Some of the use categories may contain an "Exceptions"
subsection. These subsections provide a cross reference for uses that may seem
to be part of a particular category, but which are explicitly classified into a
different use category.
   E.   Prohibited Uses: Certain uses are specifically prohibited in the city
of Iowa City, even though they may be construed to be part of a particular use
category. These uses are listed in a subsection entitled "Prohibited" under the
relevant use category. As noted in subsection A4 of this section, some uses may
also be prohibited because they cannot be clearly classified within an existing
use category by the procedures set forth in subsection A of this section.
   F.   Developments With Multiple Principal Uses: Developments with multiple
principal uses will be categorized using the following rules:
      1.   When all of the principal uses of a development fall within one use
category, then the entire development is assigned to that use category. For
example, a development that contains a hair salon, a dry cleaners, and a
photographic studio would be classified as personal service oriented retail.
      2.   When the principal uses of a development fall within different use
categories, each principal use is classified into the applicable use category
and each use is subject to all applicable regulations for the use category. For
example, a development that contains a store that sells musical instruments and
an architectural office would fall into two (2) different use categories: Sales
oriented retail and general office.
      3.   Developments with multiple principal uses, such as shopping centers,
shall incorporate only those uses permitted or allowed as provisional or by
special exception in the underlying zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   G.   Use Classification For Establishments That Sell Alcohol:
      1.   Applicability: Any use for which an application has been filed for a
liquor control license or wine or beer permit is subject to the following use
classification process.
      2.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to terms used in
this subsection:
   ALCOHOL SALES: The sale of alcohol and alcoholic beverages, including, but
not limited to, alcohol, beer or wine in closed containers intended for off
site consumption; and alcoholic beverages, including cocktails, shots, wine,
beer, and any part of an alcoholic beverage intended for on site consumption,
as defined in chapter 123 of the state code.
   LICENSE: Any liquor control license, wine or beer permit issued by the state
of Iowa that allows sales of alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
   LICENSEE: Any person or entity that holds a liquor control license, wine or
beer permit issued by the state of Iowa.
      3.   Classification Process:
         a.   Prior to issuance of a license for a new use or renewal of a
license for a use that was established prior to the effective date hereof, but
which has not yet been classified according to these provisions, the licensee
must submit to the department of housing and inspection services a verified
statement that details the nature of the principal use for which the license
will be issued, the type of license(s) applied for, and the hours that the
establishment will be open for business. The city may request any other
information deemed necessary to verify and classify the use, including, but not
limited to, business records upon which the statement is based, state and
federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance and audits performed
to determine dramshop insurance premiums, and receipts from vendors for goods
purchased.
         b.   Based on the information provided by the applicant, the type of
license being applied for, and the classification system set forth in this
article, the city will advise the applicant regarding the classification of the
proposed use for zoning purposes, and, if applicable, whether the alcohol sales
will be considered a principal or accessory use of the property.
         c.   If through this use classification process, a use that was
legally established prior to the effective date hereof is determined to be
nonconforming with regard to the separation requirements for drinking
establishments or alcohol sales oriented retail uses, the property file will be
tagged by the building official or designee as a nonconforming drinking
establishment or nonconforming alcohol sales oriented retail use, as
applicable. Such a nonconforming use may continue provided it is in compliance
with the applicable provisions of article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of
this chapter.
      4.   Accessory Alcohol Sales Certification: Any use that is classified as
an alcohol sales oriented retail use is considered a principal use and subject
to the regulations pertaining thereto, unless it is determined that alcohol
sales are an accessory use to another principal use of the property through the
following certification process. Any licensee applying for an accessory alcohol
sales certificate must submit verified statements and business records as set
forth in the following subsections:
         a.   For existing uses, if according to a verified statement issued by
a certified public accountant, alcohol sales expressed as a percentage of gross
yearly income is less than twenty five percent (25%), an accessory alcohol
sales certificate will be issued for one year, after which time it must be
renewed annually at the time the license is renewed. Said statement shall be
based on records made in the regular course of the licensee's business. The
licensee shall allow, upon request, the building official, city clerk or
designee to examine the business records upon which the statement is based,
including state and federal tax records, applications for dramshop insurance
and audits performed to determine dramshop insurance premiums, and receipts
from vendors for goods purchased.
         b.   For new uses, if the licensee estimates, based on their submitted
business plan, that alcohol sales expressed as a percentage of gross yearly
income will be less than twenty five percent (25%), an accessory alcohol sales
certificate will be issued for one year. The certificate must be renewed
annually thereafter at the time the license is renewed based on actual sales
according to a verified statement from a certified public accountant as
described in subsection G4a of this section.
         c.   If, at the time of renewal of the certificate, alcohol sales
constitute twenty five percent (25%) or more of gross yearly income and the use
is not in compliance with zoning requirements for alcohol sales oriented uses,
a notice of violation will be issued. If the use is in violation of the zoning
requirements for alcohol sales oriented uses, the licensee must reduce alcohol
sales to below twenty five percent (25%) of gross yearly income or otherwise
bring the use into compliance with the applicable regulations. (Ord. 09-4341,
6-2-2009)
14-4A-3: RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES:
   A.   Household Living Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: The residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a
single household or group household, who are living together as a single
housekeeping unit. The principal use of the property is for long term
residential living, with each dwelling unit containing its own facilities for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating meals, and with all spaces within the unit
open to the entire household. The dwelling or dwelling units are designed for
residential living and any accessory use shall be secondary to the use of the
property as a residence.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below. The
single family uses are further divided into various dwelling types, because
these dwelling types have distinct dimensional and development standards based
on the zone in which they are located. Group households, given that they are a
type of "household" rather than a type of dwelling, are permitted in any type
of dwelling listed in the three (3) other subgroups, as is permanent supportive
housing.
         a.   Group Households: Group households include only the following
specific uses: elder family homes, elder group homes, parental group homes, and
family care homes, all as defined in chapter 9, article A, "General
Definitions", of this title.
         b.   Single Family Uses: A single family use is a household living use
where there is no more than one principal dwelling unit per lot. Single family
uses include the following dwelling types.
            (1)   Detached single family dwellings. Farm dwellings; detached
single family houses; manufactured homes; modular homes; and mobile homes, if
converted to real property and taxed as a site built dwelling, as provided in
the Code of Iowa, as amended. (See exceptions, below.)
            (2)   Detached zero lot line dwellings.
            (3)   Attached single family dwellings. Attached zero-lot- line
dwellings; townhouse dwellings.
         c.   Two Family Uses: Two family uses are household living uses in
which there are two (2) principal dwelling units within a single building and
both dwelling units are located on the same lot. These uses are often referred
to as duplexes.
         d.   Multi-Family Uses: Multi-family uses are household living uses
where there are three (3) or more principal dwelling units within a single
building and all dwelling units within the building are located on the same
lot. These uses include apartments, condominium apartments, elder apartments,
assisted living apartments, townhouse-style apartments and condominiums,
efficiency apartments, and dwelling units located within mixed-use buildings.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Private recreational uses; storage buildings;
parking for residents' vehicles; supportive services that assist permanent
supportive housing residents in retaining housing, improving their health
status, and maximizing their ability to live and when possible work in the
community. Home occupations, accessory dwelling units, childcare homes,
mechanical structures such as solar energy systems, and bed and breakfasts are
accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations outlined in article
C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter. Any accessory use of the
property shall remain secondary to the principal use of the property for
residential living.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Mobile homes located within manufactured housing parks approved
through a planned development process are considered detached single family
dwellings, regardless of whether they are converted to real property and taxed
as site built dwellings.
         b.   Detached single family dwellings and detached zero lot line
dwellings approved through a planned development process are considered single
family uses for purposes of this title, even if they are located on one common
lot and sold as condominiums.
         c.   Single family uses that contain accessory dwelling units are not
considered a two family use.
         d.   Mixed-use buildings containing dwelling units are always
considered multi-family uses, regardless of the number of dwelling units within
the building.
         e.   Uses such as hotels, motels, and guest houses are not considered
residential. They are considered a form of temporary lodging and are classified
as hospitality-oriented retail.
         f.   Transient housing is not considered residential. It is considered
a form of temporary lodging or shelter and is classified as community service -
shelter.
         g.   Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where
residents are placed in the facility by court order and are under supervision
of employees or contractees of the Department of Corrections, are classified as
detention facilities.
         h.   Any single family dwelling or dwelling unit within a two family
dwelling where there is more than one residential lease issued per unit or
where there are locks installed on bedroom doors through which one resident may
prevent other residents from entering his/her private room(s) when he/she is
not physically present is classified as a group living use, unless the dwelling
meets the definition of a group household.
   B.   Group Living Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Group living uses are characterized by the
residential occupancy of a dwelling by a group of people (roomers) who do not
meet the definition of a "household" or "group household". Group living
structures contain individual, private rooming units that are not open to all
the residents of the dwelling. Rooming units contain private space for living
and sleeping, but not for cooking. Bathroom facilities may be private or
shared. There may also be shared kitchen and dining facilities and shared
common rooms and amenities for all residents. The rooming units are furnished
with locks through which one member of the group may prevent other members of
the group from entering his/her private rooming unit. The residents may or may
not receive any combination of care, training, or treatment, but those
receiving such services must reside at the site.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below.
         a.   Assisted group living: Group care facilities, including nursing
and convalescent homes; assisted living facilities.
         b.   Independent group living: Rooming houses; student dormitories.
         c.   Fraternal group living: Fraternities; sororities; monasteries;
convents; and rooming house cooperatives.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Recreational facilities; meeting rooms; associated
offices; shared amenity areas, shared kitchens and dining rooms, food
preparation and dining facilities; off-street parking for vehicles of the
occupants and staff; storage facilities; mechanical structures including solar
energy systems; off-street loading areas.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Uses such as hotels, motels, and guest houses are not considered
residential. They are considered a form of temporary lodging and are classified
as hospitality-oriented retail.
         b.   Family care homes, elder group homes, and elder family homes are
considered group households and are classified as household living uses.
         c.   Transient housing is not considered residential. It is considered
a form of temporary lodging or shelter and is classified as community service -
shelter.
         d.   Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where
residents are placed in the facility by court order and are under supervision
of employees or contractees of the Department of Corrections, are classified as
detention facilities. (Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; amd. Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022;
Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 23-4917, 11-21-2023)
14-4A-4: COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES:
   A.   Adult Business Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Any amusement or entertainment establishment,
bookstore, massage establishment, motion picture theater, video rental or sales
establishment, or other similar use, in which twenty five percent (25%) or more
of its floor area is customarily not open to the public generally but only to
one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age under
chapter 728, "obscenity", Code of Iowa, as amended.
      2.   Examples: Adult bookstores; adult video stores; nightclubs featuring
nude dancing.
      3.   Accessory uses: Off street parking.
      4.   Exceptions: Therapeutic massage is considered personal service
oriented retail.
   B.   Animal Related Commercial Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Commercial services related to the temporary care,
medical treatment, recreation, or cremation of domestic animals. Uses are
divided into two (2) subgroups based on the intensity of the use, outdoor
activity on the site, and the potential for noise and odor related
externalities.
      2.   Examples: This category includes uses from the two (2) subgroups
listed below:
         a.   General: Veterinary clinics; animal grooming establishments; pet
crematoriums; animal daycare; indoor animal recreation.
         b.   Intensive: Kennels; stables.
      3.   Accessory uses: Boarding facilities and pet crematoriums within
veterinary clinics; overnight sleeping accommodations for staff; private
outdoor animal recreation; parking; outdoor animal exercise areas associated
with kennels and stables.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Pet and pet supply stores are classified as sales oriented
retail.
         b.   Pet crematoriums may also be considered an accessory use to a
mortuary or funeral home.
   C.   Building Trade Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Building trade uses are characterized by firms who
undertake activities of a type that are specialized either to building
construction or to both building and nonbuilding construction projects. These
specialized trade contractors may work on subcontract from the general
contractor, performing only part of the work covered by the general contract,
or they may work directly for the owner of the building or project. Building
trade contractors primarily perform their work at the site of construction,
although they also may have shops where they perform work incidental to the job
site.
      2.   Examples: Electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning
contractors, painting and wall papering services, masons, stone and tile
setters, glass and glazing services.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Off street parking, workshops, storage.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Contractors and others who perform services off site are included
in the office use category if large equipment and materials are not stored
indoors or outdoors on the site, and fabrication, or similar work, is not
conducted on the site.
         b.   Businesses that repair and install glass in automobiles, trucks
and other vehicles are classified as vehicle repair uses.
         c.   Uses specializing in heavy construction work, or that include
major fabrication or assembly activities, or that store large quantities of
materials on site will be classified as industrial service, manufacturing and
production, and/or warehouse and freight movement depending on the particular
characteristics of the use (see section
14-4A-2, "Classifying Uses", of this article).
         d.   Artisans and artists that manufacture or assemble goods made of
wood, glass, metal, tile, stone or similar that are intended for sale to the
general public are categorized as cottage industries, as defined in chapter 9,
article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
   D.   Commercial Recreational Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Commercial facilities used primarily for physical
exercise, recreation, or culture. Outdoor uses in this category are typically
land intensive uses that provide continuous recreation or entertainment
oriented activities. They may take place in a number of structures that are
arranged together in an outdoor setting. Indoor uses in this category may
require larger indoor areas to accommodate equipment or facilities for the
proposed activity.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed
below:
         a.   Outdoor: Campgrounds; commercial tennis and swimming facilities;
drive-in theaters; outdoor skating rinks; golf driving ranges; outdoor
miniature golf facilities; commercial amphitheaters; amusement parks; privately
owned active sports facilities such as ball fields.
         b.   Indoor: Physical fitness centers; health clubs; gyms; bowling
alleys; indoor skating rinks; billiard halls; amusement arcades; indoor
theaters; indoor play parks.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Concessions; off street parking; maintenance
facilities.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Golf courses are considered parks and open space.
         b.   Commercial art galleries are classified as sales oriented retail.
         c.   Private lodges and clubs are classified as religious/private
group assembly.
         d.   Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature, such as
community centers, libraries and museums are considered community service.
         e.   Establishments featuring nude dancing are considered an adult
business use.
   E.   Commercial Parking Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Commercial parking facilities provide parking that
is not accessory to a specific use. A fee may or may not be charged. A facility
that provides both accessory parking for a specific use and regular fee parking
for people not connected to the use is also classified as commercial parking.
      2.   Examples: Municipal parking facilities; short term and long term fee
parking facilities; commercial shuttle parking facilities; mixed parking lots
(partially for a specific use, partly for rent to others).
   F.   Eating And Drinking Establishments:
      1.   Characteristics: Establishments where the principal activity is the
preparation, dispensing and consumption of food and/or beverages. Depending on
the type of establishment, food and/or beverages may be consumed on or off of
the premises. These uses may vary with regard to traffic generation,
congestion, and the potential for off site impacts. Therefore, the size,
location, and accessory uses permitted may be regulated differently based on
the underlying zoning.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed
below:
         a.   Eating Establishments: Restaurants; cafes; cafeterias; coffee
shops; delicatessens, tearooms; dining rooms; supper clubs; fast food
restaurants; ice cream parlors.
         b.   Drinking Establishments: Any use that meets all of the defining
characteristics listed in subsections F2b(1), F2b(2), and F2b(3) of this
section, is considered a drinking establishment for purposes of this title,
unless listed as an exception in subsection F4 of this section.
            (1)   The principal activity of the establishment is the
preparation, dispensing and consumption of food and/or beverages; and
            (2)   The establishment is licensed by the state for the sale of
alcoholic beverages for on site consumption, as defined by Iowa Code chapter
123; and
            (3)   The establishment is open for business on a regular basis any
time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and two o'clock (2:
00) A.M.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Off street parking. Drive-through facilities and
sidewalk cafe seating are accessory uses that are subject to additional
regulations outlined in article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
chapter.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Establishments featuring nude dancing are considered an adult
business use.
         b.   Restaurants and/or bars that are associated with a hospitality
oriented retail use and that have been issued a class B liquor control license
are considered accessory to the subject hospitality oriented retail use and are
not considered eating or drinking establishments or alcohol oriented retail
uses.
   G.   Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Quick vehicle servicing uses provide direct
services for motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car or on
site before and while the service is performed. The facility may include a
drive-through area where the service is performed. Full serve and miniserve gas
stations are always classified as a principal use, rather than an accessory
use, even when they are in conjunction with other uses.
      2.   Examples: Full serve and miniserve gas stations; unattended card key
service stations; car washes.
      3.   Accessory uses: Off street parking and stacking lanes.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and
light and medium trucks is classified as vehicle repair and is considered a
principal use rather than an accessory use, even when in conjunction with a gas
station or other use. A development with both a gas station and automotive
repair shop would be classified as containing two (2) principal uses: quick
vehicle servicing and vehicle repair.
         b.   A convenience store located on the same lot as a quick vehicle
servicing use is regulated as a separate principal use, sales oriented retail
or alcohol sales oriented retail, whichever is applicable.
         c.   Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and heavy
trucks is classified as industrial service.
         d.   Fleet vehicle refueling facilities that are located on the site
where the fleet vehicles are kept are classified as an accessory use.
   H.   Office Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Office uses are characterized by activities
conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government,
professional, medical, or financial services.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed
below:
         a.   General Office: Professional offices, such as lawyers,
accountants, engineers, architects, and real estate agents; financial
businesses, such as mortgage lenders, brokerage houses, administrative and back
office banking facilities; data processing; government offices; public utility
offices; social service agency offices; television and radio studios; and
business services, such as advertising agencies, consumer credit reporting
agencies, collection agencies, mailing and copying services, quick printing
services, building management services, detective agencies, computer services,
software development, research and development, consulting and public
relations, protective services, bondspersons, drafting services, auctioneer
services, call centers.
         b.   Medical/Dental Office: Medical and dental clinics; chiropractic
clinics; medical and dental labs; blood collection facilities; physical therapy
clinics.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Cafeterias; exercise facilities for employees; off
street parking; other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm
or building. Antennas and satellite receiving devices that are accessory to a
television or radio studio are subject to additional regulations. (See article
C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter.)
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Broadcast and other communication towers associated with radio
and television studios are classified as communication transmission facilities
and are regulated as a separate principal use.
         b.   Offices that are accessory to a business or facility in another
use category are not classified as an office use, but are subject to the
relevant regulations for accessory uses. For example, a manufacturing facility
may include some offices for administrative functions. These offices are
considered accessory to the manufacturing and production use.
         c.   Retail banking establishments that offer teller services and
other personal banking services for individual customers are considered
personal service oriented retail. Banking establishments that contain both
administrative offices/back office functions and retail operations are
considered to contain two (2) principal uses: office and personal service
oriented retail.
         d.   Offices for contractors and others who perform services off site
are included in the office category if equipment and materials are not stored
on the site and fabrication services or similar work is not conducted on site.
         e.   Salons and spas that offer therapeutic massage and other
aesthetic health treatments are classified as personal service oriented retail.
   I.   Retail Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Establishments involved in the sale, lease, or rent
of new or used products to the general public for personal or household
consumption and establishments involved in the sale of personal services,
hospitality services, or product repair services to the general public.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the subgroups listed below:
         a.   Sales Oriented: Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer,
home, and business goods, including, but not limited to, antiques, appliances,
art, art supplies, bicycles, carpeting, clothing, dry goods, electronic
equipment, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries,
hardware, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants,
printed material, stationery, videos. Also includes retail establishments that
have a cottage industry component, such as bakeries, confectioneries,
upholsterers, artist/artisans' studios, and similar.
         b.   Personal Service Oriented: Establishments engaged in providing
retail services and services related to the care of a person or a person's
apparel, such as retail banking establishments, laundromats, catering services,
dry cleaners, tailors, shoe repair, photographic studios, beauty salons,
tanning salons, therapeutic massage establishments, taxidermists, mortuaries,
funeral homes, and crematoriums.
         c.   Repair Oriented: Repair of consumer goods, such as electronics,
bicycles, office equipment; appliances.
         d.   Hospitality Oriented: Hotels; motels; convention centers;
guesthouses; and commercial meeting halls/event facilities.
         e.   Outdoor Storage And Display Oriented: Uses that typically include
large areas of outdoor storage or display, such as lumberyards; sales or
leasing of consumer vehicles, including passenger vehicles, light and medium
trucks, and recreational vehicles; sales of landscaping materials and nursery
products to the general public; farm supply and implement sales; equipment or
vehicle rental businesses.
         f.   Alcohol Sales Oriented: Liquor stores; wine shops; grocery
stores; convenience stores; and other retail establishments for which a class E
liquor control license or wine or beer permit has been issued that allows sale
of alcohol or alcoholic beverages in closed containers for off premises
consumption.
         g.   Delayed Deposit Service Uses: Payday lenders and any other
similar use that meets the definition of "delayed deposit service use", as
defined in chapter 9, article A of this title.
         h.   Tobacco Sales Oriented: Any retailer actively engaged in the sale
of tobacco products, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, all as defined in Iowa Code Chapter 453A, as amended, pursuant to a
tobacco permit.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; storage of goods; assembly, repackaging, or
processing of goods for on site sale; off street parking, services incidental
to the sale of goods; wholesale sales. Drive-through facilities are accessory
uses that are subject to additional regulations outlined in article C,
"Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter. Crematoriums, for either human
or pet remains, may be an accessory use to a funeral home or mortuary.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Lumberyards and other building material suppliers that sell
primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as
wholesale sales.
         b.   Repair of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and
medium trucks is classified as vehicle repair. Repair and service of industrial
vehicles and equipment, and heavy trucks is classified as industrial service.
         c.   Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment is
classified as wholesale sales.
         d.   Firms that primarily sell tree nursery products and landscaping
materials to other retail outlets rather than to the general public are
considered wholesale sales.
         e.   Restaurants and/or bars that are associated with a hospitality
oriented retail use and that have been issued a Class B liquor control license
are considered accessory to the subject hospitality oriented retail use and are
not considered drinking establishments or alcohol oriented retail uses.
         f.   Drinking establishments are not considered alcohol sales oriented
uses, even if they have a liquor control license or wine or beer permit that
allows sale of alcohol, wine, or beer in closed containers for off premises
consumption.
         g.   A use is not considered an alcohol sales oriented use if an
accessory alcohol sales certificate has been granted according to the process
set forth in subsection
14-4A-2G, "Use Classification For Establishments That Sell Alcohol", of this
article.
         h.   Bed and breakfasts are considered accessory uses to any
residential use and are regulated according to the provisions specified for
such uses in article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this chapter.
         i.   A pet crematorium, if a principal use on a property, is
considered an animal related commercial use. Pet crematoriums may also be an
accessory use to a veterinary clinic.
         j.   Sales of first-class and/or second-class consumer fireworks is
classified as an "other use" as set forth in subsection
14-4A-7E of this article.
   J.   Redemption Center Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: An indoor facility that collects bottles and cans
from consumers, distributes payment of the refund value, and may utilize
compressing machines.
      2.   Examples: Redemption center facilities.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; off street parking.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Recycling processing facilities are classified as waste related
uses.
         b.   Establishments that offer beverages for sale are classified as
either sales oriented retail, alcohol sales oriented retail, eating
establishment, or drinking establishment.
   K.   Surface Passenger Services:
      1.   Characteristics: Passenger terminals for regional bus and passenger
rail service; dispatch facilities for local taxi and limousine service.
      2.   Examples: Regional bus and passenger rail depots; charter and rental
bus services; dispatch facilities for local taxi and limousine services.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; concessions; parking; maintenance and
fueling facilities.
      4.   Exceptions: Bus stations and park and ride facilities for local mass
transit are classified as general community service uses.
   L.   Vehicle Repair Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Establishments providing repair and servicing of
passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles
such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer
does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed.
      2.   Examples: Vehicle repair shops; auto body shops; transmission and
muffler shops; alignment shops; auto upholstery shops; auto detailing services;
tire sales and mounting.
      3.   Accessory uses: Offices; sales of parts; off street parking; vehicle
storage.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Towing services and the repair and service of industrial vehicles
and equipment and of heavy trucks are classified as industrial service.
         b.   Vehicle wrecking and salvage are classified as salvage
operations.
         c.   Quick vehicle lubrication businesses are classified as quick
vehicle servicing. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006;
Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord.
12-4495, 9-18-2012; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017; Ord. 20-4820, 3-3-2020; Ord. 22-
4882, 6-21-2022; Ord. 24-4940, 11-4-2024; Ord. 24-4941, 12- 10-2024)
14-4A-5: INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES:
   A.   Industrial Service Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Firms that are engaged in the repair or servicing
of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or
byproducts. Industrial service firms that service or repair consumer goods do
so primarily by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets,
rather than for individual customers. Few customers, especially the general
public, come to the site. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      2.   Examples: Facilities, yards, and preassembly yards for construction
contractors; welding shops; machines shops; tool repair; electric motor repair;
repair of scientific or professional instruments; repair of heavy machinery;
towing and vehicle storage; servicing and repair of medium and heavy trucks;
exterminators; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; laundry, dry cleaning
and carpet cleaning plants; schools for industrial trades. (Ord. 11-4452, 10-
18-2011)
      3.   Accessory uses: Offices; parking; storage; rail spur or lead lines.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Building contractors who primarily perform services off site are
included in the building trade uses category. However, contractors and others
who perform services off site are included in the office use category if large
equipment and materials are not stored indoors or outdoors on the site, and
fabrication, or similar work, is not conducted on the site. (Ord. 11-4452, 10-
18-2011)
         b.   Recycling processing facilities are classified as waste related
uses.
         c.   Schools that offer training in industrial trades, but that do not
include training on large equipment or vehicles and that do not include
activities that generate noise, odors, or dust more typical of industrial uses,
are classified as specialized educational facilities or colleges and
universities.
   B.   Manufacturing And Production Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Firms that are involved in the manufacturing,
processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manmade,
raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be
finished or semifinished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for
transfer to other plants, or to order for businesses or consumers. Goods are
generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part
of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the three (3) subgroups listed
below: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
         a.   Technical/Light Manufacturing: Firms engaged in the
manufacturing, development, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling of
electronic components; electrotherapeutic, electromedical and X-ray apparatus;
engineering, scientific and research laboratory equipment; measuring and
controlling instruments; office, computing and accounting machines; optical
instruments and lenses; pharmaceuticals; photographic equipment and supplies;
photofinishing laboratories. (Ord. 09-4352, 7-6-2009)
         b.   General Manufacturing: Manufacturing, compounding, assembling or
treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise. This subgroup excludes
those manufacturing firms listed as examples under heavy manufacturing and also
excludes those manufacturing uses that are expressly prohibited in Iowa City.
For example, this subgroup includes the manufacture of most chemicals and
allied products and the manufacture of most food and kindred products, except
those listed under the heavy manufacturing subgroup.
         c.   Heavy Manufacturing: Manufacturing firms not included in the
manufacturing categories above because they may have significant external
effects (excessive odor, fumes, smoke, dust, hazardous waste) on adjacent, less
intense commercial or industrial uses. Included in this category are uses such
as concrete batch/mix plants; asphalt mixing plants; meatpacking plants;
sawmills and planing mills; wet corn milling; manufacture of animal feeds; and
paper and paperboard mills.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; cafeterias; off street parking; employee
recreational facilities; on site daycare facilities; warehouses; storage yards;
rail spur or lead lines; docks; repair facilities; truck fleets.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on site and to the
general public are classified as sales oriented retail.
         b.   Salvage and wrecking of automobiles, trucks, and other heavy
machinery is classified as salvage operations.
      5.   Prohibited Uses: Rendering plants; Portland cement plants;
stockyards and slaughterhouses; manufacture of fertilizers or explosives; oil
refining and alcohol plants; steel mills; pulp mills.
   C.   Salvage Operations:
      1.   Characteristics: Firms that collect, store, and dismantle damaged or
discarded automobiles, trucks, machinery, appliances, and building materials.
Damaged goods are often dismantled in order to salvage usable parts for resale.
      2.   Examples: Auto and truck salvage and wrecking; salvage and wrecking
of heavy machinery, appliances, and building materials.
      3.   Accessory uses: Towing services; offices; parking; storage.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Recycling processing facilities are classified as waste related
uses.
         b.   Uses that receive, store, or dispose of liquid or solid organic
materials or waste are classified as waste related uses.
   D.   Self-Service Storage Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Uses that provide separate storage areas for
individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private
access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property.
      2.   Examples: Miniwarehouses; ministorage facilities.
      3.   Accessory uses: Security and leasing offices. Use of the storage
areas for sales, service, repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered
accessory to a self-service storage use.
      4.   Exceptions: A transfer and storage business where there are no
individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods
to be stored or transferred is classified as warehouse and freight movement.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   E.   Warehouse And Freight Movement Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Firms involved in the storage or movement of goods
for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or
the final consumer, except for some will-call pick ups. There is little on site
sales activity with the customer present.
      2.   Examples: Separate warehouses used by retail stores such as
furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage;
cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; major wholesale
distribution centers; truck and air freight terminals; railroad switching
yards; bus and railcar storage lots; storage lots for large fleets of vehicles;
parcel services; major postal facilities; grain terminals; and the stockpiling
of sand, gravel, and other aggregate materials.
      3.   Accessory uses: Offices; fleet parking and maintenance areas; rail
spur or lead lines; docks; and repackaging facilities.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid
wastes are classified as waste related uses.
         b.   Miniwarehouses are classified as self-service storage.
         c.   Dispatch facilities and accessory parking areas for taxi and
limousine services are classified as surface passenger services. (Ord. 06-4245,
12-12-2006)
   F.   Waste Related Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from
others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location; uses that
collect sanitary wastes; uses that recycle solid waste or recyclable materials;
and uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from biological
decomposition of organic material.
      2.   Examples: Recycling processing facilities; sanitary landfills;
limited use landfills; waste composting; waste transfer stations; energy
recovery plants; sewage treatment plants; portable sanitary collection
equipment storage and pumping; and hazardous waste collection sites.
      3.   Accessory uses: Recycling of materials; offices; repackaging and
transshipment of byproducts.
      4.   Exceptions: Uses that receive, store, and dismantle damaged or
discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances or building materials for reuse or
resale of component parts are classified as salvage operations.
      5.   Prohibited Uses: Disposal, reduction or dumping of dead animals or
offal; radioactive waste storage or disposal facilities. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
   G.   Wholesale Sales Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Firms that are primarily involved in the sale,
lease, or rent of products to retailers; to industrial, institutional, or
commercial business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such individuals
or companies. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but
sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on site or
delivered to the customer.
      2.   Examples: Wholesale sales and rental of heavy trucks, machinery,
equipment, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine
parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and
store fixtures; mail order houses; wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts,
and building hardware.
      3.   Accessory uses: Offices; products repair; warehouses; parking; minor
fabrication services; repackaging of goods.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on
a membership basis are classified as sales oriented retail.
         b.   Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on site
business activity are classified as warehouse and freight movement.
         c.   Wholesale plant or tree nurseries are classified as agriculture.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-4A-6: INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC USES:
   A.   Basic Utility Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: "Basic utilities" are infrastructure services that
need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic
utility uses generally do not have a large number of employees at the site.
Services may be publicly or privately provided.
      2.   Examples: Utility substation facilities, such as electric
substations, gas regulator stations, telecommunications switching and relay
facilities; water and sewer lift stations, water towers, and reservoirs.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Parking; control, monitoring, data or transmission
equipment.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Services where employees or the general public are generally
present are classified as community service or office uses.
         b.   Utility offices where employees or customers are generally
present are classified as office uses.
         c.   Bus barns are classified as warehouse and freight movement.
         d.   Communications towers, including radio, television, and wireless
communications infrastructure, are classified as communication transmission
facilities.
         e.   Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems are not
considered a basic utility use.
   B.   Colleges And Universities:
      1.   Characteristics: Public or private colleges and universities that
offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a formal degree.
Colleges, universities and professional schools granting academic degrees and
requiring at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic
training for admission. Junior colleges and technical institutes requiring at
least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic training for
admission and granting associate academic degrees, certificates or diplomas.
These uses tend to be in campuslike settings or on multiple blocks.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the following two (2)
subgroups:
         a.   Public: Public universities and community colleges that are under
state jurisdiction.
         b.   Private: Private colleges and universities; private technical
colleges; private nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital;
seminaries.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; housing for students; food service;
laboratories; health and sports facilities; theaters; meeting areas; parking;
maintenance facilities; support commercial.
      4.   Exceptions: Business, technical, trade, martial arts, music, dance,
and drama schools/studios are classified as specialized educational facilities.
However, business and technical colleges that offer degree programs in
campuslike settings are classified as private colleges and universities.
   C.   Community Service Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature
providing a local service to people of the community. Generally, they provide
the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The
service is ongoing, not just for special events. Included are community centers
or facilities that have membership provisions that are open to the general
public to join at any time, e.g., a senior center that allows any senior to
join. The use may provide shelter or short-term housing when operated by a
public or nonprofit agency. The use may also provide special counseling,
education, or training of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the following three (3)
subgroups:
         a.   General Community Service: Libraries; museums; transit centers;
park and ride facilities; senior centers; community centers; neighborhood
centers; youth club facilities; some social service facilities; vocational
training facilities for the physically or mentally disabled; soup kitchens;
surplus food distribution centers; public safety facilities, such as police and
fire stations.
         b.   Community Service - Shelter: Transient housing operated by a
public or nonprofit agency.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas;
parking; health and therapy areas; daycare uses; athletic facilities.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Religious institutions and private clubs and lodges are
classified as religious/private group assembly uses.
         b.   Group care facilities where patients are residents of the
facility are classified as assisted group living.
         c.   Private, for profit athletic or health clubs are classified as
indoor commercial recreational uses.
         d.   Private, for profit art galleries are classified as sales
oriented retail.
         e.   Social service agencies that consist primarily of office and
counseling functions and operate in a similar fashion to other office uses are
classified as general office.
         f.   Parks and cemeteries are classified as parks and open space.
         g.   Uses where tenancy is arranged on a non-transient basis are
residential and are classified as household living or group living.
         h.   Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where
residents of the facility are under supervision of sworn officers of the court
are classified as detention facilities.
   D.   Daycare Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: A nonresidential facility that provides less than
twenty four (24) hour per daycare or supervision for children and adults for a
fee. Daycare uses also include organized programs of short term supportive
daycare in a group environment for adults who need supervision, assistance or
both. Services may include, but are not limited to, nursing and rehabilitative
services, personal care, transportation services, social or recreational
activities, and preventative or restorative services.
      2.   Examples: Childcare centers; adult daycare; preschools and latchkey
programs not accessory to an educational facility use.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; recreational areas; playgrounds; parking.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   A childcare home (see definition of "childcare home" in chapter
9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title) is considered an accessory
use and is subject to the requirements of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses
And Buildings", of this title.
         b.   Preschools and latchkey programs located within an educational
facility are considered an accessory use and are subject to the regulations of
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
         c.   Daycare centers that provide on site care for the employees of a
particular business are considered accessory uses and are subject to the
regulations of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this
title.
   E.   Detention Facilities:
      1.   Characteristics: Facilities for the judicially required detention or
incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under twenty four (24) hour
supervision by employees or contractees of the department of corrections,
except when on an approved leave. This category also includes alternatives to
incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents or inmates are placed by
and remain under the supervision of the courts.
      2.   Examples: Prisons; jails; probation centers; juvenile detention
homes; halfway houses.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; recreational and health facilities; therapy
facilities; maintenance facilities; hobby and manufacturing activities.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Programs that provide care and training or treatment for
psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the
program, but where patients are not under twenty four (24) hour supervision of
employees or contractees of the department of corrections are classified as
assisted group living.
         b.   Programs that provide transitional living experience for former
offenders, where residents are not currently under twenty four (24) hour
supervision by employees or contractees of the department of corrections, are
classified as assisted group living.
   F.   Educational Facilities:
      1.   Characteristics: Public and private schools that provide state
mandated primary and secondary generalized education; and schools for
specialized activities, such as dance, music, martial arts, business, and
technical skills.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the following two (2)
subgroups:
         a.   General Educational Facilities: Public and private elementary,
middle, junior high and senior high schools, including such schools owned or
operated by a religious entity; boarding schools; military academies.
         b.   Specialized Educational Facilities: Schools primarily engaged in
offering specialized trade, business, or commercial courses, but not academic
training. Also specialized nondegree granting schools, such as music schools,
dramatic schools, dance studios, martial arts studios, language schools and
civil service and other short term examination preparatory schools.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Cafeterias; parking; play areas; recreational and
sports facilities; auditoriums; preschools; before and after school programs.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Preschools that are not accessory to an educational facility use
are classified as daycare.
         b.   Schools that offer training in industrial trades that include
training on large equipment or vehicles, or that include activities that
generate noise, odors, or dust more typical of industrial uses are classified
as industrial service.
         c.   Business, technical, and other colleges that offer degree
programs in campus like settings are classified as private colleges and
universities.
   G.   Hospitals:
      1.   Characteristics: Uses providing health services for inpatient
medical care for sick or injured humans, including related facilities that are
an integral part thereof, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, staff
offices and emergency medical services. Hospitals tend to be on multiple blocks
or in campus settings.
      2.   Examples: Hospitals; medical centers.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Outpatient clinics; offices; laboratories; teaching
facilities; meeting areas; cafeterias; parking, maintenance facilities;
overnight facilities for staff or trainees; crematoriums.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or
training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are
residents of the program, are considered group care facilities and are
classified as assisted group living.
         b.   Medical clinics that provide care where patients are not kept
overnight are classified as medical/dental offices.
         c.   Heliports, helipads and helistops are not considered an accessory
use to or an integral part of a hospital use. Such uses are considered aviation
related uses and are always regulated as a principal use.
   H.   Parks And Open Space Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Large areas consisting mostly of natural areas,
formal or informal landscaped open space, and/or open space for outdoor
assembly and recreation. This category includes both public open space areas as
well as private, shared open space. These uses tend to have few structures.
      2.   Examples: Parks; golf courses; cemeteries; public squares; plazas;
botanical gardens; arboretums; community gardens; boat launching areas; nature
preserves.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Maintenance facilities; concessions; parking.
Mausoleums, columbariums, and crematoriums within cemeteries and recreational
uses within private open space areas, such as clubhouses, tennis courts, sports
fields, and swimming pools, are regulated as accessory uses and are subject to
the regulations of chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of
this title.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Recreational uses, such as health and athletic clubs, operated as
commercial businesses that are open to the general public, whether payment is
on a fee for services or on a membership basis, are classified as commercial
recreational uses.
         b.   Accessory outdoor recreational facilities that are located on
private property that are exclusively for use of those that live on the
property are considered an accessory use to the principal use of the property.
For example, a swimming pool, tennis court, or other similar facility located
on a property that has as its principal use an apartment building would be
considered an accessory use to a multi-family use, not an accessory use to a
parks and open space use. However, a swimming facility located on property that
has been designated private, shared open space used jointly by multiple
properties in the vicinity would be considered an accessory use to a parks and
open space use because the principal use of the property is private, shared
open space.
   I.   Religious/Private Group Assembly Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: A religious/private group assembly use provides
meeting space and facilities for a religious institution or a private,
nonprofit association. Such a use typically restricts access to the general
public and owns, leases or holds property in common for the benefit of its
members.
      2.   Examples: Religious institutions, such as churches, temples,
synagogues, and mosques; private, nonprofit meeting halls, clubs, associations,
or nonresidential fraternal organizations, such as the Masonic, Eagles, Moose
and Elks Lodges, and the Lions and American Legion Clubs.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Parking; maintenance/storage buildings; living
quarters for clergy; columbariums.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Recreational, sports, or athletic clubs operated as a commercial
business and open to the general public to join are classified as commercial
recreational uses.
         b.   Clubs where the primary activity is the sales of goods or
services are classified as either sales oriented or personal service oriented
retail.
         c.   Commercial meeting and event facilities are classified as
hospitality oriented retail.
         d.   Fraternities and sororities associated with a college or
university are classified as fraternal group living uses.
         e.   Facilities owned or operated by a religious institution that
provide state mandated primary and secondary generalized education are
classified as educational facilities.
         f.   Colleges and universities, as defined in this article, which are
owned and/or operated by a religious institution are classified as colleges and
universities.
         g.   Hospitals owned and/or operated by a religious institution are
classified as hospital uses.
         h.   Uses that are not typically associated with the primary assembly
purpose of the use, such as retail sales, residential uses (other than for
clergy), amusement parks, and large sports and entertainment facilities may be
considered separate principal uses and regulated accordingly. Decisions
regarding whether a use is an accessory use or a principal use will be based on
the factors listed in subsection
14-4A-2A of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-
2016; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-2020; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4A-7: OTHER USE CATEGORIES:
   A.   Agricultural Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Uses where the principal activities may include the
commercial cultivation of plants, including crop, vegetable, and fruit
production, livestock production, and the raising, boarding, and training of
domestic animals.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed
below:
         a.   Plant Related: Crop farming; vegetable, fruit, and tree farms;
wholesale plant nurseries.
         b.   Animal Related: Livestock operations; dairy farms; horse farms.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Dwellings for proprietors and their families and for
employees of the use; storage buildings; farm outbuildings.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Livestock auctions are classified as wholesale sales.
         b.   Processing of animal or plant products, including processing and
packaging of dairy products, is classified as either general or heavy
manufacturing.
         c.   Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified
as outdoor storage and display oriented retail.
         d.   Kennels (see definition in
chapter 9, article A of this title) are classified as intensive animal related
commercial.
      5.   Prohibited Uses: Stockyards; feedlots and confinement feeding
operations.
   B.   Aviation Related Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Facilities for the landing and take off of flying
vehicles, including loading and unloading areas and passenger terminals.
Aviation facilities may be for commercial carriers or for shared use by private
aircraft.
      2.   Examples: Examples include uses from the two (2) subgroups listed
below:
         a.   Airports: Public and private airports and airstrips.
         b.   Helicopter Landing Facilities: Heliports; helipads; helistops.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Freight handling areas; concessions; offices;
parking; maintenance, storage, and fueling facilities.
      4.   Exceptions: Helicopter landing facilities are always classified and
regulated as a separate principal use. No helicopter landing facility shall be
construed or interpreted as being an integral part of any principal use or as
being accessory to any principal use.
   C.   Extraction Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: The industrial extraction of sand, gravel, or
topsoil for off site use, excluding the process of grading a lot in preparation
for constructing a building or infrastructure.
      2.   Examples: Quarrying or dredging for sand and gravel.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Offices; storage and transfer facilities.
   D.   Communication Transmission Facility Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: All devices, equipment, machinery, structures or
supporting elements necessary to produce nonionizing electromagnetic radiation
and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. Towers may be
self-supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings.
      2.   Examples: Broadcast towers and antennas; wireless communication
towers and antennas; point to point microwave towers and antennas; emergency
communication broadcast towers and antennas.
      3.   Accessory Uses: Transmitter facility buildings.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Receive only antennas are not included in this category.
         b.   Shortwave radio towers for personal use are regulated as an
accessory use.
         c.   Radio and television studios are classified in the office
category. Their broadcast towers are classified as communication transmission
facilities and are regulated as a separate principal use. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
   E.   Consumer Fireworks Sales Uses:
      1.   Characteristics: Sales of first-class and/or second-class consumer
fireworks, as defined by the American Pyrotechnics Association.
      2.   Examples: Seasonal sales outlets.
      3.   Accessory Uses: None. (Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
ARTICLE B. MINOR MODIFICATIONS, VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, AND PROVISIONAL
USES
SECTION:
14-4B-1: Minor Modifications
14-4B-2: Variances
14-4B-3: Special Exceptions
14-4B-4: Specific Approval Criteria For Provisional Uses And Special Exceptions
14-4B-1: MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
The building official or designee is empowered to grant minor modifications
from certain standards specifically enumerated below. Minor modifications
provide a mechanism by which the specified regulations may be modified or
waived if the proposed development meets certain criteria and continues to meet
the intended purpose of those regulations. Minor modification reviews provide
flexibility for unusual situations applicable to the property, for which strict
application of the regulations is impractical. The minor modifications listed
below may be granted, provided the approval criteria as set forth in subsection
B of this section are met. The approval procedures for minor modifications are
set forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of
this title. (Ord. 10-4397, 7-12-2010)
   A.   Applicability: The building official may grant the following minor
modifications from the requirements of this title, provided the approval
criteria are met. Any requests for modifications that exceed the limitations
set forth below and all other requests for modifications of the requirements of
this title require the filing of a special exception or variance application
with the Board of Adjustment.
      1.   The number of required parking spaces for commercial uses may be
reduced up to ten percent (10%).
      2.   The building official, in consultation with the Director of
Neighborhood and Development Services, may approve a minor modification of up
to fifty percent (50%) of the total number of parking spaces required, if the
uses sharing the parking are not normally open, used, or operated during the
same hours. However, this reduction is not allowed for residential uses. To
qualify for a reduction under this provision, a parking demand analysis must be
submitted that provides evidence that the amount of parking proposed for the
shared parking area will be sufficient to meet the parking demand.
      3.   The building official, in consultation with the Director of
Neighborhood and Development Services, may approve a minor modification as
specified in
14-4B-1 of this title to reduce the total number of parking spaces required by
up to fifty percent (50%) if it meets the following standards:
         a.   It must be in a CB-2, CB-5, CC-2, CN-1, CO-1, or MU zone;
         b.   Buildings must be limited to a footprint of 5,000 square feet;
         c.   A parking demand analysis must be submitted that provides
evidence that the amount of parking proposed will be sufficient to meet the
parking demand, which depending on the complexity of the site, may require an
engineered study, as determined by staff; and
         d.   The proposed development must not result in the demolition of a
property that is designated as an Iowa City landmark, registered in the
National Register of Historic Places, or individually eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
      4.   In the CB-5 and CB-10 Zones, a minor modification may be granted
exempting up to thirty percent (30%) of the total number of dwelling units
contained in a building from the minimum parking requirements; provided that
those dwelling units are committed to the City’s assisted housing program or
any other affordable housing program approved by the City.
      5.   The height of a wall or fence may be increased up to twenty five
percent (25%), but in no case shall a minor modification allow a fence greater
than eight feet (8') high.
      6.   The height of a principal or accessory building may be increased up
to ten percent (10%).
      7.   In cases where, due to topography or other site characteristics, a
wheelchair ramp cannot meet the limitations placed on its allowed extension
into a required setback, this limitation may be modified.
      8.   Required setbacks from a side lot line may be reduced by up to two
feet (2'), but in no case shall a required setback from a side lot line be
reduced to less than three feet (3'), unless the subject side lot line abuts a
public right-of-way or permanent open space.
      9.   Other setbacks may be reduced by up to fifteen percent (15%) of the
required setback, but in no case shall a required setback from a rear lot line
be reduced to less than three feet (3'), unless the subject side lot line abuts
a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
      10.   One space for parking for persons with disabilities may be located
in a required front setback for commercial uses in a Commercial Zone, when
adjacent to a Residential Zone, where the topography or shape of the lot
precludes compliance with the location requirements for off street parking.
      11.   The permitted height of a freestanding sign may be increased by up
to ten feet (10') if the property is within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
divided, limited access highway, and there is a difference in topographical
elevations between the property and the highway, such that the visibility of
the sign from the highway would be obstructed if the sign were limited to the
maximum height permitted by ordinance.
      12.   One nonresident employee may be approved for a home occupation use.
However, nonresident employees are not permitted under any circumstances for
the types of medical offices allowed as home occupations.
      13.   Modifications to the driveway spacing standards contained in
section
14-5C-4 of this title may be granted, provided there is no feasible alternative
to the modification requested, and vehicular and/or pedestrian safety will not
be compromised due to the modification. The building official must obtain
approval from the City Engineer and the Director of Planning and Community
Development prior to granting any such modification.
      14.   A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square feet or
an accessory storage building less than five hundred (500) square feet in size
may be approved for accessory uses within parks and open space uses without
approval from the Board of Adjustment. However, if any such building addition
increases the occupancy load of the building, a special exception must be
obtained.
      15.   Modifications to the multi-family site development standards
contained in section
14-2B-6 of this title according to the alternate approval criteria set forth in
that section. The building official must obtain approval from the Design Review
Committee and the Director of Planning and Community Development prior to
granting any such modification. Such requests shall be reviewed and approved
jointly by the Design Review Committee, the Director of Planning and Community
Development, and the Building Official.
      16.   Modifications to the site development standards contained in
section
14-2C-6,
14-2C-7,
14-2C-8, or
14-2C-9 of this title according to the alternate approval criteria set forth in
section
14-2C-10 of this title. The building official must obtain approval from the
Design Review Committee and the Director of Planning and Community Development
prior to granting any such modification.
      17.   Modifications to the site development standards contained in
sections
14-2D-5, “Industrial And Research Zone Site Development Standards”, and
14-2F-5, “Public Zone Site Development Standards”, of this title according to
the alternate approval criteria set forth in those sections, respectively. The
building official must obtain approval from the Director of Planning and
Community Development prior to granting any such modification.
      18.   One additional garage entrance/exit to structured parking may be
granted according to the provisions of subsection
14-5A-5F7, “Garage Entrances/Exits”, of this title. The building official must
obtain approval from the Director of Planning and Community Development prior
to granting any such modification.
      19.   Freestanding signs in the CB-2 Zone, according to the approval
criteria and specifications as stated in section
14-5B-8,
table 5B-4 of this title.
      20.   Modifications or waivers of nonconforming development according to
the provisions set forth in section
14-4E-8, “Regulation Of Nonconforming Development”, of this chapter.
      21.   A modification of the required driveway length in Single-Family
Zones according to the provisions set forth in subsection
14-2A-6C4 of this title.
      22.   An entranceway/gate more than four feet (4') in height in
Residential Zones, provided it is designed to be compatible with and enhance
the surrounding neighborhood. An identification sign no more than twelve (12)
square feet in area incorporated as an integral element of the entranceway/gate
may be permitted as part of the requested minor modification.
      23.   Modification to reduce the open space requirement for single family
and two family uses in certain qualifying situations and according to the
specific approval criteria as specified in sections
14-2A-4 and
14-2B-4 of this title.
      24.   For solar energy systems, modifications to the accessory mechanical
structure standards contained in subsection
14-4C-2N and other accessory development standards contained in section
14-4C-3.
   B.   Approval Criteria: The building official may approve an application for
a minor modification, in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if
the following approval criteria are met:
      1.   Special circumstances apply to the property, such as size, shape,
topography, location, surroundings, or characteristics, or preexisting site
development, which make it impractical to comply with the subject regulation or
which warrant a modification and/or waiver of the subject regulation.
      2.   The minor modification will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
      3.   The minor modification does not exceed the minor modification
standards or allow a use or activity not otherwise expressly authorized by the
regulations governing the subject property.
      4.   The minor modification requested is in conformity with the intent
and purpose of the regulation modified.
      5.   The requested minor modification complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
   C.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must
support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
   D.   Precedents: The granting of a minor modification is not grounds for
granting other minor modifications for the same or differing properties. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008; Ord. 10-4397, 7-12-2010;
Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019; Ord. 20-4834, 11-17-2020; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022;
Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023)
14-4B-2: VARIANCES:
The Board of Adjustment is empowered to grant variances from the provisions of
this title that will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to
unique circumstances or conditions, a literal interpretation of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the zoning district under the terms of this title and would impose unnecessary
and undue hardship on the applicant. To ensure that the spirit of this title is
observed and substantial justice done, no variance to the strict application of
any provision of this title shall be granted by the Board unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following approval criteria are met. The
procedures for obtaining a variance are set forth in chapter 8, article C,
“Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures”, of this title.
   A.   Approval Criteria:
      1.   The proposed variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
and
      2.   Where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the zoning code provision will result in unnecessary hardship;
and
      3.   The spirit of the zoning code provision shall be observed, and
substantial justice done.
   B.   Definitions:
 
            Lack of a reasonable return may be shown by proof that the owner has been deprived
            of all beneficial use of the land. All beneficial use is said to have been lost
            where the land is not suitable for anything permitted by the zoning code. A zoning
REASONABLE  code provision deprives an owner of a reasonable return if all productive use of
RETURN:     the land is denied. Such deprivation is shown where the land in issue has so
            changed that the purpose for which it was originally zoned are no longer feasible.
            It is not sufficient to show that the value of the land has been depreciated by the
            zoning code provision, or that a variance would permit the owner to maintain a more
            profitable use.
            The applicant establishes an unnecessary hardship by demonstrating all of the
            following elements are met:
               a.   The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only as
UNNECESSARY allowed in that zone.
HARDSHIP:      b.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances and not to the
            general conditions in the neighborhood.
               c.   The proposed variance will not alter the essential character of the
            locality.
 
   C.   Use Variance Prohibited: Under no circumstance may the Board grant a
variance that would allow a land use, other than those specifically allowed in
the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must
support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
   E.   Precedents: The granting of a variance is not grounds for granting
other variances for the same or differing properties. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-
2010; amd. Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
14-4B-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The Board of Adjustment is empowered to grant special exceptions to the
provisions of this title in certain circumstances specifically enumerated
within this title. To ensure that the spirit of this title is observed and
substantial justice done, no special exception shall be granted by the Board
unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following general approval
criteria are met in addition to any specific approval criteria for the proposed
exception listed in section
14-4B-4 of this article or elsewhere in this title. The procedures for
obtaining a special exception are set forth in chapter 8, article C, "Board Of
Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title.
   A.   Approval Criteria: In order to grant a special exception, the Board
must find that the applicant meets the specific approval criteria set forth in
this title with respect to the specific proposed exception. The Board must also
find that the applicant meets the following general approval criteria or that
the following criteria do not apply:
      1.   The specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare.
      2.   The specific proposed exception will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity and will not
substantially diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood.
      3.   Establishment of the specific proposed exception will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district in which such property is located.
      4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or
egress designed to minimize traffic congestion on public streets.
      6.   Except for the specific regulations and standards applicable to the
exception being considered, the specific proposed exception, in all other
respects, conforms to the applicable regulations or standards of the zone in
which it is to be located.
      7.   The proposed exception will be consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan of the City, as amended.
   B.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant bears the burden of proof and must
support each of the approval criteria by a preponderance of the evidence.
   C.   Precedents: The granting of a special exception is not grounds for
granting other special exceptions for the same or differing properties. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4B-4: SPECIFIC APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR PROVISIONAL USES AND SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS:
The following uses are listed as provisional uses or special exceptions in one
or more of the base zones, unless specifically exempted or superseded by more
specific provisions of this title. Provisional uses are permitted, subject to
the additional requirements contained in this article. A use listed as a
special exception in a base zone is permitted only after approval from the
board of adjustment, subject to the approval criteria contained in this section
and to the general special exception approval criteria contained in section
14-4B-3 of this article. In addition to the approval criteria listed in this
article, all provisional uses and special exceptions are required to meet the
regulations of the base zone in which they are located and all other applicable
regulations of this title. If a regulation in another part of this title
conflicts with a regulation contained in this article, the regulation that is
more specific to the situation applies. When regulations are equally specific
or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the more restrictive
regulation applies.
   A.   Residential Uses:
      1.   Detached Single-Family Dwellings In ID Zones:
         a.   Detached single-family dwellings associated with an agricultural
use of the property are allowed in any ID zone, provided the dwelling is
developed in accordance with the minimum dimensional standards specified for
detached single-family dwellings in the RR-1 zone. Only one principal dwelling
is permitted per lot.
         b.   In an ID-RS zone, detached single-family dwellings not associated
with an agricultural use are allowed on minimum lot areas of five (5) acres
according to the dimensional requirements otherwise specified for the ID zones.
Only one principal dwelling is permitted per lot.
      2.   Attached Single-Family Dwellings:
         a.   Number Of Units:
            (1)   Only one principal dwelling unit is permitted per lot.
            (2)   In RS-5 and RS-8 zones: A maximum of two (2) dwelling units
may be attached unless approved through a planned development overlay rezoning.
            (3)   In all other zones: A maximum of six (6) dwellings units may
be attached unless approved through a planned development overlay rezoning.
         b.   Setbacks:
            (1)   Interior Lots: The side setbacks for the attached dwellings
may be reduced to zero along the common wall side of the units. Each end unit
in a row of attached single-family dwellings shall have one side setback that
is a minimum of ten feet (10'), unless the end unit is on a corner lot.
            (2)   Corner Lots: Either the rear setback or nonstreet side
setback may be reduced to zero feet (0'). The remaining nonstreet setback must
be at least ten feet (10') if it is a side setback and twenty feet (20') if it
is a rear setback. (See figure 4B.2 below.)
Figure 4B.2 - Setbacks For Attached Single-Family Dwellings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2552.png]
         c.   Entrances:
            (1)   Each dwelling unit must have a separate main entrance that
faces the street, is at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the
street, or opens onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an alley.
            (2)   Each dwelling must have a paved connection between the main
pedestrian entrance and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in cases
where a sidewalk is not provided.
            (3)   If parking is located at the rear of a dwelling, a second
entrance to the dwelling must be provided within twenty feet (20') of the rear
facade of the dwelling on either the rear or side facade of the dwelling.
         d.   Design Features:
            (1)   All windows, doors, and roof eaves, including roof eaves on
porches, must be demarcated with trim. The city may waive this requirement in
cases where the building has an exterior material of stucco or masonry such
that trim is impractical or inappropriate to the design of the building.
            (2)   All roof eaves must project at least twelve inches (12") from
the building wall.
            (3)   Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along
any building wall that faces a street-side lot line.
            (4)   If four (4) or more dwelling units are attached, the units
must be articulated by at least one of the following means in order to prevent
monotony, but the units should be consistent in architectural style and
proportion.
Figure 4B.3, located at the end of this subsection A3d, provides some examples
of acceptable building articulation. However, other designs meeting the
standards listed below are acceptable.
               (A)   Construct front and side elevations of the building of at
least fifty percent (50%) brick, stone, or other masonry product. For the
purpose of this provision, masonry shall not include concrete block or poured
concrete materials, except when rusticated concrete block or decorative
concrete is used as a base or exposed foundation material.
               (B)   Construct front and side elevations of the end units of
one hundred percent (100%) brick, stone, or other masonry product. For the
purpose of this provision, masonry shall not include concrete block or poured
concrete materials, except when rusticated concrete block or decorative
concrete is used as a base or exposed foundation material.
               (C)   Distinguish each unit architecturally through a change in
the roofline and a jog in the street-facing wall plane. The jog must be at
least eighteen inches (18") deep and a minimum of eight feet (8') wide; the
change in the roofline must be in concert with the jog in the wall plane, which
may be accomplished by the addition of a gable, hip or similar roof that is
perpendicular to the primary roof.
Figure 4B.3 - Examples Of Facade Articulation For Attached Single-Family
Dwellings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2528.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2530.png]
 
         e.   Garages:
            (1)   In the RS-5 and RS-8 zones, there may be no more than one
doublewide or two singlewide garage openings facing any street unless the
parking is set back at least fifteen feet (15') from the front of the building
façade. For the purposes of this section, a porch is considered part of the
building façade. Doublewide openings may not exceed twenty feet (20') in width;
singlewide openings may not exceed ten (10') in width.
            (2)   The length of any garage wall that faces a street-side lot
line may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total length of the building
façade that faces the same street-side lot line. On corner lots, only the
garage wall(s) containing a garage door must meet this standard.
         f.   Vehicular Access:
            (1)   Vehicular access points and garage entrances must comply with
the provisions of article 5, article C, “Access Management Standards”, of this
title and the single-family site development standards as set forth in chapter
2, article A of this title. Attached single-family dwellings located in the MU
zone are also subject to the standards of subsection
14-2C-9N, “Single- Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone”, of this title.
            (2)   If the lot width is less than forty five feet (45'),
vehicular access is restricted to an alley or private rear lane. Corner lots
are exempt from this standard if vehicular access faces a lot line that is at
least forty five feet (45') in length.
            (3)   Where a private rear lane or public alley is present, garage
entrances/exits must be accessed from said private rear lane or public alley.
         g.   Utilities: Each dwelling unit must have a separate utility
service from the street or rear lot line.
         h.   Maintenance: A permanent access and maintenance easement must be
secured from the owner of the lot that abuts the zero lot line side of the
dwelling. The easement must ensure access for maintenance of the exterior
portion of the building wall located on the lot line and other common elements,
such as drives and aisles. This easement must be recorded as a covenant on the
applicable lots. Proof of such recording must be submitted prior to issuance of
a building or occupancy permit.
      3.   Multi-Family Uses In The RS-12 Zone:
         a.   Number Of Units: No more than six (6) principal dwelling units
may be located on a lot in an RS-12 zone unless approved through a planned
development overlay rezoning.
         b.   Principal dwelling units must be arranged as a townhouse-style
multi-family building such that each unit has frontage on the same street.
         c.   Principal dwelling units may not be stacked where one unit is
located above or below another.
         d.   Entrances:
            (1)   Each principal dwelling unit must have a separate main
entrance that faces the street, is at an angle of up to forty five degrees
(45°) from the street, or opens onto a porch. The main entrance may not face an
alley.
            (2)   Each principal dwelling must have a paved connection between
the main pedestrian entrance and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in
cases where a sidewalk is not provided.
            (3)   A second entrance to the dwelling must be provided within
twenty feet (20') of the rear facade of each dwelling on either the rear or
side facade of the dwelling.
         e.   Design Features And Vehicular Access: The multi-family use must
meet all requirements in Section 14-2B-6 "Multi-Family Site Development
Standards".
      4.   Detached Zero Lot Line Dwellings:
         a.   Procedure: Any restrictions or easements required in subsections
A4b through A4e of this section must be recorded as a covenant on the
applicable lots. Proof of such recording must be submitted prior to issuance of
a building or occupancy permit.
         b.   Setbacks: The side setback on one side of the dwelling may be
reduced to zero. The other side setback must be at least ten feet (10'). A
restriction must be recorded on the deed of each applicable lot to ensure that
these setbacks are retained in perpetuity. A zero side lot line is not
permitted for a side lot line that is also a street lot line or for side
setbacks adjacent to lots that are not part of the zero lot line project. (See
figure 4B.4 below.)
Figure 4B.4 - Setbacks For Detached Zero Lot Line Dwellings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2532.png]
 
         c.   Vehicular Access: Vehicular access points and garage entrances
must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management
Standards", of this title and the single-family site development standards as
set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title. In the MU zone, more
restrictive standards apply. (See subsection
14-2C-9N of this title.)
         d.   Maintenance: A permanent access and maintenance easement shall be
secured from the owner of the lot that abuts the zero lot line side of the
dwelling. The easement must ensure access for maintenance of the exterior
portion of the building wall located on the lot line and other common elements,
such as drives and aisles.
         e.   Privacy: On the zero lot line side of the dwelling, windows or
other openings that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot
are not allowed. Clerestory windows or translucent windows that do not allow
visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are allowed.
      5.   Two-Family Uses
         a.   Central Planning District: Two-family uses located in the central
planning district must comply with the provisions of subsection
14-2B-6I, "Additional Standards In Central Planning District", of this title,
which will be administered through the design review process as set forth in
chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
         b.   Entrances:
            (1)    The main entrance(s) must be visible from and oriented
towards the street. To meet this standard, the main entrance must face the
street, be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street, or
open onto a porch. The main entrance(s) may not face an alley or private rear
lane.
            (2)   The duplex must have a paved connection between the main
pedestrian entrance(s) and the public sidewalk or the fronting street in cases
where a sidewalk is not provided.
            (3)   If parking is located at the rear of a dwelling, a second
entrance to the dwelling must be provided within twenty feet (20') of the rear
facade of the dwelling on either the rear or side facade of the dwelling.
         d.   Design Features:
            (1)   All windows, doors, and roof eaves, including roof eaves on
porches, must be demarcated with trim. The city may waive this requirement in
cases where the building has an exterior material of stucco or masonry such
that trim is impractical or inappropriate to the design of the building.
            (2)   All roof eaves must project at least twelve inches (12") from
the building wall.
            (3)   Exposed, unpainted or unstained lumber may not be used along
any building wall that faces a street-side lot line.
         e.   Garages:
            (1)   In the RS-5 and RS-8 zones, there may be no more than one
doublewide or two singlewide garage openings facing any street unless the
parking is set back at least fifteen feet (15') from the front of the building
façade. For the purposes of this section, a porch is considered part of the
building façade. Doublewide openings may not exceed twenty feet (20') in width;
singlewide openings may not exceed ten (10') in width.
            (2)   The length of any garage wall that faces a street-side lot
line may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total length of the building
facade that faces the same street-side lot line. On corner lots, only the
garage wall(s) containing a garage door must meet this standard. In the MU
zone, garages are exempt from this standard, but are subject to the standards
of subsection
14-2C-9N, "Single-Family Uses And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone", of this title.
         f.   Vehicular Access:
            (1)   Vehicular access points and garage entrances must comply with
the provisions of chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this
title and the single-family site development standards as set forth in chapter
2, article A of this title. Two-family uses located in the MU zone are also
subject to the standards of subsection
14-2C-9N, "Single-Family And Two-Family Uses In MU Zone", of this title.
            (2)   If the lot width is less than eighty feet (80'), vehicular
access is restricted to an alley or private rear lane. Corner lots and double
frontage lots are exempt from this standard if the vehicular access for one of
the dwelling units is located along a different street than the vehicular
access of the other dwelling unit, or if vehicular access for both dwelling
units is located along a street where the front setback line is at least eighty
feet (80') in length. (See definitions of "lot width" and "setback line, front"
in section
14-9A-1 of this title.)
            (3)   Where a private rear lane or public alley is present, garage
entrances/exits must be accessed from said private rear lane or public alley.
      6.   Group Households: Group households are permitted within any housing
type allowed in the base zone, provided the following conditions are met:
         a.   The proposed use must meet the definition of "elder group home",
"elder family home", "parental group home", or "family care home".
         b.   The proposed use must comply with all the approval criteria and
base zone standards for the housing type within which the group household is
located. For example, a group household located within a two-family use in the
RS-8 zone must comply with the conditions listed in subsection A5 of this
section.
         c.   All the individuals residing in the proposed use must live as one
household or family. The dwelling may not contain separate apartments.
         d.   The owner of the dwelling within which the group household is
located must obtain a rental permit from the city.
      7.   Multi-Family Uses In Commercial Zones
         a.   Location: The proposed dwelling units must be located above the
street level floor of a building, except as provided in subsections A7e and A7f
of this section.
         b.   Maximum Density: The residential density standards for multi-
family uses in commercial zones are stated in section
14-2C-4, "Dimensional Requirements",
table 2C-2(c) of this title.
         c.   Residential Entrances:
            (1)   To provide safe access for residents, any building containing
a residential use must have at least one door that provides pedestrian access
to the dwelling units within the building. Said entrance must be located on an
exterior building wall that faces a street, public sidewalk, or pedestrian
plaza and is visible from and easily accessed from said street, sidewalk, or
plaza. Access to dwelling units must not be solely through a parking garage or
from an alley.
            (2)   Access to entrance doors of any individual dwelling units
located above the ground level floor of a building must be provided from an
enclosed lobby or corridor and stairway. Unenclosed or partially enclosed
exterior stairways are prohibited. However, the city may allow exterior fire
egress structures on existing buildings that cannot otherwise reasonably meet
code requirements, provided the fire egress structure is not located on a wall
of a building that faces a street.
            (3)   To facilitate commercial uses at the street level, the ground
level floor height should be no more than one foot (1') above the level of the
abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza. The City may adjust this requirement for
sloping building sites, for multi-family buildings with no commercial
component, or for existing buildings. However, on sloping sites at least a
portion of the ground level floor height of any new building must be located no
more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian
plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of the building must be
no more than three feet (3') above the level of the abutting public sidewalk or
pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing building facade.
         d.   Standards For Ground Level Floor Of Building:
            (1)   The floor to ceiling height must be at least fourteen feet
(14'), except it may be reduced for existing buildings or where dwelling units
are permitted on the ground level floor of the building.
            (2)   Construction must meet the building code specifications for
commercial uses, except where dwelling units are permitted on the ground level
floor of the building.
            (3)   In the CB-10 zone, for the first two (2) floors of a
building, construction must meet the building code specifications for
commercial uses.
         e.   Ground Floor Residential Exception: The board of adjustment may
grant a special exception for multi-family dwellings to be located on or below
the ground level floor of a building, provided that the following criteria are
met:
            (1)   Where the proposed dwelling will be located in an existing
building in a Historic District Overlay (OHD) zone a rehabilitation plan for
the property must be reviewed and approved by the Iowa City historic
preservation commission. The rehabilitation of the property must be completed
according to this plan before an occupancy permit is granted.
            (2)   The proposed dwellings will not significantly alter the
overall commercial character of the subject zone.
            (3)   If an existing building located in a Historic District
Overlay (OHD) zone includes three (3) or more of the following commercial
storefront characteristics, dwellings are prohibited on or below the street
level floor of that building:
               (A) The main entrance to the building is at or near grade;
               (B) The front facade of the building is located within ten feet
(10') of the front property line;
               (C) The front facade of the building contains ground floor
storefront or display windows; and
         f.   CB-5 Form Based Code Exception: For properties zoned CB-5 located
within the area bounded by Gilbert Street, Van Buren Street, Burlington Street
and the midblock alley south of Jefferson Street, residential uses are allowed
on the ground level floor of buildings, provided the following conditions are
met:
            (1)   In lieu of the standards in subsections A7c and A7d of this
section, the proposed ground level dwelling units must be located within one of
the following building types, as described in the form based zoning standards
in section
14-2G-5, "Building Type Standards", of this title:
               (A)   Apartment building;
               (B)   Multi-dwelling building;
               (C)   Liner building;
               (D)   Townhouse.
            (2)   Building frontage(s) must be designed to meet the
requirements of section
14-2G-4, "Frontage Type Standards", of this title, as applicable for the chosen
building type.
            (3)   In lieu of the dimensional requirements and central business
site development standards that generally apply in the CB-5 zone, buildings
must comply with the same zoning standards that apply in the south Gilbert
subdistrict of riverfront crossings as set forth in chapter 2, article G,
"Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development
Standards", of this title, including all general requirements in section
14-2G-7 of this title. If the ground level dwelling units are proposed as an
integral part of a larger project on the same property that includes a mix of
building types, the standards that apply in the south Gilbert subdistrict shall
apply to the entire project in lieu of the dimensional requirements and central
business site development standards of the CB-5 zone.
            (4)   Buildings are subject to design review. Minor adjustments may
be allowed by the design review committee as warranted according to the
provisions of subsection
14-2G-7H of this title.
      8.   Assisted Group Living:
         a.   Maximum Density: Maximum density within an assisted group living
use is as follows. For purposes of calculating maximum density, staff and live-
in staff of a facility are not considered roomers.
            (1)   In the RM-12 zone: One roomer per seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet of lot area.
            (2)   In the RM-20, RNS-20, CN-1, CC-2, and MU zones: One roomer
per five hundred fifty (550) square feet of lot area.
            (3)   In the RM-44, PRM, CO-1, CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones: One
roomer per three hundred (300) square feet of lot area.
         b.   Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet
facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title
17, "Building And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants may have
access to a communal kitchen, dining room, and other common facilities and
services.
      9.   Independent Group Living: The maximum density and maximum occupancy
standards for an independent group living use are as follows. Both density and
occupancy limitations apply in all cases.
         a.   Maximum Density:
            (1)   In the RM-20 zone: One roomer per nine hundred (900) square
feet of lot area.
            (2)   In the RM-44 and PRM zones: One roomer per five hundred (500)
square feet of lot area.
         b.   Maximum Occupancy: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet
of floor area within the independent group living use.
         c.   Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet
facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title
17, "Building And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants shall have
access to kitchen facilities, a dining room, and other shared living spaces and
common facilities related to the use.
         d.   Additional Approval Criteria For Special Exceptions: The proposed
use must be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of
adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use such as the location, site
size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale, setbacks,
landscaping and amount of paved areas to ensure that the proposed use is
compatible with other residential uses in the neighborhood. The board may
prohibit certain aspects of a use or impose conditions or restrictions to
ensure compatibility. These conditions or restrictions may include, but are not
limited to, additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian facilities; setbacks;
location and design of parking facilities; location and design of buildings;
establishment of a facilities management plan.
      10.   Fraternal Group Living: The maximum density and maximum occupancy
standards for a fraternal group living use are as follows. Both density and
occupancy limitations apply in all cases.
         a.   Maximum Density:
            (1)   In the RM-20 and RNS-20 zones: One roomer per nine hundred
(900) square feet of lot area.
            (2)   In the RM-44 and PRM zones: One roomer per three hundred
(300) square feet of lot area.
         b.   Maximum Occupancy: One roomer per three hundred (300) square feet
of floor area within the fraternal group living use.
         c.   Facilities: The group living use must have bath and toilet
facilities available for use by roomers in such numbers as specified in title
17, "Building And Housing", of this code. In addition, the occupants shall have
access to kitchen facilities, a dining room, and other shared living spaces and
common facilities related to the use.
         d.   Additional Approval Criteria For Special Exceptions: The proposed
use must be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. The board of
adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such as the location,
site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale,
setbacks, landscaping and amount of paved areas to ensure that the proposed use
is compatible with other residential uses in the neighborhood. The board may
prohibit certain aspects of a use or impose conditions or restrictions to
mitigate any incompatibilities. These conditions or restrictions may include,
but are not limited to, additional screening, landscaping, pedestrian
facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking facilities, location and
design of buildings, establishment of a facilities management plan, and
similar.
   B.   Commercial Uses:
      1.   Adult Business Uses:
         a.   The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any property containing an existing daycare use, educational
facility use, parks and open space use, religious/private assembly use, or
residential use.
         b.   The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any single-family or multi-family residential zone.
         c.   The proposed use will be located at least five hundred feet
(500') from any other adult business use.
      2.   General Animal Related Commercial In CN-1, CH-1, CO-1, CC-2, CB-2,
And CB-5 Zones:
         a.   In the CN-1, CO-1, CC-2, CB-2, and CB-5 zones all aspects of the
operation of the facility, including any accessory uses, must be conducted
completely indoors within a soundproof building.
         b.   In the CH-1 zone, all aspects of the operation of the facility
must be conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building with the
exception of private outdoor animal recreation uses, which are only allowed as
an accessory use by special exception provided that the following criteria are
met:
            (1)   Private outdoor animal recreation areas must be located at
least four hundred feet (400') from any residential zone.
            (2)   No private outdoor animal recreational uses are allowed
overnight.
            (3)   All private outdoor animal recreation areas must have secure
fencing in place so that animals cannot escape.
            (4)   Animals shall not be permitted in a private outdoor animal
recreation area unless a handler is present.
            (5)   Where private outdoor animal recreation facilities are
accessed by the public, a double-entry gate is required.
            (6)   All private outdoor animal recreation areas must be kept in a
clean, dry, and sanitary condition.
            (7)   Private outdoor animal recreation areas shall be located in
an interior side or rear yard and screened from any right-of-way or adjacent
residential zone by at least the S2 screening standard.
      3.   General And Intensive Animal Related Commercial In ID, RR-1 And CI-
1 Zones:
         a.   In the ID zones and the RR-1 zone, any outdoor facilities,
including unenclosed stable areas, outdoor dog runs and animal exercise areas
must be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot line. Overnight
boarding facilities must be located completely indoors within a soundproof
building. If all aspects of the operation, including any accessory uses, are
conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building, then the setback
requirements of this provision do not apply. However, the use is subject to any
setback requirements of the base zone.
         b.   In the CI-1 zone, any facility with outdoor runs or exercise
areas must be located at least four hundred feet (400') from any residential
zone. Overnight boarding facilities must be located completely indoors within a
soundproof building. If all aspects of the operation, including any accessory
uses, are conducted completely indoors within a soundproof building, then the
setback requirements of this provision do not apply. However, the use is
subject to any setback requirements of the base zone.
      4.   Building Trade Uses In The CC-2 Zone:
         a.   All aspects of the operation must be conducted indoors; and
         b.   Except for fleet vehicle parking, outdoor storage of materials or
equipment is not allowed.
      5.   Outdoor Commercial Recreational Uses In ID Zones And CC-2 Zone:
         a.   The proposed use will be designed and developed with adequate
separation between outdoor activity areas and surrounding properties. Outdoor
activity areas must be set back and separated from other uses or surrounding
properties by distance, landscaping and/or screening as deemed appropriate for
the intensity of the use.
         b.   The proposed use will be in compliance with title 6, chapter 4,
"Noise Control", of this code. If the proposed use is located within four
hundred feet (400') of a residential zone, the proposed use may not use sound
amplifying equipment as a regular part of its operation.
         c.   The proposed hours of operation will be similar to or
complementary to other uses in the area based on the projected intensity of the
use, the specific characteristics of the locale, and the existing and future
uses intended for the area according to the comprehensive plan.
      6.   Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In CO-1 Zone: Indoor commercial
recreational uses are limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area. The maximum size may be increased by special exception; provided,
that the following criteria are met:
         a.   The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by
employees of the surrounding businesses and by nearby residents.
         b.   The proposed use will be designed to be of similar scale and
character to surrounding businesses and residences.
         c.   The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated intent
of the CO-1 zone.
      7.   Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In CN-1 Zone: Indoor commercial
recreational uses are limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
      8.   Indoor Commercial Recreational Uses In RDP And ORP Zones:
         a.   The proposed use will primarily serve employees of the firms
located within the subject RDP or ORP zone.
         b.   The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall
character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of
office, light industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily
intended.
         c.   The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with
regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
      9.   Commercial Parking In CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10 Zones: Commercial parking
is limited to parking facilities owned and operated by the municipal
government.
      10.   Eating And Drinking Establishments In CN-1, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
         a.   The occupancy load for any one establishment will not exceed one
hundred (100), except as allowed in subsection B10c of this section.
         b.   Drive-through windows and drive-through lanes are prohibited.
         c.   In the CN-1 zone, the maximum occupancy load may be increased to
one hundred twenty five (125) by special exception; provided, that the
following criteria are met:
            (1)   The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by
residents of the surrounding area.
            (2)   The proposed exception will result in a more attractive
neighborhood commercial development due to the presence of outdoor eating areas
that enhance the pedestrian orientation of the development, additional parking
lot landscaping, additional vegetative buffers, or other site improvements.
            (3)   The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated
intent of the CN-1 zone.
         d.   Drinking establishments are not allowed in the MU and CO-1 zones.
         e.   In any CN-1 zone within the university impact area, as
illustrated in section
14-2B-6, map 2B.1 of this title, or the riverfront crossings district, as
illustrated in section
14-2C-11,
figure 2C.8 of this title, a "drinking establishment", as defined in this
title, must be separated by a minimum distance of five hundred feet (500') from
any other drinking establishment. Distance shall be measured along a straight
line from the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building
space) of the proposed use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of
the leased building space) of any other drinking establishment. For example, in
the case of a drinking establishment that is located on a lot with multiple
leased spaces, such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the
nearest point of the leased building space occupied by a drinking establishment
to the nearest property line or leased building space of any other drinking
establishment.
      11.   Drinking Establishments In The CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And
CB-10 Zones: Within the university impact area, as illustrated in section
14-2B-6, map 2B.1 of this title, or the riverfront crossings district, as
illustrated in section
14-2C-11,
figure 2C.8 of this title, a "drinking establishment", as defined in this
title, must be separated by a minimum distance of five hundred feet (500') from
any other drinking establishment. Distance shall be measured along a straight
line from the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building
space) of the proposed use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of
the leased building space) of any other drinking establishment. For example, in
the case of a drinking establishment that is located on a lot with multiple
leased building spaces, such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from
the nearest point of the leased building space occupied by a drinking
establishment to the nearest property line or leased building space of any
other drinking establishment.
      12.   Quick Vehicle Servicing:
         a.   All vehicular use areas, including parking and stacking spaces,
drives, aisles, and service lanes, must be screened from the public right of
way to the S2 standard and to the S3 standard along any side or rear lot line
that abuts a residential zone boundary. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening
And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
         b.   Sufficient vehicle stacking spaces must be provided to prevent
congestion and vehicle conflicts along abutting streets.
         c.   Unenclosed canopies over gas pump islands must be set back at
least ten feet (10') from any street right of way. Fuel dispensing equipment
must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any street right of way, and at
least fifty feet (50') from any residential zone boundary.
         d.   All lighting must comply with the provisions of chapter 5,
article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title.
         e.   In the CN-1, CB-2, and CB-5 zones, the proposed use will be
designed and developed with adequate separation and screening between vehicular
use areas and adjacent residential zones.
         f.   In the CN-1, CB-2, and CB-5 zones, car washes may contain no more
than one bay and are permitted only if built in conjunction with another quick
vehicle servicing use. The car wash must be located adjacent to and on the same
property as the other quick vehicle servicing use and must be set back an
adequate distance and screened to the S3 standard along any side or rear lot
line that abuts a residential zone boundary.
         g.   In the CN-1 zone, no light source on the property, except for
internally lit signs, shall be higher than fifteen feet (15') above finished
grade.
         h.   For properties located in the towncrest design review district,
quick vehicle servicing uses are only allowed by special exception and must
comply with the central business site development standards, as they would be
applied to a property in the CB-5 zone, except as otherwise allowed by
subsection B12j of this section.
         i.   For properties located in the riverfront crossings district and
eastside mixed use district, quick vehicle servicing uses are only allowed by
special exception in certain locations and must comply with the standards set
forth in chapter 2, article G, "Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use
Districts Form Based Development Standards", of this title.
         j.   For properties located in the CB-2 zone, CB-5 zone, riverfront
crossings district, eastside mixed use district, or towncrest design review
district, where it can be demonstrated that the proposed quick vehicle
servicing use cannot comply with a specific standard as indicated in
subsections B12h and B12i of this section, the board of adjustment may grant a
special exception to modify or waive the provision, provided that the intent of
the development standards is not unduly compromised. The board of adjustment
may impose any condition or conditions that are warranted to mitigate the
effects of any variation from these development standards.
      13.   Office Uses In CN-1 Zone: Each office use is limited to five
thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. Of this five thousand (5,000)
square feet, no more than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet may be
located on the ground floor of a building.
      14.   Personal Service Oriented Retail In PRM Zone:
         a.   The proposed use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400)
square feet of gross floor area.
         b.   The proposed use will be supportable primarily by residents of
the surrounding area.
         c.   The proposed use will not be contrary to the intent of the PRM
zone.
         d.   Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted
in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B14.
      15.   Sales Oriented, Personal Service Oriented, And Alcohol Sales
Oriented Retail Uses In The CN-1 Zone:
         a.   Each such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400)
square feet of gross floor area, except as follows:
            (1)   Drugstores and hardware stores may contain up to fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet of gross floor area.
            (2)   Grocery stores, including sales of specialty food items, such
as bakery and delicatessen goods, may contain up to thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet of gross floor area. Grocery stores that include other departments
for goods and services allowed in the CN-1 zone may contain up to forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area; provided, that any floor
area that exceeds thirty thousand (30,000) square feet is departmentalized for
nonfood products and services.
            (3)   Except for the uses listed in subsections B15a(1) and B15a(2)
of this section, the limit on floor area for any one use may be increased from
two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet up to five thousand (5,000)
square feet by special exception; provided, that the following criteria are
met:
               (A)   The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by
residents of the surrounding area.
               (B)   The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated
intent of the CN-1 zone.
         b.   Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted
in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B15.
      16.   Sales Oriented, Personal Service Oriented, And Alcohol Sales
Oriented Retail Uses In The MU Zone:
         a.   Any such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400)
square feet of gross floor area.
         b.   The limit on floor area for any one use may be increased from two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet up to five thousand (5,000) square
feet by special exception; provided, that the following criteria are met:
            (1)   The increased floor area will be supportable primarily by
residents of the surrounding area.
            (2)   The proposed exception will be consistent with the stated
intent of the MU zone.
         c.   Crematoriums, if proposed as a principal use, are not permitted
in this zone. Crematoriums are allowed if they are accessory to a funeral home
and meet all other provisions of this subsection B16.
      17.   Sales Oriented, And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail In The CH-1 Zone:
Sales oriented and alcohol sales oriented retail uses are limited to
convenience stores associated with quick vehicle servicing uses.
      18.   Hospitality Oriented Retail In The RM-44, PRM, MU, CO-1, And CN-
1 Zones:
         a.   Hospitality oriented retail is limited to "guesthouses" as
defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
         b.   Any accessory dining and/or bar service is limited to guests only
and may not be open to the general public.
      19.   Hospitality Oriented Retail In RDP And ORP Zones:
         a.   The proposed use will be located on a lot along the periphery of
the ORP or RDP zone such that traffic to and from the proposed use will not
adversely affect the office, light industrial, and research firms for which the
zone is primarily intended.
         b.   The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall
character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of
office, light industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily
intended.
         c.   The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with
regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
      20.   Outdoor Storage And Display Oriented Retail In CC-2 Zone:
         a.   Outdoor storage of materials must be concealed from public view
to the extent possible. If it is not feasible to conceal the storage areas
behind buildings, the storage areas must be set back at least twenty feet (20')
from any public right of way, including public trails and open space, and
screened from view to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If a fence is built around
the storage area, the required screening must be located between the fence and
the public right of way.
         b.   All outdoor storage areas that are located along a side or rear
lot line that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten
feet (10') from said lot line and screened from view of the adjacent property
to at least the S3 standard. If a fence is built around the storage area, the
required screening must be located between the fence and the adjacent property.
         c.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor storage areas may
be waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence
that a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade,
soil conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing
pavement, by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence. If the landscape
screening requirement is waived by the building official, a fence built to the
S5 standard must be substituted for the landscape screening.
         d.   Outdoor display of merchandise for immediate sale must be set
back at least ten feet (10') from public rights of way and landscaped to at
least the S1 standard.
         e.   Any outdoor display area located along a side or rear lot line
that does not abut a public right of way must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from said lot line and screened to at least the S2 standard. If the
display area is adjacent to a residential zone boundary, it has to be screened
to the S3 standard.
         f.   The landscape screening requirement for outdoor display may be
waived by the building official upon presentation of convincing evidence that a
planting screen cannot be expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil
conditions, or other site characteristics. The presence of existing pavement,
by itself, shall not constitute convincing evidence.
      21.   Vehicle Repair In CC-2, CI-1, CH-1, And CB-2 Zones:
         a.   The property containing the vehicle repair use must be located at
least one hundred feet (100') from any residential zone boundary, except in the
CB-2 and CI-1 zones. In the CB-2 zone, the property containing the vehicle
repair use must be located at least seventy feet (70') from any residential
zone boundary. In the CI-1 zone, if a vehicle repair use is located on a
property that abuts a residential zone boundary, the use must comply with the
following additional standard:
            (1)   In addition to the applicable noise control provisions set
forth in section
6-4-2 of this code, all outdoor work operations are prohibited between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Any indoor
operations that result in noise exceeding sixty (60) dBA as measured at the
residential zone boundary are prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
         b.   No vehicle shall be stored on the property for more than forty
five (45) continuous days.
         c.   The site must be designed to minimize views of vehicular use
areas from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties.
            (1)   Outdoor storage areas, including storage of vehicles to be
repaired, must be concealed from public view to the extent possible. If it is
not feasible to conceal the storage areas behind buildings, the storage areas
must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any public right-of-way,
including public trails and open space, and screened from public view to at
least the S3 standard.
            (2)   Other vehicular use areas that abut the public right-of-way,
including parking and stacking spaces, driveways, aisles, and service lanes,
must be set back at least ten feet (10') from the public right-of-way and
landscaped according to the S2 standard.
            (3)   All outdoor storage areas that abut other properties must be
fenced to the S5 standard and screened to at least the S3 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
Landscape screening must be located between the fence and the abutting
property. The landscape screening requirement may be waived by the Board of
Adjustment (in the case of a special exception) or by the building official,
upon presentation of convincing evidence that a planting screen cannot be
expected to thrive because of intense shade, soil conditions, or other site
characteristics. The presence of existing pavement, by itself, shall not
constitute convincing evidence.
      22.   Delayed Deposit Service Uses In The CC-2 Zone:
         a.   The use is licensed by the State of Iowa; and
         b.   The use will be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from
any property containing any existing daycare use, educational facility use,
parks and open space use, religious/private assembly use, or residential use;
         c.   The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any other delayed deposit service use.
      23.   Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail Uses In The CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10
Zones: An alcohol sales oriented retail use must be separated by a minimum
distance of one thousand feet (1,000') from any other alcohol sales oriented
retail use. Distance shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest
property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of the proposed
use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building
space) of any other alcohol sales oriented retail use. For example, in the case
of an alcohol sales oriented retail use that is located on a lot with multiple
leased spaces, such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the
nearest point of the leased building space occupied by an alcohol sales
oriented retail use to the nearest property line or leased building space of
any other alcohol sales oriented retail use.
   24.   Redemption Center Uses in the CO-1, CN-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, CB-10, And
MU Zone:
      a.   Redemption center uses are limited to five thousand (5,000) square
feet gross floor area.
      b.   Outdoor storage of any materials is prohibited.
   25.   Tobacco Sales Oriented Uses: A tobacco sales oriented use, as defined
in this title, must be separated by a minimum distance of five hundred feet
(500') from any other tobacco sales oriented use, any general educational
facility, and any college and university, as defined by this title. For
purposes of the distance separation requirements within this Paragraph,
"college and universities" shall include all property owned by the Iowa Board
of Regents. Distance shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest
property line (or nearest point of the leased building space) of the proposed
use to the nearest property line (or nearest point of the leased building
space) of any other tobacco sales oriented use, general educational facility,
or any college or university. For example, in the case of a tobacco sales
oriented use that is located on a lot with multiple leased building spaces,
such as a shopping mall, the distance is measured from the nearest point of the
leased building space occupied by a tobacco sales oriented use to the nearest
property line or leased building space of any other tobacco sales oriented use,
general educational facility, or college and university.
   C.   Industrial Uses:
      1.   Technical/Light Manufacturing And General Manufacturing In CC-2, CB-
2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones:
         a.   The proposed use is limited to a "cottage industry" as defined in
chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
         b.   The proposed use is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet
of gross floor area, excluding floor area devoted to other principal or
accessory uses, except as provided in subsection C1e of this section.
         c.   The proposed use meets the performance standards for off site
impacts contained in chapter 5, article H, "Performance Standards", of this
title. The City may require certification of compliance from a registered
professional engineer or other qualified person.
         d.   The following general manufacturing uses are prohibited:
            (1)   The manufacturing of chemicals and allied products.
            (2)   Any manufacturing establishment that includes milling or
processing of grain.
            (3)   Leather tanning.
            (4)   Manufacturing of motor vehicles.
            (5)   Manufacture or processing of rubber or plastics.
            (6)   Textile mills.
         e.   The limit on floor area for a proposed use may be increased from
five thousand (5,000) square feet up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
by special exception.
      2.   Technical/Light Manufacturing And General Manufacturing In CI-
1 Zone:
         a.   The proposed use is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet
of gross floor area, excluding floor area devoted to other principal or
accessory uses, except as provided in subsection C2d of this section.
         b.   The proposed use meets the performance standards for off site
impacts contained in chapter 5, article H, "Performance Standards", of this
title. The city may require certification of compliance from a registered
professional engineer or other qualified person.
         c.   The following general manufacturing uses are prohibited in the
CI-1 zone:
            (1)   The manufacturing of chemicals and allied products.
            (2)   Any manufacturing establishment that includes milling or
processing of grain.
            (3)   Leather tanning.
            (4)   Manufacture of motor vehicles.
            (5)   Manufacture or processing of rubber and plastics.
            (6)   Textile mills.
         d.   The limit on floor area for a proposed use may be increased from
five thousand (5,000) square feet up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
by special exception.
      3.   General Manufacturing In I-1 Zone: Any manufacturing establishment
that includes milling or processing of grain must comply with the following
standards:
         a.   All manufacturing, processing, storage, and packaging must be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
         b.   All transferring of raw materials and finished products must be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings, by pneumatic tubes, or by
sealed containers.
         c.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the grain
milling and processing operation must submit documentation demonstrating that
the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) or its successor has approved
the application and permit to install or alter equipment or control equipment
if the IDNR or its successor requires such a permit.
      4.   Heavy Manufacturing In CI-1 And I-1 Zones: Heavy manufacturing uses
in the CI-1 and I-1 zones are limited to concrete batch/mix plants. Concrete
batch/mix plants must meet the following standards:
         a.   The proposed use must be located at least five hundred feet
(500') from any residentially zoned property.
         b.   All proposed outdoor storage and work areas must be located and
screened to adequately reduce the noise, dust, and visual impact of the
proposed use from surrounding properties.
         c.   Traffic circulation and access points must be designed to prevent
hazards to adjacent streets or property.
      5.   Salvage Operations:
         a.   The proposed use must be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any residentially zoned property.
         b.   All outdoor storage and work areas must be completely enclosed by
a fence built to at least the S5 standard such that outdoor storage or salvage
operations are not visible from adjacent properties, streets, or highways. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
Salvage materials may not be piled against the fence or piled higher than the
height of the fence. In areas that are not visible from streets, other public
rights of way, or the Iowa River, and where nearby uses will not be harmed, the
board of adjustment may approve a semiopaque or open pattern fence in certain
situations as described below:
            (1)   Where the view is or will be blocked by a significant change
in grade or by natural or humanmade features, such that the screening is
effectively provided or the intent of the standard is met; or
            (2)   Where the adjacent property is unlikely to be developed, is
not visible to the public, and is unlikely to be harmed by an alternative
fencing requirement; or
            (3)   Where the adjacent property is zoned industrial and the area
on the adjacent property that abuts the fence is or is likely to be an outdoor
work or storage area rather than a part of the property that would be highly
visible to the public or to customers or clients of adjacent businesses.
         c.   For fire protection, a fifteen foot (15') wide, unobstructed
firebreak, which completely surrounds the use, must be established and
maintained.
         d.   The storage of rags, paper and similar combustible waste may not
be stored closer than one hundred feet (100') from any property line unless
enclosed in a masonry building of not less than four (4) hour, fire resistive
construction.
      6.   Warehouse And Freight Movement In RDP And ORP Zones:
         a.   The proposed use must be associated with a technical/light
manufacturing or office use allowed in the RDP or ORP zone.
         b.   Warehouse facilities may occupy up to sixty percent (60%) of the
total gross floor area of the building or buildings on the site.
         c.   Warehouse and freight movement facilities may not be located
between the building(s) that house the technical/light manufacturing or office
use and any street right of way.
         d.   Outdoor storage of products or merchandise is not permitted.
Outdoor work areas and loading areas must be screened from public view to at
least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering
Standards", of this title.)
      7.   Waste Related Uses In I-1 And I-2 Zones: Waste related uses are
limited to recycling processing facilities. Recycling processing facilities
must meet the following standards:
         a.   All unloading, processing, and storage of materials, including
discarded, recyclable, or processed materials, must be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, except as follows:
            (1)   Outdoor storage is limited to those materials that are
intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution, and not for final
disposal in a landfill, by incineration, or by other means. If outdoor storage
is proposed, a management plan to control the spread of litter and debris must
be submitted and approved as a part of site plan review. The screening
standards referenced in subsections C7a(2) through 7Ca(6) of this section are
minimum standards and may be supplemented with additional walls, fencing, or
landscaping to control the spread of litter and debris.
            (2)   Outdoor storage areas, including the storage of empty waste
containers and collection vehicles, must be screened from view of adjacent
commercially zoned properties to at least the S3 or S5 standard. (See chapter
5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) Outdoor
storage areas within view of property in a residential zone or within public
view, as defined in this title, must be screened from public view to at least
the S3 standard.
            (3)   Paper products, cardboard, plastic, and other similar
materials may not be stored outdoors unless they have been processed by baling,
palletizing, or other means to control the spread of litter.
            (4)   Outdoor storage of unprocessed materials is limited to glass,
metal, or other materials that are not easily dispersed by wind. If stored
outdoors, these materials must be stored in containers or structures designed
to control the spread of litter and debris.
            (5)   Collection containers for recyclable materials that are open
to the public may be located outdoors; provided, that the containers are
designed to control the spread of litter and debris. Any public collection area
located within public view, as defined in this title, or within view of
residentially zoned property must be screened to at least to the S3 standard.
            (6)   Outdoor storage of discarded tires or appliances is limited
to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area. The storage area
must be located and fenced according to the S5 standard such that it is not
visible from any adjacent property or street. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) Materials may not be piled
against the fence or higher than the height of the fence. Tires may not be
stored closer than one hundred feet (100') to any property line. Mosquito
abatement measures must be incorporated into the design of any outdoor storage
area that contains tires.
         b.   In the I-1 zone, outdoor storage areas and public collection
areas may not be located between any building and the street right of way. In
cases where an outdoor storage area cannot physically be located anywhere but
between a building and the street right of way, the city may approve the
location if properly screened.
      8.   Wholesale Sales In RDP And ORP Zones: In the RDP and ORP zones,
Wholesale sales is permitted, provided that the products sold are produced by
an office or technical/light manufacturing use located on the same property.
      9.   Wholesale Sales In CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, And CB-10 Zones:
         a.   Wholesale sales (as a principal or accessory use) is allowed if
in conjunction with a retail use or an eating and drinking establishment.
         b.   Any on site accessory storage or warehouse facilities must not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the principal uses on the
property as stated in subsection
14-4C-2W, "Storage Buildings And Warehouse Facilities", of this title.
      10.   Self-Service Storage In CC-2 Zones:
         a.   All self-service storage units or areas shall be completely
within conditioned space, as defined in the Building Code. No outdoor storage
is allowed.
         b.   Self-service storage units shall not be individually accessible
from the outside, and no more than two (2) garage or overhead doors shall
provide access into the building. Said doors shall only be provided at the rear
of the building.
         c.   A substantial portion of the front building facade must
accommodate other allowable commercial uses. Self-service storage uses are not
allowed within the first thirty feet (30') of the front building depth as
measured from the overhang of the roof, except for the primary entrance to the
self-service storage areas. This primary entrance shall not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the width of the self-service storage use’s building facade
and may consist of a hallway, lobby, and/or retail storefront. Individual self-
service storage units shall not be allowed within this primary entrance area.
         d.   Buildings containing self-service storage uses shall be
considered a large retail use as it relates to the site development standards
set forth in Section
14-2C-6K.
   D.   Institutional And Civic Uses:
      1.   Basic Utility Uses:
         a.   Basic Utility Uses Enclosed Within Buildings: Basic utility uses
are permitted within a building, provided the use is completely enclosed, and
there is no visible indication of the existence of the use from the exterior of
the building.
         b.   Basic Utility Uses Not Enclosed Within A Building:
            (1)   In the ID-I, I-1 and I-2 zones, basic utility uses not
enclosed within a building are permitted, provided the use is located at least
two hundred feet (200') from any residential zone and is screened from view of
public rights-of-way to at least the S3 standard. To ensure public safety, the
City may also require that the use be enclosed by a fence. Basic utility uses
that cannot meet the two hundred foot (200') separation requirement may apply
for a special exception from the Board of Adjustment as described in subsection
D(1)b(2) of this section.
            (2)   In all commercial zones, the RDP and ORP zones, and the P-1,
ID-C and ID-RP zones, basic utility uses not enclosed within a building are
permitted only by special exception. Proposed uses must be screened from public
view and from view of any adjacent residential zones to at least the S3
standard. The proposed use must be compatible with surrounding structures and
uses with regard to safety, size, height, scale, location, and design,
particularly for facilities that will be located close to or within view of a
residential zone. For uses located in highly visible areas, the Board may
consider additional design elements such as masonry or brick facades, and walls
or fencing to improve public safety and to soften the visual impact of the
proposed use. Water and sanitary sewer pumps or lift stations approved by the
City as part of subdivision or site plan approval do not require special
exception approval from the Board of Adjustment.
            (3)   In the ID-RP and the ORP zone, the Board of Adjustment may
grant a special exception to reduce the minimum lot size for a basic utility
use; provided that the facility will be located, screened, and landscaped in a
manner that will not detract from surrounding properties or prevent development
of an attractive entranceway to an existing or future office research park.
      2.   Private Colleges And Universities In RDP And ORP Zones:
         a.   The proposed use will be located such that traffic to and from
the proposed use will not adversely affect the office, light industrial, and
research firms for which the zone is primarily intended.
         b.   The proposed use will not significantly alter the overall
character of the research park zone and will not inhibit future development of
office, light industrial, and research firms for which the zone is primarily
intended. The board will consider such factors as size and scale of the
development, projected traffic generation, and whether adequate transportation,
transit, and pedestrian facilities exist to support the proposed use.
         c.   The proposed use will be compatible with surrounding uses with
regard to building design, site design, traffic circulation, and signage.
      3.   General Community Service Uses In RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM,
MU, And CN-1 Zones:
         a.   Community service uses are limited to "neighborhood centers", as
defined in chapter 9, article A, "General Definitions", of this title.
         b.   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      4.   General Community Service Uses In CI-1 And I-1 Zones: The proposed
use will not significantly alter the overall character of the zone and will not
inhibit future development of uses for which the zone is primarily intended.
The board will consider such factors as size and scale of the development,
projected traffic generation, and whether adequate transportation, transit, and
pedestrian facilities exist to support the proposed use. Community service uses
that are industrial or repair oriented in nature or that include operations
that require outdoor work areas may be particularly suited to these zones.
      5.   Community Service - Shelter Uses:
         a.   Maximum Density:
            (1)   In the RM-12 and MU zones: Seven hundred fifty (750) square
feet of lot area per permanent resident and two hundred (200) square feet of
lot area per temporary resident.
            (2)   In the RM-20, RNS-20, and CO-1 zones: Five hundred fifty
(550) square feet of lot area per permanent resident and two hundred (200)
square feet of lot area per temporary resident.
            (3)   In the RM-44, PRM, CI-1, CC-2, and CB-2 zones: A minimum of
three hundred (300) square feet of lot area per permanent resident and two
hundred (200) square feet of lot area per temporary resident is required.
         b.   Nuisance Issues: The proposed use will not have significant
adverse effects on the livability of nearby residential or commercial uses due
to loitering, noise, glare from lights, late night operations, odors, outdoor
storage, and litter. The applicant must submit a site plan and a shelter
management plan that address these issues. The management plan must include a
litter control plan, a loitering control plan, a plan for on site security, and
a conflict resolution procedure to resolve nuisance issues if they occur. The
site plan and shelter management plan must be submitted along with the
application for a special exception, or if allowed as a provisional use, such
plan must be included with the materials submitted for site plan review.
         c.   Site Development Standards:
            (1)   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in
the central planning district, it must comply with the multi- family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
            (2)   In the CB-5 and CB-10 zones, community service/shelter uses
must be located above the street level floor of a building.
            (3)   The proposed facility must comply with the minimum standards
as specified in the Iowa City housing code, as amended.
      6.   Reserved.
      7.   Daycare Uses:
         a.   Required Interior Activity Areas: Child daycare centers must
contain at least thirty five (35) square feet of usable interior floor space
per child. Adult daycare centers must contain a minimum of sixty (60) square
feet of usable floor area per adult client. An additional twenty (20) square
feet of floor area is required for every adult client who uses ambulatory aids.
Reception areas, kitchens, storage areas, offices, bathrooms, hallways,
treatment rooms, and specialized areas used for therapy are excluded when
calculating the required floor area. The dining area may only be included in
the square footage calculation if used by daycare participants for activities
other than meals. When collocated in a facility that houses other uses or
services, the proposed daycare use must have its own separate identifiable
space for program activities during operational hours.
         b.   Required Outdoor Areas: Child daycare uses must provide a fenced
outdoor play area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child
based on the maximum number of children that will be using the outdoor play
area at any given time. The outdoor play area must meet the following
standards:
            (1)   Playground equipment is not permitted within the front and
side setbacks.
            (2)   Outdoor play areas must be well drained, free from hazards,
and readily accessible to the daycare center. In residential zones, outdoor
play areas must be completely enclosed by a fence at least four feet (4') in
height. In commercial and industrial zones, the outdoor play area must be
completely enclosed by a fence built to the S4 standard and be screened along
the perimeter of the fence to the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F,
"Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) The city may waive the
screening requirement if it is determined that land uses surrounding the
daycare use will not pose a nuisance or safety hazard to the children such that
a screening buffer is necessary.
         c.   Vehicular Circulation: The use must provide a drop off/pick up
area in a location that is convenient to or has good pedestrian access to the
entrance to the facility. This drop off/pick up area must contain sufficient
stacking spaces and/or parking spaces to ensure that traffic does not stack
into adjacent streets or other public rights of way. (See minimum parking
requirements for daycare in section
14-5A-4,
table 5A-2 of this title.) To promote safe vehicular circulation, one-way
drives are encouraged.
         d.   Pedestrian Circulation: A sidewalk must be constructed connecting
the main entrance of the center to the adjacent public right of way. Pedestrian
access must be clearly separated or distinguished from vehicular circulation
areas to minimize the extent to which users of the facility are required to
walk across drives or aisles to gain access to the daycare center.
         e.   Site Development Standards: If the proposed use is located in a
residential zone or in the central planning district, it must comply with the
multi-family site development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title. Daycare facilities that are accessory uses are exempt
from this provision.
      8.   Detention Facilities:
         a.   The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any property containing an existing daycare use, educational
facility use, parks and open space use, religious/private group assembly use or
residential use.
         b.   The proposed use will be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any residential zone.
         c.   The proposed use will be located at least five hundred feet
(500') from any other detention facility.
         d.   The facility and its operations will not pose an unreasonable
safety risk to nearby uses and residents. The applicant must submit to the
board of adjustment a detailed plan for on site security.
      9.   General Education Facilities In The CC-2 Zone:
         a.   The use will be functionally compatible with surrounding uses and
will not inhibit retail and service uses for which the zone is primarily
intended. The board may consider such factors as site layout, size and scale of
the development, and traffic circulation.
         b.   The use must provide a drop off/pick up area in a location that
is convenient to, or has good pedestrian access to, the entrance to the
facility. The drop off/pick up area must contain sufficient stacking spaces
and/or parking spaces to ensure that traffic does not stack into adjacent
streets or other public rights of way.
         c.   The site must be designed to promote safe and convenient
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation to the school according to the
standards set forth in subsection
14-2C-6F, "Pedestrian, Bicycle, And Vehicular Circulation", of this title.
Pedestrian walkways must be established connecting the main entrance(s) of the
school to adjacent public sidewalks and trails.
      10.   General Educational Facilities In RR-1, RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-
44, PRM, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
         a.   The number of off street parking spaces provided may not exceed
one and one-half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required, unless
granted a special exception to do so. The board of adjustment will carefully
review any requests for parking spaces beyond the maximum allowed, particularly
in areas where large parking lots will erode the residential character of the
neighborhood. The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and
location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street
parking, the estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking
with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
         b.   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      11.   General Educational Facilities In RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, And RNS-12
Zones:
         a.   The following setbacks are required in lieu of the setbacks
specified in the base zone. However, the board of adjustment may reduce these
setbacks, subject to the approval criteria for setback adjustments as specified
in subsection
14-2A-4B5, "Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements", of this
title.
            (1)   Front: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Side: Twenty feet (20').
            (3)   Rear: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   The proposed use will be designed to be compatible with adjacent
uses. The board of adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such
as the site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale,
setbacks, landscaping, and location and amount of paved areas. The board of
adjustment may deny the use or aspects of the use that are deemed out of scale,
incompatible, or out of character with surrounding residential uses, or may
require additional measures to mitigate these differences. Additional
requirements may include, but are not limited to, additional screening,
landscaping, pedestrian facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking
facilities, and location and design of buildings.
         c.   Given that large parking lots can seriously erode the single-
family residential character of these zones, the board of adjustment will
carefully review any requests for parking spaces beyond the minimum required.
The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and location of
parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the
estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking with other
nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
         d.   The proposed use will not have significant adverse effects on the
livability of nearby residential uses due to noise, glare from lights, late
night operations, odors, and litter.
         e.   The building official may grant approval for the following
modifications to an educational facility, without approval from the board of
adjustment, upon written findings that the modification will not be detrimental
to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the other property
or improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is
located:
            (1)   An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500)
square feet in size.
            (2)   A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square
feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the
building.
         f.   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      12.   Specialized Educational Facilities In PRM, MU, And CN-1 Zones:
         a.   Any such use is limited to two thousand four hundred (2,400)
square feet of gross floor area.
         b.   If the proposed use is located in the PRM or MU zone or in the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      13.   Specialized Educational Facilities In The CI-1 Zone: The use will
be functionally compatible with surrounding uses, such that the health and
safety of clients/students are not compromised. The board will consider factors
such as the types of businesses that predominate in the immediate vicinity,
whether there are any significant negative externalities created by these uses,
such as excessive noise, dust, or vibrations from outdoor work areas that may
pose a health or safety risk to clients/students of the proposed use; and where
such negative externalities exist, whether the building(s) and site can and
will be designed to mitigate the harmful effects.
      14.   Hospitals In CO-1 Zone: Hospitals that existed prior to 1963, are
exempt from and may expand without compliance with the maximum height and FAR
standards of the CO-1 zone.
      15.   Parks And Open Space:
         a.   Any new cemetery use must be located on a site containing at
least five (5) acres. Other shared private open space uses are exempt from the
minimum lot requirements of the base zone in which they are located.
         b.   The following uses and facilities are regulated as accessory uses
and are subject to the regulations of article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this chapter:
            (1)   Accessory uses within shared private open space areas:
Swimming pools, tennis courts, boat ramps, and other recreational facilities.
These are recreational facilities that are shared among residents of the
surrounding properties and are maintained and operated by a common homeowners'
or residents' association. Recreational, sports, or athletic clubs operated as
a commercial business and open to the general public to join are classified as
commercial recreational facilities and are regulated as a principal use.
            (2)   Accessory uses within cemeteries: Mausoleums, chapels, and
similar accessory facilities associated with funerals or burial.
            (3)   Accessory uses within golf courses: Clubhouses and driving
ranges.
      16.   Religious/Private Group Assembly In ID-RM, ID-C, RR-1, RM-12, RM-
20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, And CO-1 Zones:
         a.   Religious institutions in existence prior to 1963, that are
located in the RM-12, RM-20, RNS-20, RM-44, PRM, MU, and CO-1 zones are exempt
from and may expand without compliance with the required number of parking
spaces.
         b.   Religious institutions located in the PRM zone that have parking
areas that existed prior to March 1, 1992, and if such parking areas are within
three hundred feet (300') of a commercial zone, the religious institution may
lease up to and including two-thirds (2/3) of the required parking spaces
within said parking areas to other users.
         c.   The number of off street parking spaces provided may not exceed
one and one-half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required, unless
granted a special exception to do so. The board of adjustment will carefully
review any requests for parking spaces beyond the maximum allowed, particularly
in areas where large parking lots will erode the residential character of the
neighborhood. The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and
location of parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street
parking, the estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking
with other nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
         d.   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      17.   Religious/Private Group Assembly In ID-RS, RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, And
RNS-12 Zones:
         a.   The following setbacks are required in lieu of the setbacks
specified in the base zone. However, the board of adjustment may reduce these
setbacks, subject to the approval criteria for setback adjustments as specified
in subsection
14-2A-4B5, "Adjustments To Principal Building Setback Requirements", of this
title.
            (1)   Front: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Side: Twenty feet (20').
            (3)   Rear: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   The proposed use will be designed to be compatible with adjacent
uses. The board of adjustment will consider aspects of the proposed use, such
as the site size, types of accessory uses, anticipated traffic, building scale,
setbacks, landscaping, and location and amount of paved areas. The board of
adjustment may deny the use or aspects of the use that are deemed out of scale,
incompatible, or out of character with surrounding residential uses, or may
require additional measures to mitigate these differences. Additional
requirements may include, but are not limited to, additional screening,
landscaping, pedestrian facilities, setbacks, location and design of parking
facilities, and location and design of buildings.
         c.   Given that large parking lots can seriously erode the single-
family residential character of these zones, the board of adjustment will
carefully review any requests for parking spaces beyond the minimum required.
The board may limit the number of parking spaces and the size and location of
parking lots, taking into account the availability of on street parking, the
estimated parking demand, and opportunities for shared parking with other
nonresidential uses in the vicinity of the use.
         d.   The proposed use will not have significant adverse effects on the
livability of nearby residential uses due to noise, glare from lights, late
night operations, odors, and litter.
         e.   The building official may grant approval for the following
modifications to a religious/private group assembly use, without approval from
the board of adjustment, upon written findings that the modification will not
be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the
other property or improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the
property is located:
            (1)   An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500)
square feet in size.
            (2)   A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square
feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the
building.
         f.   If the proposed use is located in a residential zone or in the
central planning district, it must comply with the multi-family site
development standards as set forth in section
14-2B-6 of this title.
      18.   Utility-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
         a.   Any utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be
located closer than two hundred feet (200') from any residential zone, as
measured from the property line of the residential zone.
         b.   Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems must be
screened from public view and from view of any adjacent residential zones to at
least the S3 standard. A utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy system may
be exempt from S3 screening requirements if the system is located in a public
zone and is used in part for educational purposes.
         c.   Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be
closer than twenty feet (20') from all property lines, or according to the
minimum setback requirements in the underlying base zone, whichever is greater.
         d.   Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
enclosed by security fencing. Fencing must be between six feet and eight feet
(6' and 8') in height. Up to three (3) individual horizontal strands of barbed
wire may be placed atop the fence. Barbed wire strands will not be included in
the overall fence height measurement.
         e.   The maximum height of utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall be no greater than fifteen (15').
         f.   Any on-site lighting provided for the operational phase of the
utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall be equipped with full
cutoff fixtures, shielded away from adjacent properties, and positioned
downward to minimize light spillage onto adjacent properties.
         g.   Exterior surfaces of utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy
system panels shall have a nonreflective finish to minimize glare and solar
arrays shall be designed and installed to minimize glare towards vehicular
traffic and any adjacent building.
         h.   Any utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy system that intends
to locate in a commercial (CO-1, CN-1, CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, CB-10),
research (RDP), office park (ORP), or interim development zone (ID-C, ID-RP,)
must also satisfy the approval criteria for a special exception for a basic
utility set forth in Section 14-4B-4D-1b-(2).
   E.   Other Uses:
      1.   Animal Related Agriculture In ID Zones:
         a.   Livestock feedlots must be located no closer than one-fourth (1/
4) mile from any residential zone boundary.
         b.   Confinement feeding operations are prohibited.
      2.   Extraction:
         a.   Extraction is not permitted within one thousand feet (1,000') of
a residential zone.
         b.   Proof of compliance with all state requirements, including all
approvals and licenses referenced in subsections E2c through E2e of this
section must be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to
commencing extraction operations.
         c.   Approval for the withdrawal of water must be obtained from the
Iowa department of natural resources, or its successor.
         d.   Approval for operation in a floodplain must be obtained from the
Iowa department of natural resources, or its successor.
         e.   A license to operate the extraction use must be obtained from the
Iowa department of agricultural and land stewardship, division of soil
conservation, or its successor. Failure to maintain said license shall
constitute abandonment.
      3.   Helicopter Landing Facilities In I-1, I-2, RDP, And ORP Zones:
         a.   The proposed landing facility must be located at least one
thousand feet (1,000') from any residential zone.
         b.   The landing facility must meet all applicable federal
regulations. Documentation of compliance with federal regulations must be
submitted to the board of adjustment with the application for a special
exception.
      4.   Communication Transmission Facilities In Residential Zones And In
ID-RS And ID-RM Zones:
         a.   Communications antennas are permitted in all residential zones
and in the ID-RS and ID-RM zones, provided the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The antenna is mounted on an existing communications tower,
on the roof of a principal building that contains a nonresidential use or on
the roof of a building that is accessory to a nonresidential use, or on another
tall structure that is permitted in the zone. Examples include church and
school buildings, water towers and clock towers. A maximum of two (2) antennas
is permitted per building or structure.
            (2)   The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of the
existing structure or building to which it is attached by more than twenty feet
(20'). If it exceeds this limit, a special exception is required to ensure that
the antenna and any associated structure is designed to blend into its
surroundings, or be camouflaged so as not to be obtrusive or detract from
neighboring properties.
            (3)   Strobe lighting is prohibited in residential zones.
Therefore, any antenna that requires such illumination is prohibited.
            (4)   Any equipment associated with an antenna must be located
within the exterior walls of the building to which the antenna is attached. No
separate equipment shed is permitted, except if the antenna is attached to a
tall structure that is not a building. In such a case, a separate equipment
shed is only allowed by special exception if it can be demonstrated that the
shed can be adequately screened or designed in a manner that blends in with the
residential character or future residential character of the surrounding area.
         b.   Communications towers are allowed by special exception in the ID-
RS and ID-RM zones and must comply with the following approval criteria:
            (1)   The proposed tower serves an area that cannot be served by an
existing tower or industrial property or by locating antennas on existing
structures in the area. The applicant must document attempts to utilize
existing structures, towers, and commercial and industrial properties within
one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed tower. Such documentation must include maps
illustrating the location of existing towers and potential alternative sites
for antenna and towers that have been explored by the applicant and the
applicant must state the reasons that these locations were not feasible.
            (2)   The proposed tower will be designed and constructed in a
manner that will camouflage the structure and reduce its visual impact on the
surrounding area. Examples of camouflage design include monopoles, which do not
have guywires or support trusses and that are painted to blend in with the sky
or surroundings, towers camouflaged as flagpoles, monuments, steeples, or the
integration of rooftop towers onto existing buildings, water towers, etc.
Rooftop towers must use materials similar to or that blend in with the
structure to which it is attached. Other camouflaged tower structures must be
of similar height and appearance as other similar structures allowed in the
zone, e.g., towers camouflaged as light poles or utility poles must be of
similar height and appearance as other such poles. The applicant must include
an illustration of how the tower would appear in the proposed location.
            (3)   The proposed tower will be no taller than is necessary to
provide the service intended. Evidence presented should include coverage maps
illustrating current gaps in coverage and changes to coverage with the proposed
tower. Communications towers are exempt from the maximum height standards of
the base zone, but under no circumstance may the tower be taller than one
hundred twenty feet (120') from grade. If a communications tower is camouflaged
to appear similar to another common structure allowed in the zone, it must
comply with the same height standards that would apply to the type of structure
that it emulates. For example, if the tower is camouflaged as a light pole,
flagpole, or utility pole it must not exceed the height limitation for such
structures as specified in the base zone. If no height standard exists in the
code for such a structure, it must be designed to be of similar height and
appearance to other similar or typical structures. If the tower is camouflaged
as a chimney, steeple, or other similar rooftop structure, the board may exempt
it from the base zone height standards if it is designed as if it were an
integral part of the building and is not out of scale or proportion to other
similar rooftop structures.
            (4)   The proposed tower will be set back from the property line at
least a distance equal to the height of the tower.
            (5)   Any equipment associated with the tower facility will be
enclosed in an equipment shed, cabinet, or building, which must be adequately
screened from view of the public right of way and adjacent properties and
designed in a manner that will be compatible and blend in with future
residential development.
            (6)   The proposed tower will not utilize a backup generator as a
principal power source. Backup generators may only be used in the event of a
power outage. The board of adjustment may require that the electric
distribution line necessary to furnish electric service to the tower be made
underground from existing systems, however, this requirement would not apply to
electrical transformers, meter pedestals, switchgear and other appurtenances
impractical to bury.
            (7)   Strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any tower that
requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones.
            (8)   The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to
accommodate at least one additional user, unless in doing so the tower will
exceed the one hundred twenty foot (120') height limitation or if the board of
adjustment determines that allowing the additional height needed to accommodate
another user will detract from the area to the extent that it will prevent
future development as envisioned in the comprehensive plan. The applicant shall
provide a certification by a professional engineer licensed in this state that
the proposed tower will be designed to permit a second antenna system of
comparable size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the
original antenna system.
            (9)   If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any
associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator,
or the owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the
land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present a
signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other
satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation.
      5.   Communication Transmission Facilities In Commercial Zones And ID-
C Zone; Privately Owned Communication Transmission Facilities In Public Zones:
         a.   Communications antennas are permitted in all commercial zones,
the ID-C zone, and in public zones, provided the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The antenna must be mounted on another structure allowed in
the zone, such as a rooftop, light pole, or utility pole.
            (2)   In the CN-1 and CO-1 zones and in any ID-C zone that is
intended for a future CN-1 zone, strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any
antenna that requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones.
            (3)   In public zones and in the CC-2, CH-1, CI-1, CB-2, CB-5, and
CB-10 zones and in any ID-C zone not intended for a future CN-1 zone, antennas
may not be illuminated by strobe lights unless required by federal regulations.
If alternatives are allowed under federal guidelines, strobe lights may not be
used.
            (4)   Any equipment associated with an antenna must be located
within the exterior walls of the building to which the antenna is attached or
screened from view of the public right of way and any adjacent property to at
least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering
Standards", of this title.) If the equipment is located on the roof, it must be
set back and screened so that it is not within public view or appears to be
part of the building.
         b.   Communications towers are allowed by special exception in public
zones, the ID-C, CO-1, CN-1, CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5, and CB-10 zones, and
must comply with the following approval criteria:
            (1)   If the proposed tower will be located in an ID-C zone that is
intended for a future neighborhood commercial zone according to the
comprehensive plan, as amended, then it must comply with any specific standards
listed below for CN-1 zones.
            (2)   The proposed tower serves an area that cannot be served by an
existing tower or industrial property or by locating antennas on existing
structures in the area. The applicant must document attempts to utilize
existing structures, towers, and industrial properties within one-half (1/2)
mile of the proposed tower. Such documentation must include maps illustrating
the location of existing towers and potential alternative sites for antenna and
towers that have been explored by the applicant and the applicant must state
the reasons that these locations were not feasible.
            (3)   The proposed tower will be constructed in a manner that will
camouflage the structure and reduce its visual impact on the surrounding area.
Examples of camouflage design include monopoles, which do not have guywires or
support trusses and that are painted to blend in with the sky or surroundings,
towers camouflaged as flagpoles, monuments, steeples, or the integration of
rooftop towers onto existing buildings, water towers, etc. Rooftop towers must
use materials similar to or that blend in with the structure to which it is
attached. Other camouflaged tower structures must be of similar height and
appearance as other similar structures allowed in the zone, e.g., towers
camouflaged as light poles or utility poles must be of similar height and
appearance as other such poles. The applicant must include an illustration of
how the tower would appear in the proposed location.
            (4)   The proposed tower will be no taller than is necessary to
provide the service intended. Evidence presented should include coverage maps
illustrating current gaps in coverage and changes to coverage with the proposed
tower. In the ID-C (except areas intended for CN-1), CH-1, CC-2, CI-1, CB-2,
CB-5 and CB-10 zones, communications towers are exempt from the maximum height
standards of the base zone, but under no circumstance may the tower be taller
than one hundred twenty feet (120') from grade. In the CO-1, CN-1, and any ID-
C zone intended for CN-1, communications towers must comply with the same
height standards that would apply to the type of structure to which they are
attached or if a communications tower is camouflaged to appear similar to
another common structure allowed in the zone, it must comply with the same
height standards that would apply to the type of structure that it emulates.
For example, if the tower is camouflaged as a light pole, flagpole, or utility
pole it must not exceed the height limitation for such structures as specified
in the base zone. If no height standard exists in the code for such a
structure, it must be designed to be of similar height and appearance to other
similar or typical structures. If the tower is camouflaged as a chimney or
other similar rooftop structure, the board may exempt it from the base zone
height standards if it is designed as if it were an integral part of the
building and is not out of scale or proportion to other similar rooftop
structures.
            (5)   The proposed tower will be set back at least a distance equal
to the height of the tower from any residential zone, ID-RS zone, and ID-RM
zone.
            (6)   Any equipment associated with the tower facility will be
enclosed in an equipment shed, cabinet, or building, which must be adequately
screened from view of the public right of way and any adjacent residential or
commercial property.
            (7)   The proposed tower will not utilize a backup generator as a
principal power source. Backup generators may only be used in the event of a
power outage.
            (8)   In the CN-1 and CO-1 zones and in any ID-C zone that is
intended for a future CN-1 zone, strobe lighting is prohibited. Therefore, any
tower that requires such illumination is prohibited in these zones. The tower
will not be illuminated by strobe lights unless required by federal
regulations. If alternatives are allowed under federal guidelines, strobe
lights may not be used.
            (9)   The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to
accommodate at least one additional user, unless in doing so the tower will
exceed the one hundred twenty foot (120') height limitation or if the board of
adjustment determines that allowing the additional height needed to accommodate
another user will detract from the area to the extent that it will prevent
future development intended in the zone. The applicant shall provide a
certification by a professional engineer licensed in this state that the
proposed tower will be designed to permit a second antenna system of comparable
size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the original antenna
system.
            (10)   If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any
associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator,
or the owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the
land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present a
signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other
satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation.
      6.   Communication Transmission Facilities In Industrial And Research
Park Zones And ID-RP And ID-I Zones:
         a.   Communications antennas are permitted in all Industrial and
Research Park Zones and in the ID-I and ID-RP Zones, provided the antenna is
mounted on another structure allowed in the zone, such as a rooftop, light
pole, or utility pole.
         b.   Communications towers are allowed in the ID-I, I-1 and I-2 Zones
and by special exception in the ID-RP, RDP and ORP Zones, provided the
following conditions are met:
            (1)   The proposed tower will be set back at least a distance equal
to the height of the tower from any residential zone, ID-RS Zone, and ID-RM
Zone.
            (2)   The tower and any associated equipment, buildings, or
structures must be screened from the public right-of-way and any bordering
residential or commercial zone to at least the S3 standard. (See chapter 5,
article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
            (3)   The proposed tower must be designed and constructed to
accommodate at least two (2) additional users. The applicant shall provide a
certification by a professional engineer licensed in this State that the
proposed tower will be designed to permit two (2) additional antenna systems of
comparable size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the
original antenna system.
            (4)   If use of the tower is discontinued, the tower and any
associated equipment must be removed by the owner of the tower, the operator,
or the owner of the property within one year of discontinuance of use and the
land graded and replanted to prevent erosion. The applicant shall present a
signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of covenants, or other
satisfactory evidence acknowledging this obligation.
      7.   Consumer Fireworks Sales In The I-1 And I-2 Zones: In the I-1 and I-
2 Zones, consumer fireworks sales, as defined in this title, are permitted,
subject to the restrictions and dates of sale set forth in title 661 Iowa
Administrative Code chapter 265, Consumer Fireworks Sales Licensing and Safety
Standards. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4220, 7-18-2006; Ord. 06-
4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 09-4358, 10-20-2009; Ord. 09-
4363, 12-1-2009; Ord. 09-4364, 12-1-2009; Ord. 11-4443, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-4448,
10-18-2011; Ord. 11-4450, 10-18-2011; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011; Ord. 12-4482,
5-15-2012; Ord. 13-4520, 4-9-2013; Ord. 13-4522, 4-23-2013; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-
2013; Ord. 13-4543, 8-20-2013; Ord. 13-4544, 8-20-2013; Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-
2013; Ord. 13-4551, 9-17-2013; Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; Ord. 16-4655, 2-2-2016;
Ord. 16-4667, 7-5-2016; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017; Ord.
19-4779, 2-19-2019; Ord. 19-4800, 8-6-2019; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-2020; Ord. 20-
4820, 3-3-2020; Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020; Ord. 21-4864, 9-21-2021; Ord. 22-
4880, 6-6-2022; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 24-4940,
11-4-2024; Ord. 24-4941, 12-10-2024)
ARTICLE C. ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
14-4C-1: General Approval Criteria
14-4C-2: Specific Approval Criteria
14-4C-3: Development Standards
14-4C-1: GENERAL APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a permitted use, provisional use or special exception
are permitted, provided they are operated and maintained according to the
following standards:
   A.   The accessory use is subordinate to the principal use of the property
and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants,
customers, or employees of the principal use;
   B.   The accessory use, building or structure is under the same ownership as
the principal use or uses on the property;
   C.   The accessory use, building or structure does not include structures,
structural features, or activities inconsistent with the uses to which they are
accessory;
   D.   Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved
according to the provisions set forth in subsection
14-5A-4F, “Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements”, of this title, the
accessory use, building, or structure is located on the same lot as the
principal use or uses to which it is accessory; and
   E.   The accessory use, building, or structure conforms to the applicable
base zone regulations and to the specific approval criteria and development
standards contained in this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 11-
4449, 10-18-2011)
14-4C-2: SPECIFIC APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Any accessory uses listed in the following subsections must comply with the
conditions listed, unless specifically exempted or superseded by more specific
provisions of this title. As noted, some require special exception approval
from the Board of Adjustment. If a regulation in the base zone chapter
conflicts with a regulation contained in this article, the regulation that is
more specific to the situation applies. When regulations are equally specific
or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the more restrictive
regulation will govern.
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs): ADUs are permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   Applicability: The ADU shall be located in a zone that allows
household living uses and shall be accessory to a principal use that consists
of no more than two (2) dwelling units on a lot.
      2.   Ownership:
         a.   The owner of the property on which an ADU is located must occupy
at least one of the dwelling units on the premises as the permanent legal
resident.
         b.   The ADU and the principal use must be under the same ownership.
      3.   Site Requirements:
         a.   Only one ADU may be established per lot.
         b.   The minimum lot size and area per unit requirements of the
underlying base zone must be met, but no additional lot area is required beyond
that which is required for the principal use.
      4.   Design Requirements:
         a.   The ADU must be a complete, separate dwelling unit that functions
independently from the principal use. It must contain its own kitchen and
bathroom facilities, in addition to a separate entrance from the exterior.
         b.   When located within a building with an existing principal use,
the ADU must be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of
an allowed use within that zone, and any new entrances, exterior finish
materials, trim, windows, and eaves must visually match the principal use.
      5.   Apartment Size: The floor area of the ADU may not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total floor area of the principal use, excluding the area
of an attached garage, or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less.
   B.   Accessory Retail Sales: For nonresidential uses, accessory retail sales
is permitted, provided the following conditions are met. Retail sales
associated with home occupations is addressed in the subsection M, "Home
Occupations", of this section.
      1.   Accessory retail sales must clearly be subordinate to the use to
which it is accessory. The floor area devoted to accessory retail sales may not
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet or forty percent (40%) of the total
floor area of the principal use to which the retail sales is accessory,
whichever is less. The floor area devoted to accessory uses is included when
calculating the total floor area of the principal use. For example, a small
manufacturing establishment contains a total of two thousand (2,000) square
feet of floor area. Under this provision, the establishment may include up to
eight hundred (800) square feet of accessory retail space.
      2.   The operation of and area devoted to retail sales must meet the
performance standards for commercial zones as specified in
chapter 5, article H of this title.
      3.   The products sold must be manufactured, processed, or fabricated on
the property or must be associated with the principal use of the property.
   C.   Accessory Uses Within Parks And Open Space Uses:
      1.   Within cemeteries, all structures, including, but not limited to,
mausoleums, columbariums, crematoriums, permanent monuments and maintenance
buildings, must be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property
line or street right of way line. Such structures must be screened from view of
abutting residential properties to at least the S3 standard. (See
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.) If
such structures are located such that they are not visible from residential
properties, then screening is not required.
      2.   Playground equipment, picnic facilities, shelters, and gazebos are
permitted within parks and open space uses, provided they are set back a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line or street right of way
line.
      3.   Uses, buildings and structures devoted to active recreational
activities, such as clubhouses, driving ranges, swimming pools, recreation
buildings, sports fields, and tennis courts, which are located within private,
shared open space, are permitted by special exception and are subject to the
following approval criteria, except for uses approved through a planned
development process. Uses, buildings, and structures devoted to active
recreational activities approved through a planned development process are not
initially required to obtain special exception approval. However, any expansion
or enlargement of such a use, building, or structure requires special exception
approval from the board of adjustment, except as permitted in subsection C3g of
this section. A special exception is not required for buildings or structures
devoted to active recreational activities within public parks.
         a.   The proposed use is properly located to provide adequate
separation between properties and between uses within the parks and open space
area. Any buildings associated with the proposed use must comply with the
setback requirements for principal buildings in the underlying base zone. Other
structures and facilities must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
property line. The board of adjustment may reduce or increase the setback
requirements; provided, that adequate separation is established based on the
specific use proposed and the nature of the surrounding properties.
         b.   The proposed use is consistent with the intended character of the
specific parks and open space area.
         c.   The location or operation of the proposed use will not compromise
any designated environmental conservation areas adjacent to or within the parks
and open space area.
         d.   The transportation system is capable of safely supporting the
proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors
include street capacity and level of service, access requirements, on street
parking impacts, neighborhood impacts, and pedestrian safety.
         e.   Adequate public services are available or will be made available
to serve the proposed use.
         f.   The proposed use will not have significant adverse impacts on the
livability of nearby residential properties due to noise, glare from lights,
late night operations, odors, and litter.
         g.   The building official may grant approval for the following minor
modifications to accessory uses within parks and open space uses without
approval from the board of adjustment, according to the procedures and approval
criteria for minor modifications as set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title:
            (1)   An accessory storage building less than five hundred (500)
square feet in size.
            (2)   A building addition of less than five hundred (500) square
feet, provided the addition does not increase the occupancy load of the
building.
   D.   Bed And Breakfasts: Bed and breakfasts are allowed in conjunction with
any residential use, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   Guests stay for periods not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
      2.   The operator must provide the City an emergency contact and obtain a
housing inspection every two (2) years to protect public health and safety
related to fire and building safety and sanitation.
   E.   Reserved.
   F.   Caretaker Residences In Industrial And Research Park Zones: In the
industrial and research park zones, a maximum of one residence for a
proprietor, caretaker, or watchperson is permitted, provided it is located on
the same property as the commercial or industrial use.
   G.   Childcare Homes:
      1.   "Childcare homes", as defined in this title, that provide care for
up to eight (8) children, are permitted in any zone that allows household
living uses, provided the operation and maintenance of the childcare home meets
all applicable state requirements. A childcare home is permitted one
nonresident caregiver in addition to the primary resident caregiver.
      2.   "Childcare homes", as defined in this title, that provide care for
nine (9) to sixteen (16) children, are permitted in any zone that allows
household living uses, provided the following conditions are met:
         a.   The home must provide a fenced outdoor play area of not less than
fifty (50) square feet per child based on the maximum number of children that
will be using the outdoor play area at any given time.
         b.   The home must contain thirty five (35) square feet of interior
floor space per child, excluding kitchen, bathrooms, and halls.
         c.   The home must have a working fire extinguisher, smoke detectors,
and two (2) direct exits.
         d.   The operation and maintenance of the home must meet all
applicable state requirements.
         e.   The home is permitted one nonresident caregiver in addition to
the primary resident caregiver.
   H.   Communication Towers, Antennas, And Satellite Receiving Devices:
      1.   Accessory communications antennas and satellite receiving devices,
one meter or smaller in diameter, are permitted in any zone; provided, that
such a device is in compliance with the provisions of chapter 5, article D,
"Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
      2.   Accessory satellite receiving devices larger than one meter in
diameter are permitted in all commercial and industrial zones; provided, that
no such device is located in violation of the provisions of chapter 5, article
D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. In residential zones,
including the ID-RS and ID-RM zones, such devices are permitted, provided they
are not located in the area between the street and the principal building,
within the required principal building, front or side setback area, or on the
roof of any building.
      3.   Communications towers, other than amateur radio and citizen band
transmitters, are permitted according to the requirements for communications
transmission facilities as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
      4.   Amateur radio and citizen band transmitters, antennas, and
supporting structures are permitted in any zone, provided they are not located
in the area between a street and a principal structure or within the required
side setback.
   I.   Daycare: Daycare accessory to institutional, commercial, or industrial
uses is permitted according to the approval criteria for daycare uses as set
forth in article B of this chapter.
   J.   Decks And Patios, Uncovered:
      1.   In residential zones:
         a.   Uncovered patios and decks constructed two feet (2') or less
above grade must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front or street-
side lot line and set back at least two feet (2') from any alley right of way.
No side setback is required.
         b.   Uncovered patios and decks constructed more than two feet (2')
above grade must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any front or street-
side lot line, at least five feet (5') from any side lot line, and at least two
feet (2') from any alley right of way.
      2.   In riverfront crossings zones and the eastside mixed use district:
         a.   Decks are not allowed in private frontage areas, as defined in
subsection
14-2G-7A, "Streetscape And Frontage Area Improvements", of this title.
         b.   Patios are not allowed in private frontage areas unless expressly
permitted according to the standards for the applicable frontage type, as
specified in section
14-2G-4 of this title.
         c.   Uncovered patios and decks constructed two feet (2') or less
above grade must be set back at least two feet (2') from any alley right of
way. No side setback is required.
         d.   Uncovered patios and decks constructed more than two feet (2')
above grade must be set back at least five feet (5') from any side lot line and
at least two feet (2') from any alley right of way.
      3.   In all other zones:
         a.   Uncovered patios and decks must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from any front or street-side lot line and set back at least two feet
(2') from any alley right of way. No side setback is required.
         b.   Decks and patios in any zone where there is no front setback
requirement for principal buildings are exempt from the front setback
requirement in subsection J3a of this section.
   K.   Drive-Through Facilities:
      1.   Allowed Facilities: Drive-through facilities are allowed according
to
table 4C-1 of this section.
Table 4C-1: Drive-Through Facilities
Zone Drive-Through Facilities Allowed Additional Requirements
Zone                  Drive-Through Facilities   Additional Requirements
                      Allowed
ID zones              None permitted             Not applicable
Residential zones     None permitted             Not applicable
                      Limited to facilities that Special exception
CO-1 zone             are accessory to financial required. See additional
                      institutions               approval criteria listed
                                                 below
                                                 Drive-through lanes must
                                                 be set back at least 10
                                                 feet from property lines
                                                 and must be screened from
CH-1 zone             Permitted                  view of any abutting
                                                 residential zone to the S3
                                                 standard. (See
                                                 chapter 5, article F,
                                                 "Screening And Buffering
                                                 Standards", of this title)
                      Limited to facilities that
                      are accessory to financial
                      institutions and           Special exception
                      pharmacies                 required. See additional
CN-1 zone             Maximum of 2 lanes allowed approval criteria listed
                      for a financial            below
                      institution
                      Maximum of 1 lane allowed
                      for a pharmacy
                      Permitted by special       Special exception
CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, and exception. Limitations     required. See additional
riverfront crossings  apply in the riverfront    approval criteria listed
zones                 crossings zones, as        below
                      specified below
CB-5, CB-10 zones     None permitted             Not applicable
Eastside mixed use    None permitted             Not applicable
district
 
      2.   Riverfront Crossings Zones; Limitations And Restrictions:
         a.   In all riverfront crossings subdistricts, except for the west
riverfront and south Gilbert subdistricts, drive-throughs are limited to
facilities that are accessory to financial institutions and pharmacies.
         b.   In the south Gilbert subdistrict, drive-through facilities are
not allowed along frontages designated as required retail storefronts or
required Ralston Creek frontages, or along the required pedestrian streets that
extend east-west through the block to provide connections to the riverfront
park, all as illustrated in section
14-2G-2,
 figure 2G-1, "Regulating Plan", of this title. Otherwise, drive-through
facilities are allowed by special exception for any use allowed in the
subdistrict.
         c.   In the west riverfront subdistrict, drive-through facilities are
allowed by special exception for any use allowed in the subdistrict according
to the provisions set forth in this section.
         d.   Principal buildings to which a drive-through is accessory must
comply with all standards of the applicable riverfront crossings subdistrict as
specified in chapter 2, article G of this title, unless a minor adjustment is
approved by the FBC committee according to the provisions in subsection
14-2G-7H, "Minor Adjustments", of this title.
      3.   Special Exception Approval Criteria:
         a.   Access And Circulation: The transportation system should be
capable of safely supporting the proposed drive-through use in addition to the
existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level
of service, effects on traffic circulation, access requirements, separation of
curb cuts, and pedestrian safety in addition to the following criteria:
            (1)   Wherever possible and practical, drive-through lanes shall be
accessed from secondary streets, alleys, or shared cross access drives. If the
applicant can demonstrate that access from a secondary street, alley, or shared
cross access drive is not possible, the board may grant access to a primary
street, but may impose conditions such as limiting the width of the curb cut
and drive, limiting the number of lanes, requiring the drive-through bays and
stacking lanes to be enclosed within the building envelope, and similar
conditions.
            (2)   To provide for safe pedestrian movement, the number and width
of curb cuts serving the use may be limited. A proposal for a new curb cut on
any street is subject to the standards and restrictions in chapter 5, article
C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
            (3)   An adequate number of stacking spaces must be provided to
ensure traffic safety is not compromised. A minimum of six (6) stacking spaces
is recommended for drive-through facilities associated with eating
establishments and a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces for banking,
pharmacies, and similar nonfood related drive-through facilities. "Stacking
spaces" shall be defined as being twenty feet (20') in length and the width of
a one lane, one-way drive. The board may reduce the recommended number of
stacking spaces if the applicant can demonstrate that the specific business has
unique characteristics such that the recommended number of parking spaces is
excessive (i.e., a drive- through that is to be used for pick up only and not
ordering).
            (4)   Sufficient on site signage and pavement markings shall be
provided to indicate direction of vehicular travel, pedestrian crossings, stop
signs, no entrance areas, and other controls to ensure safe vehicular and
pedestrian movement.
         b.   Location:
            (1)   In the CB-2 zone and in all subdistricts of the riverfront
crossings district located east of the Iowa River, drive-through lanes and
service windows must be located on a nonstreet-facing facade. In all other
locations where drive-throughs are allowed, this location standard must be met,
unless the applicant can demonstrate that a street-facing location is
preferable for the overall safety and efficiency of the site, does not conflict
with adjacent uses or pedestrian access, and does not compromise the character
of the streetscape or neighborhood in which it is located.
            (2)   Drive-through lanes must be set back at least ten feet (10')
from adjacent lot lines and public rights of way and screened from view
according to the design standards below.
         c.   Design Standards: The number of drive-through lanes, stacking
spaces, and paved area necessary for the drive-through facility will not be
detrimental to adjacent residential properties or detract from or unduly
interrupt pedestrian circulation or the commercial character of the area in
which the use is located. The board of adjustment may increase or reduce these
standards according to the circumstances affecting the site.
            (1)   To promote compatibility with surrounding development, the
number of drive-through lanes should be limited such that the amount of paving
and stacking space does not diminish the design quality of the streetscape or
the safety of the pedestrian environment.
            (2)   Drive-through lanes, bays, and stacking spaces shall be
screened from views from the street and adjacent properties to the S2 standard.
If the drive-through is located adjacent to a residential use or property zoned
residential, it must be screened from view of these properties to at least the
S3 standard. To preserve the pedestrian oriented character of streets in the
CB-2 zone and the riverfront crossings district, the board may require the
drive-through to be incorporated within the building or be screened with
masonry street walls and landscaping. Street walls shall be a minimum of five
feet (5') in height and shall be designed to complement the principal building
on the site.
            (3)   Multiple windows servicing a single stacking lane (e.g.,
order board, payment window, pick up window) should be considered to reduce the
amount of idling on the site.
            (4)   Stacking spaces, driveways, and drive-through windows shall
be located to minimize potential for vehicular and pedestrian conflicts and
shall be integrated into the surrounding landscape and streetscape design of
the neighborhood in which it is located.
            (5)   Lighting for the drive-through facility must comply with the
outdoor lighting standards set forth in chapter 5, article G of this title and
must be designed to prevent light trespass and glare onto neighboring
residential properties.
            (6)   (Rep. by Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
            (7)   Loudspeakers or intercom systems, if allowed, should be
located and directed to minimize disturbance to adjacent uses. Special
consideration should be given to locations adjacent to residential uses to
ensure such systems do not diminish the residential character of the
neighborhood.
   L.   Fences, Walls, And Hedges:
      1.   Permit Required: A permit is required for all of the following:
         a.   Electric fences;
         b.   Barbed wire fences;
         c.   Any fence or wall over six feet (6') in height;
         d.   Any retaining wall over four feet (4') in height measured from
the top of the footing to the top of the wall; and
         e.   A retaining wall of any height that supports a surcharge or
impounds flammable liquids.
      2.   Location And Height Requirements: All fences, walls, and hedges
located within a principal building front, side, or rear setback area or within
five feet (5') of a lot line, are subject to the following location and height
requirements:
         a.   Except as otherwise allowed or required in chapter 2, article G,
"Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development
Standards", of this title, no portion of a fence or wall more than ten percent
(10%) solid shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. The solidity is the percent
of the fence over a random area which is made up of solid, opaque material, and
which does not allow light or air to pass through. Retaining walls are exempt
from the provisions of this paragraph.
         b.   Fences, walls, and hedges must be set back at least two feet (2')
from any alley or street right of way line.
         c.   On corner lots, fences, walls, and hedges over two feet (2') in
height must comply with the provisions of chapter 5, article D, "Intersection
Visibility Standards", of this title.
         d.   Fences and walls that exceed four feet (4') in height are not
permitted in the principal building, front setback area on properties zoned
residential or on properties located within fifty feet (50') of any property
along the same frontage that is zoned residential. However, this height limit
is increased to six feet (6') for lots with frontages along an expressway or an
arterial street; provided, that the lot is a double frontage lot or a reversed
corner lot. Retaining walls are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. A
minor modification may be requested to adjust the height of an entranceway gate
in a fence located within a front yard setback area according to the procedures
and approval criteria for minor modifications contained in article B of this
chapter.
         e.   In riverfront crossings zones and the eastside mixed use
district, fences and walls located within private frontage areas are strictly
regulated and, if allowed, must comply with the applicable frontage type
standards as specified in chapter 2, article G of this title.
      3.   Regulations For Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: Barbed wire and
electric fences are subject to the following regulations:
         a.   Barbed wire consists of twisted wires with barbs on each wire.
The barbs on each wire must be at least four inches (4") apart. Any barbed wire
that does not meet this description is prohibited. Concertina wire is
prohibited.
         b.   Except when used for the enclosure of livestock associated with
an allowed agriculture use, barbed wire fences are permitted only in the
commercial, industrial, and research zones, provided the bottom strand of
barbed wire is not less than six feet (6') above grade.
         c.   Except for the enclosure of livestock associated with an allowed
agriculture use, electric fences are not permitted in any zone.
         d.   No electric fence shall carry a charge greater than twenty five
(25) milliamperes nor a pulsating current lower than one- tenth (1/10) second
in a one second cycle. All electric fences must carry the seal of an approved
testing laboratory.
         e.   Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited within five feet
(5') of a public sidewalk or within four feet (4') of a street right of way
line where a public sidewalk does not exist. In the latter case, however, a
barbed wire or electric fence may be installed or constructed along the right
of way line if the property owner agrees to move the fence back the required
distance within two (2) months after the installation of a public sidewalk.
Said agreement must be submitted with the application for a fence permit.
   M.   Home Occupations: There are two (2) categories of home occupations,
type A and type B. Type A home occupations are permitted, provided the use
complies with the standards in subsections M3 through M9 of this section. Type
B home occupations are permitted, provided the use complies with the standards
in subsections M3 through M9 of this section, and the operator of the use
obtains a home occupation permit from the city as described in subsection M2 of
this section. The standards for bed and breakfast homestays, bed and breakfast
inns, and childcare homes are specified in other subsections of this section
and are, therefore, not subject the provisions of this subsection.
      1.   Home Occupation Types:
         a.   Type A: A "type A home occupation" is one where a resident or
residents of a dwelling use the dwelling as a place of work, but no employees
or customers come to the site. Examples include artists, craftspersons,
writers, and consultants. Type A home occupations also provide an opportunity
for a home to be used as a business address but not as a place of work. No
permit is required for these uses, but they must comply with all of the other
regulations stated herein.
         b.   Type B: A "type B home occupation" is one where a nonresident
employee works at the site or where customers frequent the site on a regular
basis. Examples include counseling, tutoring, and hair cutting and styling. A
home occupation permit is required for these uses.
      2.   Permit Required For Type B Home Occupations: Prior to establishment
of a type B home occupation, a home occupation permit must be obtained from the
department of housing and inspection services according to the procedures set
forth in chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this
title. A home occupation permit is required in order to ensure that the
applicant is aware of the provisions governing home occupations and that the
city has all information necessary to evaluate whether the proposal initially
meets and continues to meet the provisions of this subsection.
      3.   Location And Occupancy:
         a.   The home occupation use must be located within a dwelling unit or
within a building that is accessory to a dwelling unit.
         b.   The dwelling unit must be the bona fide primary residence of the
owner and operator of the home occupation during nonbusiness hours.
      4.   Prohibited Uses: In addition to the uses that would be excluded
based on the conditions specified in this subsection, the following uses are
specifically prohibited as home occupations:
         a.   Adult business uses.
         b.   Veterinary clinics and kennels.
         c.   Commercial recreational uses.
         d.   Commercial parking.
         e.   Eating and drinking establishments.
         f.   Medical/dental offices, except for psychiatrists, psychologists,
chiropractors, and physical therapists.
         g.   Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with
internal combustion engines (such as automobiles, motorcycles, scooters,
snowmobiles, outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws and other small
engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers, and
refrigerators) or any other work related to automobiles and their parts.
         h.   Self-service storage.
         i.   Industrial service.
         j.   Any use which changes the fire safety rating of the occupancy
separation classification requirements of the structure.
      5.   Commercial Activity:
         a.   No commodities may be sold on the premises except for those
produced on the premises or those associated with the home occupation conducted
on the premises.
         b.   Type B home occupations are limited to ten (10) clients or
customers per day.
      6.   Traffic And Parking:
         a.   The proposed use will not generate a greater volume or type of
traffic than what is normally expected in the zone in which it is located; nor
will it necessitate parking in excess of what is normally expected in the zone
in which it is located. Vehicles used for delivery and pick up are limited to
those normally servicing residential neighborhoods.
         b.   No more than one truck associated with the home occupation may be
parked at the site. Only light trucks that are less than seven feet (7') in
height are permitted. Medium and heavy trucks are prohibited. A "light truck"
is a truck with a single rear axle and a single set of rear wheels. The home
occupation use must comply with regulations in chapter 5, article A, "Off
Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title, regarding the parking and
storage of special vehicles and commercial vehicles and the provisions of title
9, chapter 4, "Parking Regulations", of this code.
      7.   Off Site Impacts: Except for a permitted sign, there must be no
indication from the exterior of the dwelling unit or accessory building, such
as noise, odor, smoke, dust, excessive outdoor lighting, or outdoor storage of
materials, that there is a home occupation use on the premises. No visitors or
deliveries to the home occupation use are permitted before seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      8.   Size: For a home occupation located within a principal dwelling
unit, the floor area devoted to the home occupation may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the total floor area of the principal dwelling (the floor area
of an attached garage is not included in the calculation of total floor area of
the dwelling). This twenty five percent (25%) limit applies regardless of
whether the home occupation is located within the principal dwelling unit or
within an accessory building. For example, for a property where the principal
dwelling contains two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area, a home
occupation would be limited to five hundred (500) square feet regardless of
whether it was located within the dwelling or within an accessory building.
      9.   Nonresident Employees: Nonresident employees are prohibited, except
as approved by the building official as a minor modification to the home
occupation use, according to the approval criteria and procedures for minor
modifications as set forth in chapter 4, article B of this title.
      10.   Signage: Home occupations are permitted one nonilluminated fascia
sign, not to exceed one square foot in size.
   N.   Mechanical Structures:
      1.   Screening:
         a.   All ground level mechanical and utility equipment, such as heat
pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, electrical vehicle charging
stations, and water pumps, must be screened from public view to at least the S2
standard. (See chapter 5, article F, “Screening And Buffering Standards”, of
this title.) If it is not feasible to use landscape screening, the mechanical
equipment must be screened using wall or fencing materials complementary to the
principal structure. Mechanical structures accessory to single-family uses and
solar energy systems accessory to any uses are exempt from this standard.
         b.   In all zones except I-1 and I-2, rooftop mechanical equipment
must be concealed from public view by integrating equipment into the design of
the building, screening equipment behind building features, such as parapets,
or by setting the equipment back from the edge of the roof so that it is not
visible from ground level. Solar energy systems are exempt from this standard.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Single-Family Residential Zones: Mechanical structures must be
set back at least two feet (2') from the side and rear lot lines. However,
mechanical structures may not be located between the principal dwelling and the
street.
         b.   All Other Zones: Mechanical structures must be set back at least
two feet (2') from any lot line. Additional location standards may apply in
certain zones or for certain uses.
      3.   Minor Modifications For Solar Energy Systems: A minor modification
for solar energy systems may be requested according to chapter 4, article B of
this title.
   O.   Off Street Loading: Off street loading is permitted in the multi-
family, commercial, industrial, and research zones according to the provisions
of chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this
title.
   P.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking must comply with the provisions
of the base zone in which it is located and the provisions of chapter 5,
article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this title.
   Q.   Outdoor Dumpster Areas:
      1.   Outdoor recycling, trash, solid waste and dumpster areas must be in
compliance with the applicable provisions of title 16, chapter 3, article H,
"Solid Waste", of this code.
      2.   Any such area must be screened from view of adjacent properties and
from the public right of way to the S3 or S5 standard. (See chapter 5, article
F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.)
   R.   Outdoor Lighting: Outdoor lighting must comply with the provisions of
the base zone in which it is located and the provisions of chapter 5, article
G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title.
   S.   Outdoor Storage And Display: Any use with permanent outdoor storage or
outdoor display areas must comply with the standards for the base zone in which
the use is located, the relevant performance standards as specified in chapter
5, article H of this title, and any additional standards required for the use
in article B of this chapter. Uses with temporary outdoor storage and display
areas must comply with the regulations in article D, "Temporary Uses", of this
chapter.
   T.   Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, And Tennis Courts: Swimming pools, hot tubs,
and tennis courts intended for private use by persons that reside on the
property or their guests are permitted, provided the following conditions are
met:
      1.   Setbacks:
         a.   Residential Zones, Riverfront Crossings Zones, And The Eastside
Mixed Use District:
            (1)   The use must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any
side or rear lot line.
            (2)   The use may not be located in the front yard (see definition
of "front yard" in chapter 9, article A of this title) unless the use is set
back at least forty feet (40') from the front property line.
         b.   Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zones, the use must be
set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side, rear, or front property
line, unless the property on which the use is located is directly abutting or
across the street from a property zoned residential. In the case of such an
adjacency, the use must comply with the setback requirements for residential
zones as stated in subsection T1a of this section.
      2.   Lighting Standards: Lighting for such facilities must comply with
the standards specified in chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards",
of this title.
      3.   Fence Requirement: Swimming pools, with a depth of eighteen inches
(18") or more and the edge of which is less than four feet (4') above grade,
must be completely enclosed by a fence according to the following
specifications:
         a.   The fence must be at least four feet (4') in height and must be
constructed so that a sphere, five inches (5") in diameter, cannot pass through
the fence.
         b.   A principal or accessory building may be used as part of the
enclosure.
         c.   All gates and doors opening through the enclosure must be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times when not in use, except the door of any
building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
         d.   The building official may permit other protective devices or
structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the
substitute device or structure is not less than the protection afforded by an
enclosure built to the specifications of this subsection T3.
   U.   Roadside Stands For The Sale Of Produce: Roadside stands for the sale
of produce grown on the premises are permitted in the ID zones and the RR-
1 zone, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The stand contains no more than six hundred (600) square feet of
floor area;
      2.   The stand is set back at least ten feet (10') from any lot line and
at least twenty feet (20') from any street right of way; and
      3.   Access to the stand is from an entrance to the farm or residence.
Additional street access will not be granted for such a use.
   V.   Signs: Signs are allowed according to the regulations in chapter 5,
article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
   W.   Storage Buildings And Warehouse Facilities:
      1.   In residential zones and for residential building types in the
riverfront crossings and eastside mixed use district, accessory storage and
accessory storage buildings are allowed as follows:
         a.   Accessory storage and storage buildings are permitted for the
storage of personal vehicles, wood, lumber, gardening equipment and other
materials and equipment used exclusively by residents of the premises or by
persons affiliated with a permitted use.
         b.   On properties where the principal use is household living,
storage buildings for commercial purposes are prohibited.
      2.   In commercial, industrial, and research zones, and for
nonresidential uses allowed within commercial and mixed use buildings in the
riverfront crossings zones and eastside mixed use district, accessory storage
and warehouse facilities are permitted, provided the floor area devoted to such
a use does not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total floor area of the
buildings on the property. If storage and warehousing exceeds this floor area
limit, it is considered a principal use and is subject to the base zone
regulations and any relevant approval criteria in article B of this chapter.
      3.   Accessory storage buildings and warehouse facilities must meet the
development standards for accessory buildings as specified in section
14-4C-3 of this article.
   X.   Structures For Shelter Of Household Pets, Horses And Ponies:
      1.   Structures for the shelter of household pets are permitted, provided
the following conditions are met. "Kennels", as defined in this title, are
regulated as a principal use, intensive animal related commercial, and are
subject to the base zone regulations and the relevant approval criteria in
article B of this chapter.
         a.   Dog runs, built solely for the purpose of exercising and feeding
of dogs, must be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any front or street
side lot line, at least ten feet (10') from any side lot line, at least ten
feet (10') from the rear lot line.
         b.   Dog runs must be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient
height and construction to contain the dog at all times.
         c.   A principal or accessory building may be used as part of the
enclosure.
         d.   All gates and doors opening through the enclosure must be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times when not in use, except the door of any
building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
         e.   The building official may permit other protective devices or
structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the
substitute device or structure is not less than the protection afforded by an
enclosure built to the specifications of this subsection X1.
      2.   Structures for the shelter of horses and ponies are permitted in the
ID zones and the RR-1 zone, but not in other zones. A minimum lot area of two
(2) acres is required for the first horse or pony, plus one acre for each
additional horse or pony. Commercial stables are regulated as a principal use,
intensive animal related commercial, and are subject to the base zone
regulations and the relevant approval criteria in article B of this chapter.
   Y.   Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems: Small wind energy conversion
systems (SWECS) are allowed as accessory uses in certain zones subject to the
applicable approval process, standards and restrictions as set forth in this
subsection.
      1.   Permit Required:
         a.   It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or
locate a SWECS within the city of Iowa City, unless the owner/operator has
obtained a building permit from the city of Iowa City.
         b.   The owner/operator of the SWECS shall obtain all applicable
permits required by federal and state law prior to constructing the system.
      2.   Applicability And Approval Process:
         a.   Building mounted SWECS are allowed in the CI-1, CC-2, CH-1, CB-5,
CB-10, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P-1, P-2, and ID zones, in accordance with the
standards and restrictions set forth in this subsection.
         b.   Freestanding SWECS that do not exceed a total extended height of
forty five feet (45') are allowed in the I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, P-1, P-2, ID-I,
and ID-RP zones, in accordance with the applicable standards and restrictions
set forth in this subsection. A special exception is required, however, for any
freestanding SWECS proposed within three hundred feet (300') of a residential
zone boundary.
         c.   A special exception is required for any freestanding SWECS that
exceed a total extended height of forty five feet (45') in the I-1, I-2, RDP,
ORP, P-1, P-2, ID-I, and ID-RP zones.
      3.   Feasibility Study Recommended:
         a.   It is highly recommended that a feasibility study be made of any
site prior to installing a wind turbine. The feasibility study should include
measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed turbine site for at least three
(3) months. The applicant for a SWECS building permit shall indicate whether a
feasibility study has been conducted and the results of any such study.
         b.   The grant of a special exception or issuance of a building permit
for a SWECS does not constitute the granting of an easement by the city of Iowa
City. The SWECS owner/operator shall have the sole responsibility to acquire
any covenants, easements, or similar rights to assure or protect access to
sufficient wind as may not be necessary to operate the SWECS.
      4.   Size And Number Of Systems Per Lot:
         a.   If allowed in the subject zone, no more than one freestanding
SWECS that is taller than the tallest existing principal building on the
property may be permitted. If allowed in the subject zone, additional
freestanding SWECS that conform to setback requirements and other standards
contained herein and that are no taller than the tallest existing principal
building located on said property may be permitted. Additional building mounted
SWECS may be allowed within the parameters of this subsection.
         b.   Any one SWECS proposed for the subject property may not exceed a
nameplate rated capacity greater than one hundred (100) kilowatts. However, in
no case shall the generating capacity of aggregated SWECS on a property exceed
anticipated energy needs for on site consumption.
      5.   Lot Size Standards:
         a.   The minimum lot size for a freestanding SWECS shall be one acre.
         b.   The minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS shall be one
acre if mounted on a building five (5) stories or less in height.
         c.   There shall be no minimum lot size for building mounted SWECS if
mounted on a building six (6) or more stories in height.
      6.   Setbacks:
         a.   The minimum distance between any freestanding SWECS and any
property line or any existing, proposed, planned, or anticipated public street
right of way or public trail shall be a distance that is equivalent to one
hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the total extended height. If the certificate
of insurance for the SWECS requires a greater setback than the setback required
herein, the setback shall be increased to meet the insurance requirement. The
setback shall be measured from the point of the SWECS closest to the property
line or existing, proposed, planned, or anticipated public street right of way
or public trail, including the blade at its greatest horizontal extension.
         b.   The required setback for any building mounted SWECS shall be
equal to the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS is
to be attached.
      7.   Additional Siting Standards:
         a.   No portion of a vertical axis SWECS blade shall extend within
twelve feet (12') of the ground.
         b.   No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall extend within
thirty feet (30') of the ground.
         c.   The blades of any freestanding SWECS may not extend within twenty
feet (20') of a parking area, driveway, tree, structure, outdoor use area,
pedestrian walkway, or aboveground utility structure or facility.
         d.   No part of a SWECS shall be located within or over drainage,
utility or other established easements.
         e.   No SWECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can extend
within twenty feet (20') laterally of an overhead electrical power line
(excluding secondary electrical service lines or service drops). The setback
from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet (5').
         f.   A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of
applicable federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations as amended.
      8.   Height Standards: Small wind energy conversion systems are exempt
from the maximum height standards of the base zone, however the following
height restrictions apply:
         a.   For freestanding SWECS, the total extended height of SWECS shall
not exceed the following:
            (1)   For lots of one but fewer than three (3) acres: Sixty five
feet (65') maximum.
            (2)   For lots of three (3) to seven (7) acres: Eighty feet (80')
maximum.
            (3)   For lots more than seven (7) acres, but less than fifteen
(15) acres: One hundred feet (100') maximum.
            (4)   For lots more than fifteen (15) acres: One hundred fifty feet
(150') maximum.
         b.   For building mounted SWECS, the hub height shall not be more than
ten feet (10') higher than the point of attachment to the building on which it
is attached.
      9.   Design Standards:
         a.   Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding SWECS.
Lattice or guyed towers of any other type are prohibited.
         b.   Freestanding SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white, sky
blue or light gray. Building mounted SWECS shall match or be complementary in
color to the building to which it is attached. Other colors may be allowed at
the discretion of the board of adjustment. The surface shall be nonreflective.
         c.   No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to
meet FAA regulations.
         d.   No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the
tower or any associated structures.
         e.   The tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first
twelve feet (12') of height above grade.
      10.   Coordination With Local Utility Company:
         a.   Utility Notification: The city of Iowa City shall notify the
applicable utility company of receipt of an application to install an
interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from
this notification requirement.
         b.   Interconnection: The SWECS, if not off grid, shall meet the
requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility and
the Iowa utilities board. No permit of any kind shall be issued until the city
of Iowa City has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection
agreement. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
         c.   Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: A SWECS shall be
used exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on site
consumption, except that excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not
presently needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company in
accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code,
as may be subsequently amended.
      11.   Performance Standards: An applicant shall provide evidence to the
city that the following standards will be met:
         a.   Noise: A SWECS shall be designed, installed and operated so that
the noise generated does not exceed fifty (50) decibels (dBA) when measured
from the nearest point on property line to the SWECS.
         b.   Shadow Flicker: No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to
cause a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
         c.   Safety Controls: Each SWECS shall be equipped with both automatic
and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled
rotation, overspeeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor
blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking system shall also be
capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to
prevent backfeeding of the grid.
         d.   Structural Integrity: Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited
unless the owner has obtained a written analysis from an Iowa licensed
structural engineer determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause
damage to the structure and that the SWECS can be securely fastened so as to
not pose a hazard caused by detaching from the structure.
         e.   Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in accordance
with manufacturer's specifications and shall remain in an operational condition
that poses no potential safety hazard nor is in violation of any provisions
contained within this article or elsewhere within this Code.
         f.   Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for the
wind turbine will be required as determined by the building official.
         g.   Electromagnetic Interference: All SWECS shall be designed and
constructed to not cause radio and television interference. If it is determined
that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner/operator
shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference
including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of
the building official. A special exception or permit granting a SWECS may be
revoked if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
         h.   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components, as supplied by the manufacturer, in
sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the design and manner of
installation conforms to the State National Electric Code.
         i.   Insurance: A person seeking a building permit to erect a small
wind energy system shall provide evidence, in the form of a certificate of
insurance satisfactory to the City of Iowa City, showing general liability
insurance coverage for the installation and operation of the system under a
standard business owner's insurance policy, separate and distinct from any
insurance requirements of a public utility.
         j.   Engineer Certification: Applications for any SWECS shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the
tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of all components of the
SWECS showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by an
Iowa licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
         k.   Installation: Installation must be done according to
manufacturer's specifications. All wiring and electrical work must be completed
according to the applicable Building and Electric Codes. All electrical
components must meet code recognized test standards.
         l.   Removal: If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuous period of six (6) months, the system shall be deemed to be
abandoned. The SWECS owner and/or the owner of the property shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense. To comply with this requirement, the entire
structure, transmission equipment and any surrounding fencing must be removed
from the property, excluding foundations. Nonfunction or lack of operation may
be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. For off grid systems the
City of Iowa City shall have the right to enter the property at its sole
discretion to determine if the off grid system is generating power. Such
generation may be proven by use of an amp meter. The SWECS owner/operator and
any successors shall make available to the Director of Housing and Inspection
Services or designee any and all reports or documents needed to determine
functionality, if requested. If removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is
required, the Director of Housing and Inspection Services Department or
designee shall notify in writing the SWECS owner and/or the owner of the
property on which the SWECS is located. Removal shall be completed within six
(6) months of the date of said written notice.
   Z.   The Keeping Of Chickens And Structures For The Shelter Of Chickens: The
keeping of chickens and structures for the shelter of chickens is permitted for
detached single-family uses subject to the restrictions and provisions set
forth in title 8, chapter 4, "Animal Services", of this Code.
   AA.   Rooftop Service Areas (RSAs): Rooftop service areas (RSAs), as defined
in chapter 9, article A of this title, are allowed in accordance with the
regulations indicated in this subsection and
table 4C-2 of this section. Where an RSA is allowed as a provisional use, the
application for such approval shall be administered through the design review
process. Where an RSA is allowed only by special exception, an application for
such approval must be reviewed and approved by the board of adjustment. Any RSA
accessory to a use that is licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages is
considered a type of "outdoor service area", as defined in section
4-1-1 of this code, and is subject to the applicable regulations in title 4,
"Alcoholic Beverages", of this code. Additional approval criteria apply to RSAs
proposed for nonconforming drinking establishments, as set forth in subsection
AA2 of this section.
TABLE 4C-2
ROOFTOP SERVICE AREAS (RSAs)
 
Zone                    General Rules               Requirements
ID zones, I-1, I-2      None permitted              Not applicable
Residential zones       None permitted              Not applicable
                                                    Compliance with approval
                                                    criteria listed below.
                                                     
                                                    For RSAs serving alcohol,
                                                    compliance with applicable
                                                    regulations for outdoor
                                                    service areas in title 4,
                                                    "Alcoholic Beverages", of
                                                    this code.
CO-1, CN-1, MU, RFC-G   Allowed as provisional uses  
                                                    Maximum occupancy: 30, or
                                                    the maximum occupancy for
                                                    the principal use,
                                                    whichever is less.
                                                     
                                                    Hours of operation limited
                                                    to: 10:00 A.M. to 10:00
                                                    P.M. or when the kitchen is
                                                    closed, whichever is more
                                                    restrictive.
                                                    Compliance with approval
                                                    criteria listed below.
                                                     
                                                    For RSAs serving alcohol,
                                                    compliance with applicable
                                                    regulations for outdoor
                        Allowed as provisional uses service areas in title 4,
                        within the hours of         "Alcoholic Beverages", of
                        operation and occupancy     this code.
                        limits stated in this        
                        table.                      Maximum occupancy: 30, or
                                                   the maximum occupancy for
                        An RSA operating outside of the principal use,
CI-1, CC-2, CH-1, CB-2, the hours of operation or   whichever is less.
CB-5, RDP, ORP          occupancy limits set forth   
                        in this table may be        Hours of operation limited
                        allowed by special          to: 10:00 A.M. to 10:00
                        exception. However, if      P.M. or when the kitchen is
                        located within 100 feet of  closed, whichever is
                        a residential zone, no      earlier.
                        special exception is         
                        allowed.                    For RSAs that require a
                                                    special exception,
                                                    compliance with the general
                                                    special exception approval
                                                    criteria set forth in
                                                    section
                                                    14-4B-3 of this chapter.
                                                    Compliance with approval
                                                    criteria listed below.
                                                     
                                                    For RSAs that require a
                                                    special exception,
                        If accessory to:            compliance with the general
                                                   special exception approval
                        Hospitality oriented retail criteria set forth in
                        use: Allowed as a           section
                        provisional use in          14-4B-3 of this chapter.
                        accordance with the hours    
                        of operation set forth in   For RSAs serving alcohol,
                        this table. An RSA          compliance with applicable
                        operating outside these     regulations for outdoor
                        hours may be allowed by     service areas in title 4,
                        special exception.          "Alcoholic Beverages", of
                                                   this code.
                        Commercial recreational use  
                        or eating establishment:    Hours of operation limited
                        Allowed as a provisional    to:
RFC zones, except RFC-G use, provided the RSA has    
                        an occupancy limit of 30    10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. -
                        people or less and is in    Sunday - Thursday.
                        accordance with the hours    
                        of operation set forth in   10:00 A.M. to 12:00
                        this table. An RSA          midnight - Friday,
                        operating outside of these  Saturday, or when the
                        hours of operation or       kitchen is closed,
                        occupancy limits may be     whichever is earlier.
                        allowed by special           
                        exception.                  If located within 100 feet
                                                   of a residential zone, the
                        Drinking establishment or   maximum occupancy shall be
                        other principal use not     30 and the hours of
                        listed above: Allowed only  operation shall be limited
                        by special exception.       to 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
                                                    daily or when the kitchen
                                                    is closed, whichever is
                                                    earlier. These limits may
                                                    not be exceeded by special
                                                    exception.
                                                    Compliance with approval
                                                    criteria listed below.
                                                     
                                                    For RSAs that require a
                        If accessory to:            special exception,
                                                   compliance with the general
                        Hospitality oriented retail special exception approval
                        use: Allowed as a           criteria set forth in
                        provisional use.            section
                                                   14-4B-3 of this chapter.
                        Commercial recreational use  
                        or eating establishment:    For RSAs serving alcohol,
                        Allowed as a provisional    compliance with applicable
CB-10                   use, provided the RSA has   regulations for outdoor
                        an occupancy limit of 50    service areas in title 4,
                        people or less. A special   "Alcoholic Beverages", of
                        exception is required for   this code.
                        RSAs proposed to exceed      
                        this occupancy limit.       If located within 100 feet
                                                   of a residential zone,
                        Drinking establishments or  maximum occupancy is 30 and
                        other principal uses not    hours of operation limited
                        listed above: Allowed only  to 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
                        by special exception.       daily or when the kitchen
                                                    is closed, whichever is
                                                    more restrictive. These
                                                    limits may not be exceeded
                                                    by special exception.
 
      1.   Approval Criteria For Rooftop Service Areas:
         a.   Accessibility: The RSA shall meet all building and fire code
requirements, be ADA compliant, include elevator service, and have accessible
restrooms provided.
         b.   Design: The RSA shall be designed in an attractive manner that
will not detract from adjacent uses, and will prevent nuisance and safety
issues. The applicant shall submit a design plan with the application for an
RSA that, at a minimum, specifies and illustrates the proposed size,
dimensions, setbacks from adjacent buildings and roof edges, occupancy load,
layout, landscaping elements, access routes, elevator, and accessible
bathrooms. RSAs shall meet the following minimum standards. If a special
exception is required, the board of adjustment may impose additional or more
restrictive conditions to mitigate any anticipated externalities, including,
but not limited to, restrictions on hours of operation, lighting, size,
occupancy load, and setback and screening requirements.
            (1)   The RSA shall be located directly adjacent to or above the
use to which it is accessory and there shall not be other uses located on
floors in between the RSA and the use to which it is accessory.
            (2)   The RSA must be set back from adjacent upper floor uses and
the edge of the roof and screened and completely enclosed within a decorative
fence or wall built of high quality, durable materials. Landscaping elements,
such as planters and green roofs, may be used to soften views or provide a
buffer. The setback and screening must be established in a manner that will not
unduly block light, air, or outdoor views from upper floor windows on abutting
buildings.
            (3)   The RSA must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
street facing edge of the roof. A smaller buffer between the RSA and the roof
parapet or guardrail may be allowed, provided the buffer is determined to
adequately address public safety. The buffer and screen wall shall be of a
sufficient depth and/or height and constructed of attractive, durable materials
that may also include landscaping elements to prevent persons from leaning or
dropping things over the parapet or guardrail that encloses the terrace or
rooftop. A design of the proposed buffer and screen wall shall be submitted
with the application.
            (4)   The lighting must comply with chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor
Lighting Standards", of this title. Except for any lighting required by the
building code, lights must be turned off when the RSA is not in operation. A
lighting plan shall be submitted that illustrates compliance with these
standards.
            (5)   No signs shall be allowed in or on the exterior wall or fence
of the RSA that are within public view, as defined in chapter 9, article
A of this title.
         c.   Management:
            (1)   For RSAs that are also outdoor service areas, as defined in
title 4 of this code, there must be an RSA management plan in place and at
least one employee must be designated to monitor the safety and compliance of
the RSA during hours of operation. The proposed management plan shall be
submitted with the application. If nuisance or safety issues arise, the city
may require immediate changes to the management plan and/or the number of
monitors to remedy the situation and reserves the right to suspend or revoke
the RSA permit.
            (2)   In the CB-10 zone, where the building containing the RSA
abuts or is directly across a public alley from a property containing upper
floor residential uses or hotel rooms that have windows facing the RSA, the
hours of operation of the RSA are limited to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Friday and Saturday.
         d.   Food Service: If alcohol is being served, food service must be
provided. Prior to approval of an RSA, the applicant must submit evidence
indicating how this requirement will be met.
         e.   Noise: The design of the RSA must minimize the carry of noise
across property boundaries. Use of specialized screen wall materials, sound
deadening techniques, or similar, may be required. Evidence of such a noise
mitigation plan must be included with an RSA application. In addition, after an
RSA is established, the city reserves the right to require additional measures
to remedy any violation of the city's noise or nuisance ordinance, as
determined by the city.
         f.   Amplified Sound: Due to the potential nuisance to neighboring
properties and the general public in the surrounding neighborhood, amplified
sound is only allowed for RSAs associated with hospitality oriented retail uses
in the RFC-SD subdistrict and for RSAs in the CB-10 zone, subject to the
limitations set forth below. RSAs accessory to hospitality oriented retail uses
are not required to obtain a temporary use permit, but must comply with the
city's noise and nuisance ordinance, and the standards stated below. Amplified
sound is only allowed for an RSA in the CB-10 zone upon receipt of a seasonal
temporary use permit, unless it is accessory to a hospitality oriented use.
Permits for amplified sound are subject to the standards and restrictions set
forth below and the general approval criteria for temporary uses as set forth
in article D of this chapter. A temporary use permit may be denied or rescinded
at the discretion of the city if noise becomes a nuisance or terms of the
temporary use permit or the special exception conditions are violated.
            (1)   If an RSA is located within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential zone, amplified sound is prohibited;
            (2)   The city may restrict the hours when amplified sound may be
used. However, in no case shall amplified sound be permitted between the hours
of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.;
            (3)   No live entertainment using amplification shall be allowed;
            (4)   Amplified sound may be restricted or prohibited during public
events, festivals or concerts;
            (5)   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
city that the design of the RSA will minimize carry of noise across property
boundaries. Use of specialized screen wall materials, sound deadening
techniques, control of volume, or similar may be required.
      2.   Additional Special Exception Approval Criteria For Nonconforming
Drinking Establishments: An RSA accessory to a nonconforming drinking
establishment may be allowed by special exception provided it meets the general
approval criteria for special exceptions set forth in section
14-4B-3 of this chapter, the approval criteria stated above for all RSAs and
the additional approval criteria listed below:
         a.   The RSA shall be located directly above and contiguous to the
licensed drinking establishment. Contiguous means there may not be other uses
located on floors in between the drinking establishment and the accessory RSA.
         b.   There shall be no horizontal expansion of the licensed drinking
establishment, except as allowed per
14-4E-5G;
         c.   There shall be no increase in interior floor area or interior
occupant load of the existing drinking establishment, except if necessary for
required bathrooms, elevator, stairs, kitchen equipment, or other essential
elements necessary to meet accessibility, building code requirements or to meet
the requirements or conditions of the special exception, or except as allowed
per
14-4E-5G. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 12-
4497, 10-2-2012; Ord. 12-4503, 12-4-2012; Ord. 13-4550, 9-17-2013; Ord. 14-
4587, 6-3-2014; Ord. 14-4595, 8-19-2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; Ord. 16-4675,
9-20-2016; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020; Ord. 21-4856, 5-
18-2021; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4917, 11-21-
2023)
14-4C-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following development standards help to ensure that accessory structures
and buildings remain secondary to the principal uses and buildings on a site.
The standards provide for necessary access around structures, help maintain
privacy to abutting lots, and maintain open front setback areas. In addition to
any requirements in the base zone and any specific approval criteria in section
14-4C-2 of this article, accessory structures are subject to the following
requirements:
   A.   Time Of Construction: Accessory structures may not be constructed prior
to the start of construction of the principal building on a site; except, that
temporary construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site
clearance and grading begins and may remain on the site only for the duration
of construction.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Accessory Structures Other Than Buildings: Allowed accessory
structures, other than buildings, may be located anywhere on a lot, provided
the structure complies with any specific setback standards listed in section
14-4C-2 of this article, and provided that on corner lots, such a structure is
located in compliance with the provisions of
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
      2.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
         a.   Corner Lot Setback Requirements: On corner lots, detached
accessory buildings must be located in compliance with the provisions of
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
         b.   Front Setback Requirements:
            (1)   Except for roadside stands, detached accessory buildings must
comply with the principal building, front setback requirements of the base zone
in which the building is located. Roadside stands, when allowed, are exempt
from this requirement. In addition, garages and carports must comply with
subsections B2b(2) and B2b(3) of this section.
            (2)   Garages and carports must be located pursuant to the site
development standards of the applicable base zone.
            (3)   For single-family and two-family uses, a garage or carport
must be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from any street- side lot line
that the garage or carport entrance faces. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
         c.   Side And Rear Setback Requirements:
            (1)   Residential Zones:
               (A)   Along street-side lot lines, accessory buildings must
comply with the front, principal building setback requirement. Along side or
rear lot lines that are not street-side lot lines, accessory buildings must be
set back at least five feet (5') from the side or rear lot line. This five foot
(5') setback requirement may be reduced if an accessory building is set back at
least sixty feet (60') from the edge of the street pavement. In such cases, the
building may be located within three feet (3') of a side or rear property line.
However, garages and carports entered directly from an alley must be set back
at least five feet (5') from the alley right-of-way line, regardless of how far
back the structure is from the street.
               (B)   A detached accessory building for a zero lot line dwelling
must comply with the same side setback requirements as the principal dwelling.
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
            (2)   Nonresidential Zones: Along street-side lot lines, accessory
buildings must comply with the front, principal building setback requirement.
Along side or rear lot lines that are not street- side lot lines, detached
accessory buildings do not have a required side or rear setback, unless the
detached building is a parking garage that is accessed from an alley. In such a
case, the garage must be set back at least five feet (5') from the alley right-
of-way line.
      3.   Attached Accessory Buildings:
         a.   An attached accessory building must comply with the setback
requirements applicable to the principal building to which it is attached. In
addition, attached garages and carports must comply with subsections B3b and
B3c of this section.
         b.   Attached garages and carports must be located pursuant to the
site development standards of the base zone.
         c.   For single-family and two-family uses, a garage or carport must
be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from any street- side lot line that
the garage or carport entrance faces. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
         d.   For purposes of determining setbacks, garages located in the rear
yard and attached to the principal dwelling with a (non- habitable) breezeway
(8 feet or narrower in width) will be considered detached accessory buildings
and, therefore, are subject to the setback requirements for detached accessory
buildings, rather than principal building setback requirements. Similarly,
subject breezeways shall be treated as detached accessory structures/buildings.
(Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
      4.   Adjustments To Setback Requirements:
         a.   A minor modification to reduce setback requirements for an
accessory use, building, or structure may be requested according to the
approval criteria and procedures for minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
         b.   A special exception may be requested to reduce setback
requirements for an accessory use, building, or structure beyond what is
allowed by minor modification. The Board of Adjustment may adjust setback
requirements if the owner or lawful occupant of a property demonstrates that
the general special exception approval criteria and the following specific
approval criteria have been satisfied:
            (1)   The situation is peculiar to the property in question;
            (2)   There is practical difficulty in complying with the setback
requirements;
            (3)   Granting the exception will not be contrary to the purpose of
the setback regulations; and
            (4)   Any potential negative effects resulting from the setback
exception are mitigated to the extent practical.
            (5)   The accessory use, building or structure will be located no
closer than three feet (3') to a side or rear property line, unless the side or
rear property line abuts a public right-of-way or permanent open space.
   C.   Building Separation And Lot Coverage:
      1.   In residential zones, the combined footprint of all detached
accessory buildings may not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area.
The area of any outdoor special vehicle storage area must also be included as a
part of this fifteen percent (15%) lot coverage limitation.
      2.   No portion of a detached accessory building may be located closer
than three feet (3') to the principal building.
      3.   There must be at least three feet (3') between all unattached
accessory buildings.
   D.   Height:
      1.   In residential zones, one story accessory buildings and structures,
except for those specifically exempted, may not exceed a height of fifteen feet
(15'). One and one-half (11/2) story and two (2) story accessory buildings may
not exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
      2.   In nonresidential zones, accessory buildings and structures, except
for those specifically exempted, may not exceed the maximum height standard of
the base zone in which the structure is located.
      3.   Structures and building features that are exempt from the maximum
height standards of the base zone are also exempt from the applicable height
standards listed in subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
      4.   A minor modification may be requested adjusting the maximum height
for an accessory building according to the procedures and approval criteria for
minor modifications contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. TEMPORARY USES
SECTION:
14-4D-1: Purpose
14-4D-2: Temporary Uses Allowed
14-4D-3: Permit Required
14-4D-4: Approval Criteria
14-4D-5: Conditions Of Approval
14-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the temporary use regulations is to allow short term and minor
deviations from the requirements of this title for uses which are truly
temporary in nature, will not adversely impact the surrounding area and land
uses, and which can be terminated and removed immediately. Temporary activities
are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and by the fact that
permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses have no
inherent rights within the zone in which they locate. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-4D-2: TEMPORARY USES ALLOWED:
The following temporary principal and accessory uses are allowed, subject to
approval by the building official through the temporary use permit process
described in this article and any conditions specified herein:
Christmas tree sales lots; however, a permit is not required when such sales
are in conjunction with an established commercial business, provided such
activity occurs only from November 1 through December 31.
Circuses, rodeos and carnivals.
Construction activities pursuant to a valid building permit that temporarily
violate the performance standards contained in
chapter 5, article H of this title.
Fairs, festivals and concerts, when not held within premises designed to
accommodate these types of events, such as auditoriums, stadiums, or other
public assembly facilities.
Football game day commercial use.
Halloween haunted houses for fifteen (15) to forty five (45) days, one event
per year.
On and off site contractors' construction yards in conjunction with an approved
development project.
Outdoor display and sale of first-class and/or second-class consumer fireworks,
as defined by the American Pyrotechnics Association, according to the
restrictions and dates of sale set forth in title 661 Iowa Administrative Code
chapter 265, Consumer Fireworks Sales Licensing and Safety Standards. Outdoor
display and sales of such fireworks are only allowed in industrial zones.
Outdoor display and sales of merchandise within commercial districts, including
merchandise customarily sold on the premises by a permanently established
business.
"Outdoor service area", as defined in title 4 of this Code, operated in
conjunction with a licensed establishment that is a nonconforming eating
establishment, an eating establishment allowed pursuant to a Residential
Planned Development Overlay Zone, or an eating establishment located in the
Mixed Use Zone.
Real estate sales centers and model homes, provided the center or use of a home
as a model is discontinued when the number of dwelling units remaining to be
sold is less than ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units
approved for the development or five (5) units, whichever is less. Employees at
the approved real estate center are limited to the minimum number necessary to
show and sell the dwelling units within the same development. The hours of
operation are limited to the hours between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Seasonal permit for any proposed amplified sound for rooftop service areas
(RSAs) located in the Central Business District (CB-10), subject to the
standards and restrictions set forth in subsection
14-4C-2AA, "Rooftop Service Areas (RSAs)", of this chapter, and any other
conditions deemed appropriate by the City to ensure the general comfort,
welfare and safety of the public.
Seasonal permit for limited use of amplified background music in outdoor
service areas associated with eating or drinking establishments located in the
Riverfront Crossings - South Gilbert (RFC-SG) or Riverfront Crossings - West
Riverfront (RFC-WR) Zones, according to the approval criteria set forth in
section
14-4D-4 of this article and any associated conditions deemed appropriate by the
City to advance the purpose of the approval criteria.
Temporary auto sales lots.
Temporary parking areas in conjunction with a permitted use.
Other temporary uses which, in the determination of the building official, are
compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011; Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015;
Ord. 17-4694, 3-7-2017; Ord. 17-4732, 11-21-2017)
14-4D-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A temporary use permit is required for all temporary uses listed in section
14-4D-2 of this article, unless specifically exempted. Tailgating and tailgate
parking held on home Iowa football game days do not require a temporary use
permit. Procedures for obtaining a permit are contained in
chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
(Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011)
14-4D-4: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A temporary use permit will be approved, approved with conditions, or denied by
the building official within ten (10) business days after submittal of a
complete application. A temporary use must meet the following approval
criteria:
   A.   The proposed use is temporary or seasonal in nature and will not
continue for more than the time period specified in the application. Except for
temporary uses specifically approved for longer periods, such as model homes or
real estate sales offices, temporary uses must not continue for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days for outdoor temporary uses or one year for temporary
uses within a building;
   B.   The proposed temporary use will not necessitate permanent improvements
to the site;
   C.   The site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of the
proposed use;
   D.   The proposed temporary use is compatible with the land uses presently
on the site and with existing land uses in the general area;
   E.   There is adequate provision for public and private utilities and
services to ensure that the proposed temporary use will not be detrimental to
public health and safety;
   F.   There is adequate provision for public and emergency access to serve
the proposed temporary use; and
   G.   Any impacts of the proposed temporary use are mitigated. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
   H.   Football game day commercial use:
      1.   Display Permit: Vendors must prominently display the permit and it
must be clearly viewable from the public right-of-way.
      2.   Assignment And Use By Others: A vendor may not assign its space/
permit to any other vendors.
      3.   Location: Vendors are only allowed to locate along the Melrose
Avenue street frontage between the Iowa Interstate Railway right- of-way and
Melrose Circle.
      4.   Setup/Teardown: Vendors are not allowed to set up before ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. the day before game day and must tear down/remove all equipment
and materials after each game.
      5.   Cleanup Responsibility: All vendors must keep any area where they
vend litter free and shall remove litter from any adjacent public property/
right-of-way. Vendors shall provide a trash container with unfilled capacity at
all times. Vendors with liquid waste (oil, grease, gray water, etc.) must
provide disposal units for the waste. Commercial liquid waste shall not be
placed in gutters, port-a-johns or on the ground.
      6.   No Blocking Of Sidewalk/Right-Of-Way: No vendor shall block or
obstruct the free movement of pedestrians or vehicles on a sidewalk, street, or
other public right-of-way. Tents/stands must be set back at least two feet (2')
from the back edge of public sidewalks.
      7.   Signage: Vendor signage is only allowed on the vendor's stand/
vehicle/tent and is not allowed on utility poles across the public sidewalk, on
buildings or as yard signs. No electrically lit signs will be allowed.
      8.   Sales Tax Permit: Each vendor whose sales are subject to sales tax
must provide a copy of their sales tax permit.
      9.   Insurance/Indemnification: All vendors must provide to the city
evidence of comprehensive general liability insurance of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
aggregate and must indemnify the city against all damages that may result from
the vendor's permitted temporary commercial use and/or the vendor's use of the
public right of way.
      10.   Fire Extinguishers: All vendors must provide at least one 5-pound,
2A 10 BC extinguisher that is functional and accessible at all times.
      11.   Health Permits: All food vendors must secure necessary health
permits from the Johnson County department of health and prominently display
the permit so it is clearly viewable from the public right of way.
      12.   Cooking Tents: All tents used for cooking (regardless of size) must
be approved by the fire code/building official. Cooking tents will be required
to be separated from other tents, parked vehicles and lot lines. LP containers
exceeding ninety six (96) pounds require approval from the fire code/building
official.
      13.   Tent Size: All tents and membrane structures having an area in
excess of four hundred (400) square feet shall not be erected or operated for
any purpose without first obtaining approval from the fire code/building
official.
      14.   Alcohol: No alcohol is allowed to be sold, dispensed or otherwise
made available to the public in conjunction with any temporary commercial use.
      15.   Utility Location: Any tents and membrane structures using stakes or
similar ground attachments must call the city for utility location at least
twenty four (24) hours before setup. Vendors must comply with "One Call"
utility location requirements.
      16.   Violation Of These Provisions: Any violation of the temporary use
permit conditions will result in a civil citation and loss of the temporary
commercial use permit for a minimum of seven (7) home games. The city also
reserves the right to deny a temporary use permit for the same location for a
minimum of seven (7) home games. (Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011)
   I.   Where an outdoor service area is allowed only as a temporary use
pursuant to this article, a temporary use permit may be granted upon
satisfaction of the following additional approval criteria:
      1.   The outdoor service area is operated in conjunction with a
"restaurant" as defined in title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of this code.
      2.   The outdoor service area shall only be operational while the
establishment is serving food from an on premises kitchen and the outdoor
service area must be closed to all patrons by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or when
the kitchen is closed, whichever is earlier.
      3.   The outdoor service area occupancy limit shall not exceed thirty
(30) persons.
      4.   A lighting plan for the outdoor service shall be filed with the
application and approved by the building official.
      5.   The outdoor service area is located on the street facing side of the
building, or in an enclosed courtyard.
      6.   Conformance with all other criteria in title 4, "Alcoholic
Beverages", of this code. (Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014)
   J.   Where amplified sound is allowed in an outdoor service area as a
temporary use pursuant to section
14-4D-2 of this article, a temporary use permit may be granted upon
satisfaction of the following additional approval criteria and shall be
operated accordingly:
      1.   Amplified sound is only allowed if the outdoor service area is
located more than three hundred feet (300') from any residential zone.
      2.   Amplified sound shall be limited to background music intended to
enhance the outdoor dining experience associated with an eating or drinking
establishment and therefore should be kept at a low volume that will not
inhibit normal conversation within the outdoor service area and will minimize
carry to areas outside the outdoor service area.
      3.   Amplified background music is only allowed if the outdoor service
area is located more than one hundred feet (100') from any other outdoor
service area, unless it can be demonstrated that the amplified sound from the
outdoor service area is not audible within the other outdoor service area.
      4.   The city may restrict the hours when amplified sound may be used.
However, in no case shall amplified sound be permitted between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
      5.   Amplified sound may be restricted or prohibited during public
events, festivals or concerts.
      6.   The applicant must submit a sound mitigation plan in accordance with
subsection
4-3-1C5 of this code.
      7.   Live entertainment, movies, DJs, or presentations using
amplification are not allowed under this permit. A separate temporary use
permit is required for these types of special events. (Ord. 17-4694, 3-7-2017)
14-4D-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the building official
may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the permit
will be in accordance with the approval criteria required by this article and
to satisfy public needs directly caused by the proposed temporary use. These
conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of such
temporary event or use, and may include, but are not limited to: (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
   A.   Provision for a fixed period of time, not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days, for a temporary use not occupying a structure, including
promotional activities; or one year for outdoor service areas, all other uses,
and structures; or for a shorter period of time as determined by the building
official; (Ord. 14-4594, 8-19-2014)
   B.   Provision for temporary parking facilities, including vehicular ingress
and egress and appropriate circulation. Parking required for temporary and
principal commercial uses may be reduced up to ten percent (10%) if sufficient
evidence is presented that parking will be adequate to meet the demand for the
proposed temporary use and any permanent uses on the site;
   C.   Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, prevention
of glare, light trespass, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, or
heat that create a nuisance or safety hazard for neighboring properties;
   D.   Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement,
height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas
and other yards;
   E.   Provision for sanitary and medical facilities;
   F.   Provision for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection and disposal;
   G.   Provision for security and safety measures;
   H.   Provision for regulation of signs;
   I.   Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the
duration of the temporary use;
   J.   Submission of a performance bond or other surety device to ensure that
any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site
within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be
restored to its former condition;
   K.   A requirement that the approval of the requested temporary use permit
is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of the federal, state
and city codes; and
   L.   Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed
temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the
intent and purpose of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
SECTION:
14-4E-1: Purpose
14-4E-2: Types Of Nonconforming Situations
14-4E-3: General Provisions And Restrictions
14-4E-4: Nonconforming Single-Family Uses
14-4E-5: Regulation Of Nonconforming Uses
14-4E-6: Regulation Of Nonconforming Structures
14-4E-7: Regulation Of Nonconforming Lots
14-4E-8: Regulation Of Nonconforming Development
14-4E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming situations.
Nonconforming situations are created when the zoning designation is changed or
the zoning regulations are changed such that an existing lawfully established
use, structure, lot, or development no longer complies with the zoning
regulations. The intent of these regulations is not to force all nonconforming
situations to be immediately brought into conformance. Rather, the intent is to
guide future uses and development in a direction consistent with City policy,
to protect the character of an area by reducing the potential negative impacts
from nonconforming situations, and, over time, to bring development into
compliance with the City's regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-2: TYPES OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
   A.   Nonconforming Use: A "nonconforming use" is a use that, when
established, was a permitted use, was allowed as a provisional use, or was
approved as a special exception, but which subsequently, due to a change in the
zone or to the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer allowed. This
definition includes residential uses that exceed the allowable residential
density of a zone (minimum lot area per unit requirements) and uses that exceed
the maximum floor area ratio or maximum floor area standards specified for a
particular use or zone.
   B.   Nonconforming Structure: A "nonconforming structure" is a structure or
portion of a structure that was established in conformance with the setback,
building height, building width, lot coverage standards, or other requirements
or standards of the Zoning Code that relate to the design of the building or
structure, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the
requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in conformance with one or more
of these standards.
   C.   Nonconforming Development: "Nonconforming development" is an element of
a development, such as a parking area, a loading area, outdoor lighting,
landscaping, screening, or signage, that was established in conformance with
the Zoning Code, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to the
requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in conformance with the current
applicable standards.
   D.   Nonconforming Lot: A "nonconforming lot" is a lot of record that was
established in conformance with the minimum lot area, width, and frontage
requirement of the Zoning Code, but which subsequently, due to a change in the
zone or the requirements of the Zoning Code, is no longer in conformance with
one or more of these requirements. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Continuation Of Nonconforming Situations: Legal nonconforming
situations are allowed to continue in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
   B.   Continuance Of Unlawful Uses: Nothing in this article shall be
interpreted as authorization for the continuance of the use of a structure or
land established unlawfully in violation of the regulations in effect at the
time that the use or structure was established.
   C.   Determination Of Nonconforming Status: The burden of establishing that
a nonconforming situation is a legal nonconforming situation rests solely upon
the owner of such nonconformity.
   D.   Repairs And Maintenance: Incidental repairs and routine maintenance of
a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure is permitted unless such repairs
increase the extent of nonconformity or are otherwise expressly prohibited by
provisions of this title. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent
structures from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition
in accordance with an official order of a public official. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-4E-4: NONCONFORMING SINGLE-FAMILY USES:
Except with regard to the occupancy, any single-family use, structure for a
single-family use, including any accessory structures, and any lot on which a
single-family use is located, that was established lawfully prior to the
establishment of the currently applicable development regulations and, due to a
change in the regulations, is no longer in conformance with the provisions of
this title, will generally be treated as conforming for as long as the dwelling
is used for a single-family use. Accordingly, the following rights are granted
under this article:
   A.   A nonconforming single-family use may be reestablished and its
structure reconstructed if the structure for the nonconforming single-family
use is destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public
enemy.
   B.   A nonconforming single-family use may also be expanded, repaired and
structurally altered, provided such expansion or alteration does not increase
or extend any other nonconforming situation on the property. However, if a
nonconforming single- family use is changed in order to increase the occupancy
beyond that of a family or group household, the property must be brought into
full compliance with the number of required off street parking spaces.
   C.   A nonconforming structure that contains a single-family use may be
restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by
fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy. Such a structure may also be
repaired or structurally altered, provided such construction does not increase
or extend the degree of nonconformity and does not increase or extend any other
nonconforming situation on the property.
   D.   A nonconforming accessory structure to a single-family use may be
restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by
fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy. Such a structure may also be
repaired and structurally altered, provided such construction does not increase
or extend the degree of nonconformity and does not increase or extend any other
nonconforming situation on the property.
   E.   A nonconforming lot that contains a single-family use is granted the
same rights as listed in subsections A, B and C of this section, and will be
treated as if the lot were conforming. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-5: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, nonconforming uses shall be
regulated as follows:
   A.   Enlargement Or Alteration:
      1.   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, except as set forth in
this section.
      2.   A structure that contains or is accessory to a nonconforming use
shall not be constructed or altered in such a way as to enlarge the
nonconforming use.
      3.   Ordinary repair, maintenance, and remodeling are allowed as long as
the nonconforming use is not enlarged. For purposes of this provision, changes
made to provide safe access to a building for persons with disabilities is not
considered an enlargement.
   B.   Change Of Use:
      1.   A nonconforming use may be converted only to another use in the same
use category and subgroup or to a conforming use, except as provided in
subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a
nonconforming use, which is located in a structure not designed for a use
allowed in the zone, to be converted to a nonconforming use in a different use
category or subgroup that is the same or lesser in intensity than the existing
use, provided the following conditions are met:
         a.   The proposed use will be located in a structure that was designed
for a use that is currently not allowed in the zone, for example a storefront
commercial building located in a single- family residential zone.
         b.   The proposed use is of the same or lesser level of intensity and
impact than the existing use. The Board of Adjustment will make a determination
regarding the relative intensity of the proposed use by weighing evidence
presented by the applicant with regard to such factors as anticipated traffic
generation, parking demand, hours of operation, residential occupancy, noise,
dust, and customer and/or resident activity. The Board of Adjustment may also
consider qualitative factors such as whether a proposed use will serve an
identified need in the surrounding neighborhood.
         c.   The proposed use is suitable for the subject structure and site.
         d.   The structure will not be structurally altered or enlarged in
such a way as to enlarge the nonconforming use. Ordinary repair and maintenance
and installation or relocation of walls, partitions, fixtures, wiring, and
plumbing is allowed, as long as the use is not enlarged.
      3.   Once a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, it may
not be converted back to a nonconforming use.
      4.   Once a nonconforming use is converted to a less intensive
nonconforming use in accordance with subsection B2 of this section, it may not
be converted back to the prior nonconforming use.
      5.   A use is deemed "converted" when an existing nonconforming use is
terminated and a new use commences and continues for a period of seven (7)
consecutive days.
   C.   Occupancy Of A Nonconforming Use: (Rep. by Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018)
   D.   Accessory Uses:
      1.   A nonconforming use is permitted to have the same amount and type of
signage as would be allowed for such a use in the most restrictive zone in
which the use is allowed.
      2.   No use, including parking and signage, that is accessory to a
principal nonconforming use shall continue after the principal use has ceased
or been terminated unless the accessory use thereafter conforms to all
provisions of this title.
   E.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   Any structure for a nonconforming use which has been destroyed or
damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of
less than seventy five percent (75%) of the assessed value of the structure at
the time of damage or destruction, may be restored for the same nonconforming
use as existed before such damage. However, the nonconforming use must not be
enlarged to more than what existed before such damage occurred. Any such
restoration must be completed within two (2) years of the date the structure
was destroyed or damaged; otherwise, the property must revert to a conforming
use.
      2.   A lot or portion of a lot upon which is located a structure for a
nonconforming use, or other unpermitted use, that has been previously
established and in existence for over twenty five (25) years that has been
destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the
extent of seventy five percent (75%) or more of the assessed value of the
structure at the time of damage or destruction, must revert to a conforming
use, unless a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment according
to the provisions of subsection E4 of this section. The provisions for a
special exception as outlined in subsection E4 of this section shall not apply
or be available to a nonconforming or illegal residential occupancy.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, the extent of the damage will be
determined by the building official based on credible evidence provided by the
property owner.
      4.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for uses
detailed in subsection E2 of this section provided the following conditions are
met:
         a.   An application for the special exception to restore the use must
be filed with the City within one year of the date the structure was destroyed
or damaged; and
         b.   The restored structure for the use may be redesigned or located
on the property in order to increase the compatibility with surrounding uses,
but neither the structure nor use may be enlarged beyond what existed before
such damage or destruction occurred; and
         c.   Prior to the damage or destruction, the intensity of the use and
the activities, operations, buildings and other aspects of the use were
generally compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; and
         d.   The proposal for the restored use will be equally or more
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood as was the use prior to the damage
or destruction. The Board of Adjustment may consider such factors as traffic
generation, parking, hours of operation, noise, dust, aesthetics, screening,
amount of customer traffic; number of employees, residents, or occupants of a
building or business; and any other factors that relate to the compatibility of
the nonconforming or previously established use with the surrounding
neighborhood and uses; and
         e.   Once restored/rebuilt, the nonconforming or previously
established unpermitted use will retain or be conferred nonconforming status.
The Board of Adjustment may impose additional conditions such that the
conference of nonconforming status is limited.
   F.   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: Except as allowed in subsection E,
G, and H of this section, a nonconforming use that is discontinued for a period
of one year must revert to a conforming use or, in qualifying situations, a
special exception may be applied for according to the provisions of subsection
B of this section.
   G.   Nonconforming Drinking Establishments And Alcohol Sales Oriented Retail
Uses: In addition to the other provisions in this section, the following
provisions apply to nonconforming drinking establishments and nonconforming
alcohol sales oriented retail uses:
      1.   Any "drinking establishment", as defined in this title, that was
legally established prior to the effective date hereof and that is
nonconforming with regard to the separation requirement between said uses, as
specified in this title, may continue unless one or both of the following
situations occur. If one or both of these conditions occur, then nonconforming
rights cease and the use must convert to a conforming use:
         a.   The liquor license lapses, is revoked or is discontinued, or the
drinking establishment ceases operation, for a period of one year, except
where:
            (1)   The drinking establishment is located on property with a
Historic District Overlay (OHD) zone; and
            (2)   The drinking establishment is in a building that has remained
vacant for the previous two (2) consecutive years.
         b.   There has been a change of use as defined in Section
14-4E-5B.
      2.   Any "alcohol sales oriented retail use", as defined in this title,
that was legally established prior to the effective date hereof that is
nonconforming with regard to the separation requirement between said uses, as
specified in this title, may continue unless one or both of the following
situations occur. If one or both of these conditions occur, then nonconforming
rights cease and the use must convert to a conforming use:
         a.   The liquor license lapses, is revoked or is discontinued for a
period of one year; or
         b.   There are changes to the use such that the use no longer meets
the definition of "alcohol sales oriented retail use".
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, sidewalk cafes shall not be
considered an expansion of a nonconforming use. (Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009)
      4.   Nonconforming drinking establishments may expand as follows:
         a.   To include a rooftop service area upon approval of a special
exception pursuant to the criteria set forth in article C, "Accessory Uses And
Buildings", of this chapter; and
      b.   Where a nonconforming drinking establishment meeting the standards
of
14-4E-5G-1a expands into property with a Historic District Overlay (OHD) zone
that has remained vacant for the previous two (2) consecutive years.
      5.   Nonconforming drinking establishments may connect to a sales-
oriented retail use so long as the following criteria are satisfied. At the
sole discretion of the Chief of the Police, repeated violations of Iowa Code
Chapter 123 or City Code Section
4-5-5 shall be grounds for temporary or permanent closure of the door, thereby
prohibiting access between the two uses.
         a.   The door connecting the two uses shall meet the same fire-
resistive rating as the wall separating the two uses and be ADA-compliant;
         b.   A notice, in a form and location approved by the City, shall be
posted at the door informing patrons that open containers of alcohol are
prohibited in the sales-oriented retail use pursuant to Iowa City Code Section
4-5-5; and
         c.   The holder of a liquor control license or wine or beer permit
must provide staff of sufficient number and capability to monitor all patrons
to prevent such violations.
   H.   Nonconforming Tobacco Sales Oriented Uses: In addition to the other
provisions in this section, the following provisions apply to nonconforming
tobacco sales oriented uses:
      1.   Any "tobacco sales oriented uses", as defined in this title, that
was legally established prior to the effective date hereof and that is
nonconforming with regard to separation distances required under this title,
may continue unless any of the following conditions occur. If any of these
conditions occur, then nonconforming rights cease and the use must convert to a
conforming use:
         a.   The tobacco permit is revoked; or
         b.   The tobacco permit lapses or is discontinued for a period of
sixty (60) days or more; or
         c.   The tobacco sales oriented use ceases for a period of ninety (90)
days or more; or
         d.   There has been a change of use as defined in Section
14-4E-5 B.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-2009; Ord. 13-4542, 8-20-
2013; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; Ord. 21-4856, 5-18-2021; Ord. 22-4881, 6-6-2022;
Ord. 24-4941, 12-10-2024)
14-4E-6: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Enlargement Or Alteration:
      1.   A nonconforming structure may be structurally altered or enlarged,
provided it is structurally altered or enlarged in a way that will not increase
or extend its nonconformity.
      2.   Any nonconforming structure that is relocated on the same lot must
thereafter conform to the applicable setback, building height, building width,
and lot coverage standards.
   B.   Change Of Use:
      1.   Any nonconforming structure containing a conforming use may be
converted to another conforming use, provided the conversion does not result in
an increase in the degree of nonconformity of the structure.
      2.   Any nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use may only
be converted to another use in accordance with the provisions of section
14-4E-5, "Regulation Of Nonconforming Uses", of this article, and provided the
conversion does not result in an increase in the degree of nonconformity of the
structure. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   C.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   Any nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged by
fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the assessed value of the structure, may be
restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less. Any such restoration must
be completed within two (2) years of the date the structure was destroyed or
damaged; otherwise the structure may not be restored, except in compliance with
the provisions of this title.
      2.   Except for designated historic landmarks or key or contributing
structures in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, a nonconforming structure
that has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a
public enemy to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or more of the
assessed value of the structure, may not be restored except in compliance with
the provisions of this title.
      3.   A nonconforming structure that is a designated historic landmark or
a key or contributing structure in a historic preservation or conservation
district overlay zone may be reconstructed upon its original foundation or the
site of the original foundation regardless of the extent of the damages,
provided it is reconstructed as nearly as possible to the original exterior
design. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation
commission is required prior to commencing reconstruction.
      4.   For purposes of this subsection, the extent of the damage will be
determined by the building official based on credible evidence provided by the
property owner. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-4E-7: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   Any conforming use or structure for a conforming use may be established
or installed on a lot of record that is nonconforming with regard to lot
frontage or lot width, provided the minimum lot area required for the use is
met, and provided the use or structure meets all other requirements of this
title.
   B.   Any use or structure for a use, either one of which requires more lot
area than presently exists, is prohibited, except as provided in subsection C
of this section.
   C.   In any zone in which single-family uses are permitted, a single-family
use and accessory structures may be established on any lot of record,
notwithstanding failure to meet the minimum lot area requirement of the zone in
which the lot is located.
   D.   All existing conforming and nonconforming uses and structures located
on a nonconforming lot will be treated as if such uses and structures were
established on a conforming lot. However, no use or structure for a use, either
one of which requires more lot area than presently exists and the structure of
which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by a
public enemy to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or more of the
assessed value of the structure, shall be restored, except in compliance with
the provisions of this title.
   E.   If two (2) or more abutting lots (or portions thereof), one or more of
which are nonconforming, become in single ownership, the land involved shall be
deemed a single parcel for the purposes of this article, and no portion of said
parcel shall be sold or used in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot
frontage, width and area requirements, except as allowed in subsection F of
this section by special exception.
   F.   In cases where two (2) or more abutting lots of record have become in
single ownership and are deemed a single parcel as set forth in subsection E of
this section, the board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
reestablish a lot of record previously combined with an adjacent lot in order
to allow a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings to be installed on
said lot, notwithstanding a failure to meet the requirements of the zone for
lot area or lot width, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   Granting of the requested exception results in appropriate,
compatible development with surrounding residential development;
      2.   The dwelling must be located on a lot of record that is at least
forty feet (40') in width; and
      3.   The request meets all other standards and requirements of this
title, including setback and frontage requirements. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-4E-8: REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Conversion: Except as otherwise restricted, prohibited or allowed in
this article, a use or structure located on a lot that contains nonconforming
development may be converted to a different use or altered, provided such
change in use or alteration does not increase or extend the nonconformity and
provided the applicable compliance standards listed in this section are met.
(Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
      2.   Alterations: When structural alterations are made to a building or
buildings on a property that contains nonconforming development, and said
structural alterations result in an increase in the occupancy load of a
building or increase the number of bedrooms, number of dwelling units, or
otherwise increase the allowable residential occupancy of a building, the site
must be brought into conformance with the development standards listed in
subsection A2b of this section, up to the cap stated in subsection A2c of this
section. Certain structural alterations are exempt from the requirements of
this paragraph as listed in subsection A2a of this section.
         a.   Exemptions: Improvements for fire, life safety and accessibility
shall not trigger a requirement to bring nonconforming development into
compliance.
         b.   Standards That Must Be Met: Development not in compliance with
the development standards listed below must be brought into conformance or be
granted a minor modification. Requirements or standards that would not be
feasible or practical or would unduly reduce the ability to use or reuse the
property due to topography, location of existing buildings, or other site
constraints, may be modified or waived by minor modification. The city, at its
discretion, may also waive or modify by minor modification any standards that
cannot be met due to a conflict with any other requirement of this title.
            (1)   Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas,
and outdoor storage and display areas along street side lot lines according to
the applicable screening standard. Setback requirements may be modified to
address site constraints;
            (2)   Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas,
and outdoor storage and display areas from the Iowa River or from any parks and
open space use, including trails, according to the applicable screening
standard. Setback requirements may be modified to address site constraints;
            (3)   Outdoor lighting standards;
            (4)   Bicycle parking requirements;
            (5)   Street and residential tree requirements;
            (6)   Design, layout, landscaping, and tree requirements within
parking areas;
            (7)   Pedestrian circulation standards;
            (8)   Screening of existing parking, loading, vehicular use areas,
and outdoor storage and display areas along side or rear lot lines. Setback
requirements may be modified to address site constraints;
            (9)   Access management standards.
         c.   Cap On The Cost Of Compliance: The standards listed in subsection
A2b of this section must be met for the entire site. However, where the cost of
compliance with the standards enumerated in subsection A2b of this section
exceeds ten percent (10%) of the value of the applicable structural
alterations, the site shall be brought into compliance with all site
development standards up to this ten percent (10%) cap. The value of the
alterations is based on the entire project, not individual building permits. It
is the responsibility of the applicant to document that the cost of the
required site development improvements will be greater than ten percent (10%)
of the value of the proposed structural alterations to the building or
buildings on the site. If not all site improvements are being made, due to the
cost exceeding the cap, the extent and location of the site improvements below
the cap will be determined by the city and shall generally follow the order of
priority listed in subsection A2b of this section. However, at the discretion
of the city, the order of priorities may be adjusted in response to specific
site characteristics and traffic safety concerns in order to maximize the
benefits of site improvements for site users, adjacent properties, and the
public.
      3.   Damaged, Demolished Or Destroyed Site:
         a.   Restoration of a structure, which has been damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God or by a public enemy shall not trigger a requirement to
bring nonconforming development into compliance.
         b.   When a use is proposed for a property where the principal
building(s) have been demolished or destroyed, but that contains nonconforming
development, such as parking lot paving, exterior lighting, signage, etc., the
property must be brought into compliance with all applicable site development
standards as set forth in the base zone and in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord.
13-4519, 4-9-2013)
      4.   New Site Development On Sites With Nonconforming Site Development:
Any new site elements being constructed or established on the site, such as new
exterior lighting, new parking areas, new outdoor storage or display areas, new
signage, etc., must comply with current applicable standards.
      5.   Reconstruction Or Reestablishment Of Site Development: Any
nonconforming site elements that are being reconstructed or reestablished must
be brought into compliance with the current applicable standards. However,
requirements or standards that would not be feasible or practical or would
unduly reduce the ability to use or reuse the property due to topography,
location of existing buildings, or other site constraints may be modified or
waived by minor modification. The city may also waive or modify by minor
modification any standard that cannot be met due to a conflict with any other
requirement of this title.
   B.   Nonconformities With Regard To The Number Of Parking And Loading
Spaces:
      1.   If a nonresidential use, which is nonconforming with regard to the
required number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces, is modified, expanded
or enlarged such that there is an increase in the number of required spaces
over the existing situation, only the number of spaces relating to the
modification, expansion or enlargement need to be provided. These spaces are in
addition to any spaces already in existence on the site.
      2.   If a residential use, which is nonconforming with regard to the
required number of parking, stacking, or loading spaces, is changed in any way
such that there is an increase in the number of required spaces over the
existing situation, the property must be brought into full compliance with the
number of spaces required.
      3.   A use that is nonconforming with regard to the required number of
parking, stacking, or loading spaces may be converted to a use in another use
category or subgroup without full compliance with the number of parking,
stacking, or loading spaces, according to the following rules:
         a.   If the number of required spaces for the converted use is more
than what was required for the established use, only the number of spaces
beyond what was required for the established use need to be provided. These
spaces are in addition to any spaces already in existence on the site.
         b.   In addition to any additional spaces required in subsection B3a
of this section, as many spaces as the lot will accommodate must be provided,
up to the number needed to fully comply with the standard.
   C.   Nonconforming Signs: It is the intent of these provisions that
nonconforming signs be eliminated over time as set forth below:
      1.   All lawfully established signs that become nonconforming due to a
change in zoning or a change in the development regulations are permitted to
remain as nonconforming signs.
      2.   The owner of a nonconforming sign is required to maintain the sign
in such a manner as to avoid it becoming a hazardous sign.
      3.   Other than for routine maintenance, if a nonconforming sign is
changed or altered in any way it must be brought into compliance with the
provisions of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title with the following
exceptions:
         a.   Nonconforming signs that are deemed historic, signs for a
historic structure and signs on structures in a historic preservation overlay
zone may qualify for a special exception as described in subsection C4 of this
section.
         b.   On signs located within one thousand feet (1,000') of an
interstate highway that are legally nonconforming with regard to sign area or
height limitations, the existing sign face may be changed or replaced, provided
the sign meets all of the following criteria:
            (1)   The sign is located on property that is zoned commercial;
            (2)   The sign is not a "hazardous sign", as defined in this title;
and
            (3)   If the sign is located in an area subject to regulation due
to its proximity to the Iowa City Municipal Airport, a determination of "no
hazard to air navigation" has been received from the FAA.
      4.   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow
changes to a nonconforming sign, provided the following conditions are met:
         a.   The sign must be located on a property designated as a historic
landmark, a property registered on the national register of historic places, or
on a property listed as a key or contributing property in a historic
preservation or historic conservation overlay zone.
         b.   The sign must fall into one of the following categories:
            (1)   The sign is in keeping with the architectural character of a
historic structure and is appropriate to a particular period in the structure's
history; or
            (2)   The sign is an integral part of a property's historic
identity; or
            (3)   The sign makes a significant artistic or historic
contribution to the community or neighborhood in which the sign is located.
         c.   At the time of application for the special exception, changes to
the subject sign must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission
through a certificate of appropriateness. If the Board of Adjustment grants a
special exception for the sign, any subsequent changes to the sign do not have
to be approved by the Board of Adjustment, but do require a certificate of
appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
         d.   If the sign is not maintained according to the provisions of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title and becomes hazardous,
the City may request that the Board of Adjustment revoke the special exception.
      5.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow
repair or reconstruction of a nonconforming sign that has been damaged or
destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy if the following
approval criteria are met:
         a.   In order to qualify for this exception, the sign must fall into
at least one of the following categories:
            (1)   The subject sign is an integral part of the historic identity
of a property or use designated as a historic landmark, a property registered
on the National Register of Historic Places, or of a property listed as a key
or contributing property in a Historic District or Conservation District
Overlay Zone; or
            (2)   The sign is an integral part of a property's historic
identity such that it is generally recognized and associated with a
longstanding business or institution and makes a significant artistic,
cultural, or nostalgic contribution to the community or neighborhood.
         b.   The sign must be reconstructed as nearly as possible to its
historic design or to the design that is generally recognized and associated
with the longstanding business or institution such that it continues to make a
significant artistic, cultural or nostalgic contribution to the community or
neighborhood.
         c.   The sign must be reconstructed such that it is not a hazardous
sign. The sign must be located in a manner that complies with
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title. The
board may require changes to the sign, to its structure or mounting, or its
location in order to improve public safety. If the sign is not maintained
according to the provision of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title and becomes hazardous,
the City may request that the Board of Adjustment revoke the special exception.
         d.   If the sign is located on a property designated as a historic
landmark, a property registered on the National Register of Historic Places, or
a property listed as a key or contributing property in a Historic District or
Conservation District Overlay Zone, the subject sign must be approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission and issued a certificate of appropriateness.
If the Board of Adjustment grants a special exception for the sign, any
subsequent changes to the sign do not have to be approved by the Board of
Adjustment, but do require a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Commission.
   D.   Nonconforming Outdoor Lighting:
      1.   Any existing light fixture that is nonconforming with regard to how
the fixture is aimed must be brought immediately into compliance if it is
possible to re-aim the existing fixture.
      2.   Upon repair, replacement, or relocation of any luminaire, such
luminaire must comply with any applicable requirement that it be fully
shielded. (Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE F.  AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SECTION:
14-4F-1: Purpose
14-4F-2: Definitions
14-4F-3: Required Affordable Housing
14-4F-4: Incentivized Affordable Housing
14-4F-5: General Administrative And Programming Requirements
14-4F-6: Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing
14-4F-7: Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing
14-4F-8: Alternative Methods To Provide Required Affordable Housing
14-4F-9: Administrative Rules
14-4F-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to:
   A.   Create a more inclusive, just and sustainable Iowa City;
   B.   Reduce concentrations of low and moderate income households in Iowa
City;
   C.   Increase the multi-family housing stock near the university and the
City's urban core;
   D.   Promote the construction of housing that is affordable to the
community's workforce;
   E.   Increase opportunities for people of all income levels to work and live
near key employment centers;
   F.   Promote a balanced community that provides housing for people with
diverse income levels;
   G.   To reduce the number of housing cost burdened households; and
   H.   Promote household stability and reduce the threat of homelessness.
(Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: The collective reference to "Owner-Occupied Affordable
Housing" and/or "Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing", as those terms are
defined herein.
HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
INCOME ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD: Except as set forth herein, a household is an Income
Eligible Household for purposes of purchasing an Owner-Occupied Affordable
Housing dwelling unit located on land zoned a Riverfront Crossings zoning
designation pursuant to 14-2G if that household has an annual income equal to
or less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the area median income (AMI) for
Iowa City, as adjusted annually, or if not located on land zoned a Riverfront
Crossings zoning designation, if that household has an annual income equal to
or less than eighty percent (80%) of the (AMI) for Iowa City, as adjusted
annually. Except as set forth herein, a household is an income eligible
household for leasing Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing if that household has
an annual income equal to or less than sixty percent (60%) of the AMI for Iowa
City, as adjusted annually. Households with greater than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) in assets, excluding Retirement Assets, are not income
eligible households.
OWNER-OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing that is sold at a price no greater
than the most current published HUD homeownership sale price limit for existing
and new homes to an income eligible household.
RENTER-OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing that is rented for no more than the
HUD fair market rent for the Iowa City, Iowa, HUD metro FMR area, as adjusted
annually, and rented to an income eligible household, or housing that has
received Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) through the Iowa Finance
Authority and rented for no more than the LIHTC rent limits for Johnson County,
as adjusted annually, and rented to an Income Eligible Household.
RETIREMENT ASSETS: Financial assets whose liquidity is limited or penalized
until a person reaches retirement age, including, but not limited to 401(k)s,
IRAs, pension accounts, IPERS, and TIAA-CREF, not including distribution of or
income from the assets. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-3: REQUIRED AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
   A.   Riverfront Crossings Affordable Housing Requirement: Except for
developments providing Affordable Housing pursuant to a development agreement
with the City executed prior to June 6, 2016, and except for developments
exclusively providing elder apartment housing, any development containing ten
(10) or more dwelling units on land zoned a Riverfront Crossings zoning
designation is required to provide Affordable Housing dwelling units in an
amount equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) of the total number of
dwelling units. Should ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units
result in a fractional number, this fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest
whole number for any fraction over fifty percent (50%) to establish the
required number of Affordable Housing dwelling units. Any exempt elder
apartment housing developments shall be subject to periodic inspection to
ensure compliance with the zoning code regulations of this title of such use.
Affordable Housing shall be regulated pursuant to this Article.
   B.   Parking Reduction. Affordable Housing dwelling units required on land
zoned a Riverfront Crossings zoning designation in accordance with this Article
shall be exempt from providing the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise
required by the zoning code. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-4: INCENTIVIZED AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
   A.   Form-Based Zones: Owners of land zoned a Form-Based Zone pursuant to
Article 14-2H "Form-Based Zones and Standards" who voluntarily provide
Affordable Housing in accordance with this Article may utilize the following
incentives:
      1.   Parking Reduction: Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be exempt
from providing the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required by the
zoning code.
      2.   Density Bonus: For building types that allow four (4) or more
dwelling units, the maximum number of dwelling units may be increased by
twenty-five percent (25%) if all additional units are Affordable Housing.
      3.   Minor Adjustments To Certain Zone Standards Set Forth In
14-2H-2 "Zones": Where at least twenty-five percent (25%) of dwelling units
within a development are Affordable Housing, one of the following adjustments
may be administratively approved on lots that contain Affordable Housing units
where the proposed adjustment fits the characteristics of the site and the
surrounding neighborhood, and is consistent with the intent of the standard
being adjusted and the goals of the Comprehensive and District Plans:
         a.   Up to a fifteen feet (15') adjustment for the building type
design site depth standards. This provision may be combined with reductions for
relocation of utility easement or addition of new civic space not shown in the
future land use map up to a combined maximum of twenty-five feet (25').
         b.   Up to a fifteen percent (15%) adjustment for the building type
design site width standards.
         c.   Up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction for minimum amount of
facade required within the facade zone.
      4.   Minor Adjustments To Certain Standards Set Forth In
14-2H-2 "Zones" Or
14-2H-6 "Building Type Standards": Where at least twenty-five percent (25%) of
the dwelling units within a development are Affordable Housing, one of the
following adjustments may be administratively approved for buildings that
contain Affordable Housing units where the proposed adjustment fits the
characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, and is consistent
with the intent of the standard being adjusted and the goals of the
Comprehensive and District Plans:
         a.   Up to a fifteen percent (15%) adjustment for building main body
and wing standards.
         b.   Up to a 0.5 stories increase to maximum building height. This
bonus allows the building height to exceed the maximum standards for primary
buildings found in Item 4a (Building Form; Height) of section 14-2H-2 "Zones"
by 0.5 stories and by five feet (5').
      5.   Additional Minor Adjustments: An additional minor adjustment allowed
above may be administratively approved where Affordable Housing units are
rented or sold to households making fifty percent (50%) or less of the Area
Median Income.
   B.   All Other Zones: Owners of land that are not zoned a Riverfront
Crossings zoning designation pursuant to Article 14-2G "Riverfront Crossings
and Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development Standards" or a Form-
Based Zone pursuant to Article 14-2H "Form-Based Zones and Standards" who
voluntarily provide Affordable Housing in accordance with this Article may
utilize the following incentives:
      1.   Parking Reductio: Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be exempt
from providing the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required by the
zoning code.
      2.   Density Bonus: Where at least twenty percent (20%) of dwelling units
within a development are Affordable Housing, the minimum lot area and minimum
lot area per unit may be reduced by twenty percent (20%). Alternatively, where
at least twenty percent (20%) of dwelling units within a Planned Development
Overlay (OPD) zone are affordable housing, the maximum residential density may
be increased by twenty percent (20%).
      3.   Additional Incentives: Where at least twenty percent (20%) of the
dwelling units within a development are Affordable Housing, one of the
following adjustments to the standards set forth in
14-2A-4,
14-2B-4, or
14-2C-4 "Dimensional Requirements" may be administratively approved in
principle buildings that contain Affordable Housing units where the proposed
adjustment fits the characteristics of the site and the surrounding
neighborhood, and is consistent with the intent of the standard being adjusted
and the goals of the Comprehensive and District Plans:
         a.   Up to a fifteen percent (15%) reduction for any individual front,
rear, or side setback.
         b.   Up to a five foot (5') increase to the maximum principle building
height. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-5: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Methods Of Achieving Affordable Housing:
      1.   Required Affordable Housing may be provided through one or more of
the following:
         a.   Onsite Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing;
         b.   Onsite Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing;
         c.   Contribution to an affordable housing fund pursuant to
14-4F-8A;
         d.   Offsite Affordable Housing pursuant to
14-4F-8B; and/or
         e.   Contribution of land pursuant to
14-4F-8C.
      2.   Incentivized Affordable Housing may be provided through onsite
Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing and/or onsite Renter-Occupied Affordable
Housing.
   B.   Affordable Housing Agreement And Deed Restriction:
      1.   Agreement: Upon rezoning to a Riverfront Crossings zoning
designation pursuant to Article 14-2G, the property owner shall enter into an
affordable housing agreement with the City establishing which method(s) it will
utilize. Upon application for a building permit to construct any development in
which Required or Incentivized Affordable Housing is provided, the property
owner shall enter into an agreement with the City detailing which how it will
satisfy the obligations of this code, including details of the applicable
programming and development requirements. This agreement must be executed prior
to issuance of a building permit for the project containing Affordable Housing
dwelling units. The City Manager is hereby given the authority to execute such
an agreement, which shall be recorded in the Office of the Johnson County
Recorder at owner's expense.
      2.   Deed Restriction: A deed restriction documenting the Required and/or
Incentivized Affordable Housing dwelling units, selected method(s) of achieving
affordability, term, applicable resale restrictions, and applicable occupancy
and rental restrictions shall be placed upon the Owner-Occupied Affordable
Housing dwelling unit(s) or, in the case of the Renter-Occupied Affordable
Housing, shall be placed upon the land being developed contemporaneously with
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. This deed restriction shall be
recorded with Office of the Johnson County Recorder at owner's expense and
referenced in any deed conveying title of any such unit or land during the Term
of Affordability. This deed restriction shall automatically expire upon the
expiration of the term of affordability. The City Manager is hereby authorized
to issue any release of this deed restriction, as may be necessary and
appropriate, in a form approved by the City Attorney.
   C.   Term Of Affordability: An Affordable Housing dwelling unit shall remain
so for no less than the following number of years from the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for the Affordable Housing dwelling unit:
      1.   Required Affordable Housing: Ten (10) years.
      2.   Incentivized Affordable Housing: Twenty (20) years.
   D.   Remedy: Failure by the owners to verify income in accordance with the
provisions and rules of this Article is a violation of this Article and may
result in the immediate suspension of any rental permit issued for a Renter-
Occupied Affordable Housing unit. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-6: OWNER-OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing must satisfy the general requirements set
forth in Section
14-4F-5 and the following requirements.
   A.   Development Requirements:
      1.   Dwelling Unit Types: Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be
comprised of the same mix of dwelling unit types in proportion to the market
rate dwelling units within the development.
      2.   Dwelling Unit Size And Quality: The Affordable Housing dwelling unit
size shall be at least eighty percent (80%) of the floor area for the market
rate dwelling units of the same type, shall have the same number of bedrooms,
and shall be of similar quality, or as approved by the City Manager or
designee. Housing developments with Incentivized Affordable Housing dwelling
units that contain a variety of bedroom counts per dwelling unit shall provide
a percentage of Affordable Housing dwelling units with a particular number of
bedrooms that is similar to the percentage of non-set-aside dwelling units with
the same number of bedrooms.
      3.   Location: Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be distributed
throughout the development to achieve integration and avoid concentration or
segregation of the Affordable Housing dwelling units, unless approved by the
City Manager or designee.
      4.   Timing Of Construction: Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be
constructed and issued a certificate of occupancy concurrently with or prior to
the market rate dwelling units in the development.
   B.   Program Requirements:
      1.   Occupancy: An Affordable Housing dwelling unit shall, at all times
during the Term of Affordability, be occupied by an Income Eligible Household
as the household's primary residence.
      2.   Income Verification: The annual household income shall be determined
according to the HUD part 5, section 8 regulations on annual income codified in
24 CFR 5.609, as amended, and verified by the city prior to close of the sale.
      3.   Rental Restriction: An Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing unit may
not be rented, except an owner may rent or lease a bedroom in the unit.
      4.   Sale Restrictions: The following sales restrictions apply to all
Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing, compliance with which shall be verified by
the City Manager, or designee, prior to closing on the sale.
         a.   Approved Purchasers: A seller of an Affordable Dwelling unit must
sell the unit only to an Income Eligible Household. Seller shall determine a
potential buyer's annual household income according to the HUD part 5, section
8, regulations on annual income codified in 24 CFR 5.609, as amended.
         b.   Sale Price: The sale price of any Affordable Housing dwelling
unit shall not exceed the purchase price paid by the original Income Eligible
Household purchaser or the HUD homeownership sale price limit, whichever is
greater, with the following exceptions:
            (1)   Closing Costs: Customary closing costs and costs of sale.
            (2)   Real Estate Commissions: Costs of real estate commissions
paid by the seller to a licensed real estate agent.
            (3)   Permanent Capital Improvements: Reasonable value added to the
dwelling unit due to permanent capital improvements installed within the unit
by the seller pursuant to a properly issued building permit.
            (4)   Special Fees: The seller shall not levy or charge any
additional fees or any finder's fee, nor demand any other monetary
consideration other than provided in this Article. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-7: RENTER-OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
   A.   Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing must satisfy the general
requirements set forth in Section
14-4F-5 and the following requirements:
      1.   Development Requirements: Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing shall
be provided in accordance with the development requirements for Owner-Occupied
Affordable Housing set forth in Section
14-4F-6A.
      2.   Program Requirements:
         a.   Rental Rate: The monthly rental rate shall be either:
            (1)   No more than the fair market rents as published by HUD for
the Iowa City, Iowa, HUD metro FMR area, as adjusted annually; or
            (2)   For projects that have been awarded LIHTC through the Iowa
Finance Authority, no more than the LIHTC rent limits for Johnson County, as
adjusted annually.
         b.   Occupancy: Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing units must be
rented to Income Eligible Households. If a tenant initially deemed an Income
Eligible Household for purposes of occupying an Affordable Housing dwelling
unit pursuant to this Article, but is subsequently deemed no longer income
eligible upon annual examination of household income, that tenant's unit shall
not be considered an Affordable Housing dwelling unit and the rent can be
adjusted to market rate. To maintain compliance with the Affordable Housing
requirement, the next available rental unit in the project of comparable size
or larger must be rented to an Income Eligible Household. To that end, the
Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing units need not be specifically designated in
a fixed location, but may be floating throughout the development.
         c.   Income Verification: The property owner shall annually verify
that the Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing dwelling units are occupied by
Income Eligible Households. Prior to the commencement of a lease, the owner
shall determine a potential tenant's annual household income according to the
HUD part 5, section 8, regulations on annual income codified in 24 CFR 5.609,
as amended. Upon extension or renewal of a lease, the owner may determine a
tenant's annual household income based upon federal income tax returns for all
adults in the household.
         d.   Owner Verification Of Compliance: The owner must annually verify
to the City that it is in compliance with these program requirements, and
provide any documentation as deemed necessary by the City to determine
compliance, which may include examination of the documents used to verify
tenant income. Any violation of this requirement may result in immediate
suspension of any rental permit issued for the applicable unit. (Ord. 23-4914,
11-6-2023)
14-4F-8: ALTERNATIVE METHODS TO PROVIDE REQUIRED AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
For Required Affordable Housing, the owner may use one or more of the following
methods to meet the Affordable Housing Requirement. If the owner desires to
provide offsite Affordable Housing and/or a contribution of land, the owner
must establish that onsite Affordable Housing or a fee in lieu contribution to
an affordable housing fund cannot feasibly be satisfied, as reasonably
determined by the City.
   A.   Fee In Lieu Contribution: In lieu of providing Affordable Housing
dwelling units, an owner of land zoned a Riverfront Crossings zoning
designation pursuant to 14-2G may contribute a fee to a Riverfront Crossings
District affordable housing fund to be established by the City. The
contribution per dwelling unit shall be determined biennially by resolution of
the City Council based upon a formula that analyzes the difference between
renting a market rate unit for the Term of Affordability and renting a dwelling
unit affordably to an Income Eligible Household. The fund shall be utilized
solely for affordable housing purposes, which may include administration costs,
in the Riverfront Crossings District.
   B.   Transfer Of Affordable Housing Dwelling Units Off Site: Upon the owner
establishing that the affordable housing requirement cannot be satisfied
onsite, as reasonably determined by the City, it may be satisfied by
designating offsite existing or newly constructed dwelling units in the
Riverfront Crossings District as Affordable Housing dwelling units. Any
transferred Affordable Housing units shall in no way waive or reduce any
obligation to provide Affordable Housing units within the development to which
the obligation is transferred. In addition to satisfying the general
requirements set forth in Section
14-4F-5, these units must satisfy the following requirements:
      1.   Development Requirements:
         a.   Provision Of Units: Offsite Affordable Housing dwelling units,
whether they are owner- or renter-occupied, shall be provided in accordance
with the development requirements for Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing set
forth in Section
14-4F-6. The City reserves the right to deny a request to transfer Affordable
Housing units to a particular development if it would result in an undue
concentration of Affordable Housing units within that development.
         b.   Timing: Where the affordable housing requirement is to be met
through the provision of newly constructed dwelling units, such units shall be
constructed and pass final inspection no later than the date the occupancy
permit is issued for the development creating the need for the Affordable
Housing, unless otherwise agreed upon by the City Manager, or designee. Where
the affordable housing requirement is to be met through the provision of
existing offsite dwelling units, they shall be established as Affordable
Housing dwelling units prior to issuance of any occupancy permit for the
development creating the need for the affordable housing. The marketing of the
Affordable Housing dwelling units should occur no later than one (1) year after
the first market rate dwelling unit in the site that generated the requirement
passes final inspection, unless otherwise agreed upon by the City Manager. The
affordable housing agreement pursuant to Subsection
14-4F-5B-1 shall be recorded prior to issuance of a building permit for the
development creating the need for the Affordable Housing.
      2.   Programming Requirements:
         a.   Where the offsite Affordable Housing dwelling units are to be
Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing, those units shall comply with the
programming requirements for Owner-Occupied Affordable Housing set forth in
Section
14-4F-6.
         b.   Where the offsite Affordable Housing dwelling units are to be
Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing, they shall comply with the programming
requirements for Renter-Occupied Affordable Housing set forth in Section
14-4F-7.
   C.   Land Dedication: Upon the owner establishing that the affordable
housing requirements cannot be satisfied onsite, as reasonably determined by
the City, it may be satisfied by the dedication of land to the City of Iowa
City or an entity designated by the City of Iowa City for construction of
Affordable Housing dwelling units in accordance with the provisions of this
section, upon consideration of the following factors:
      1.   Location: The land shall be located in the Riverfront Crossings
District, in an area appropriate for residential redevelopment, as determined
by the City;
      2.   Number Of Affordable Housing Units: The total Affordable Housing
dwelling units possible on the land shall be equal to or greater than the
number of required Affordable Housing dwelling units;
      3.   Dwelling Type: The land shall allow for the provision of Affordable
Housing units of equivalent type (single-family, multi-family, townhome, etc.),
floor area, and number of bedrooms to that which would have been otherwise
required;
      4.   Land Value: The value of land to be dedicated shall be determined,
at the cost of the developer, by an independent appraiser, who shall be
selected from a list of certified appraisers provided by the City, or by such
alternative means of valuation to which a developer and the City agree; and
      5.   Right To Refuse: The City reserves the right to refuse dedication of
land in satisfaction of the affordable housing requirement if it determines, in
its sole discretion, that such a dedication is not in the best interests of the
public for any reason, including a determination that the City is not likely to
construct or administer an Affordable Housing development project in a timely
manner due to the unavailability of funds or other resources. Additionally,
where the value of the land proposed to be dedicated is less than the value of
the fee in lieu contribution established in accordance with the provisions
above, the City reserves the right to require an owner to contribute a fee
making up this difference in values. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-4F-9: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish administrative
rules deemed necessary to assure that the purposes of this section are
accomplished. A copy of the rules shall be on file with the City Clerk and
available on the City website. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 5
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
ARTICLE A. OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5A-1: Applicability
14-5A-2: Use And Restrictions
14-5A-3: Maximum Parking Allowed
14-5A-4: Minimum Parking Requirements
14-5A-5: Construction And Design Standards
14-5A-6: Off Street Loading Requirements
14-5A-1: APPLICABILITY:
Unless specifically exempted or superseded by other provisions of this title,
the regulations of this article apply to all parking spaces, stacking spaces,
aisles, and drives in all zones, whether required by this code or put in for
the convenience of property owners or users. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5A-2: USE AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The use of required off street parking is reserved for vehicle parking.
Other uses of a required parking area are not permitted, except as approved for
a temporary use. (See
chapter 4, article D of this title.)
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted, motor vehicles must be parked on an improved
surface, as specified in this article.
   C.   The storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, refuse containers,
obsolete or junk vehicles or the major repair of vehicles in required off
street parking and stacking spaces is prohibited.
   D.   Except for the purpose of making local deliveries, vehicles designed
for the shipment of detonable or flammable solids, liquids or gases may not be
parked or stored in any residential zone.
   E.   Commercial vehicles more than seven and one-half feet (71/2') in height
may not be stored in any residential zone. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5A-3: MAXIMUM PARKING ALLOWED:
   A.   Purpose: Certain areas and zones of the city are subject to a limit on
the amount of parking provided due to a desire to foster compact, pedestrian
oriented areas close to the downtown, the university, and in neighborhood
commercial areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods. The maximum parking
standards are a tool to prevent the development of excess parking capacity on a
site. Limiting the amount of land devoted to parking will make additional land
available for building area, open space, pedestrian amenities, and other
productive uses and will reduce stormwater runoff and protect water quality by
limiting the amount of impervious surface on a site. To further that goal, off
street parking in the central business district is generally provided in
municipally owned parking facilities, rather than in private surface lots or
structures. Providing conveniently located public parking facilities reserves
land in the downtown for more intensive commercial and civic uses and prevents
large surface parking lots from damaging the pedestrian friendly character of
the central business district.
   B.   CN-1 Zone: In the CN-1 zone, the number of parking spaces provided may
not exceed one hundred ten percent (110%) of the number of parking spaces
required, except if granted a special exception to exceed this limit by the
board of adjustment. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   C.   CB-5 Zone: (Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
   D.   CB-10 Zone:
      1.   Off street parking is not required for any use, except household
living uses, as specified in section
14-5A-4,
table 5A-1 of this article.
      2.   Private, off street parking is permitted only after approval of a
special exception, except for hospitality oriented retail uses and household
living uses as specified in the following subsections.
      3.   Hospitality oriented uses are allowed up to one and one-fourth (11/
4) parking spaces for each guestroom and parking spaces equal to one-third (1/
3) the occupant load of any meeting or convention facilities without going
through the special exception process. Any parking spaces allowed under this
maximum must meet the standards specified in subsections D5b through D5e of
this section. Any parking spaces requested beyond this maximum must be approved
by the board of adjustment as a special exception and meet all of the approval
criteria listed in subsection D5 of this section. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
      4.   Household living uses must provide parking according to section
14-5A-4,
table 5A-1 of this article. The parking must meet the standards specified in
subsections D5b through D5e of this section. If there is practical difficulty
providing the required parking for household living uses on site, off site
parking for household living uses may be approved according to the provisions
of subsection
14-5A-4F, "Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements", of this article.
(Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
      5.   In addition to the general special exception approval criteria
specified in
chapter 4, article B of this title, applications for a special exception for
private off street parking in the CB-10 zone must meet the following specific
approval criteria:
         a.   The applicant must demonstrate through a parking demand analysis
that the number of parking spaces requested does not exceed the demand for
parking for the specific building or project proposed and that the parking
demand cannot be satisfied through the public parking system. Short term
parking demand is preferred to be satisfied through the public parking system.
         b.   Surface parking is not permitted.
         c.   Underground parking is preferred over aboveground structured
parking. The design of any underground parking must not detract from or prevent
active building uses on the ground level floor of the building. To that end,
the ceiling height of any underground parking level may not extend more than
one foot (1') above the level of the adjacent sidewalk. On sloping building
sites and for existing buildings, the city may adjust this requirement.
However, on sloping sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height
of any new building must be located no more than one foot (1') above the level
of the abutting sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the
ground level floor of the building must be no more than three feet (3') above
the level of the abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point
along a street-facing building facade.
         d.   Aboveground structured parking may be approved only by special
exception according to the standards in subsection D5e of this section.
         e.   Where parking is located within the exterior walls of a building,
the following standards apply: (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
            (1)   The proposed structured parking will not detract from or
prevent ground floor storefront uses. Structured parking may be permitted on
the ground level floor of a building, provided that a substantial portion of
the ground level floor of the building is reserved for and built to accommodate
storefront uses. On the ground level floor of the building, parking is not
allowed within the first fifty feet (50') of building depth as measured from
the front building line. The board of adjustment may reduce this storefront
depth requirement if the applicant demonstrates that conditions on the subject
property create a practical difficulty in achieving full compliance. In such a
case, the applicant must demonstrate that the resulting alternative storefront
space, both the interior and exterior, will be of a quality in both design and
materials that will enhance the commercial character of the central business
district. To mitigate for loss of ground floor commercial space, the board may
also require additional quality commercial space be included on an upper floor
or mezzanine level and said space be reserved for nonresidential uses. (Ord.
11-4450, 10-18-2011)
            (2)   Vehicular access to parking within buildings must be from a
rear alley or private rear lane, whenever feasible. Garage openings along the
primary street frontage are not permitted if access is feasible from another
street or from a rear alley, private street or private rear lane. If there is
no other feasible alternative, a garage opening may be allowed along the
primary street frontage, if the board determines that the opening(s) will not
detract from or unduly interrupt pedestrian flow along the street and traffic
and pedestrian safety will not be compromised. Garage openings shall be built
to the minimum width necessary for access.
            (3)   Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are visible
from a public or private street must appear to be a component of the facade of
the building through the use of building materials, window openings and facade
detailing that is similar or complementary to the design of the building.
            (4)   Each entrance and exit to the parking area must be
constructed so that vehicles entering or leaving the parking area are clearly
visible to a pedestrian on any abutting sidewalk at a distance of not less than
ten feet (10'). Stop signs and appropriate pedestrian warning signs may be
required. (Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008)
14-5A-4: MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The minimum parking requirements are intended to ensure that
enough off street parking is provided to accommodate most of the demand for
parking generated by the range of uses that might locate at a site over time,
particularly in areas where sufficient on street parking is not available. The
minimum parking requirements are also intended to ensure that enough parking is
provided on a site to prevent parking for nonresidential uses from encroaching
into adjacent residential neighborhoods.
   B.   Minimum Requirements:
      1.   
Table 5A-2 of this section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum
bicycle parking requirements for the land use or uses on properties in all
zones except the CB-5, CB-10, Eastside Mixed Use and Riverfront Crossings
Zones. For some land uses, the minimum parking requirements differ based on the
zone in which the property is located.
      2.   For properties located within the Downtown Planning District, zoned
CB-5 and, in part, Historic District Overlay, the bicycle parking requirement
shall be 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit. For such properties, there shall be no
vehicular parking requirement. Except for the preceding,
table 5A-1 of this section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum
bicycle parking requirements for all other properties within the CB-5 and CB-10
Zones, where parking is only required for household living uses.
      3.   
Table 5A-3 of this section lists the minimum parking requirements and minimum
bicycle parking requirement for properties zoned Riverfront Crossings and
Eastside Mixed Use. Affordable housing dwelling units provided in accordance
with section
14-2G-8 of this title shall not be required to provide parking, and are
therefore exempt from the minimum parking requirement calculation for the
respective Riverfront Crossings zoning classification.
      4.   In the CB-10 Zone, off street parking must meet the standards
specified in subsection
14-5A-3D of this article.
   C.   Parking For Persons With Disabilities: Where a use is required to
provide accessibility for persons with disabilities, the number and design of
such parking spaces must be in accordance with State of Iowa Administrative
Code, 661 IAC 18, parking for persons with disabilities, as amended.
   D.   Rules For Computing Minimum Parking Requirements:
      1.   Where a fractional space results, the number of parking and stacking
spaces actually required will be the closest whole number, with a half space
rounded down.
      2.   Any use that is nonconforming with regard to the number of required
parking spaces is subject to the applicable provisions of
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
      3.   In the case of mixed uses, the number of parking and stacking spaces
required is equal to the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed
separately, except for shopping centers, as specified in
table 5A-2 of this section, and for reductions allowed under subsection F,
"Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements", of this section.
      4.   When the parking requirement is based on the number of residents or
occupants, the number of residents or occupants shall be based on the maximum
occupancy of the use as determined by the City.
   E.   Rules For Computing Bicycle Parking Requirements:
      1.   In
tables 5A-1 and
5A-2 of this section, the minimum bicycle parking requirements are expressed as
a certain number of spaces per dwelling unit or as a percentage of the required
number of vehicle parking spaces. In
table 5A-3 of this section, the minimum bicycle parking requirements are
expressed as a certain number of spaces per dwelling unit or per resident or,
in the case of nonresidential uses, as a ratio based on the floor area of the
proposed use. When expressed as a number of spaces per resident, the number of
residents shall be based on the maximum occupancy of the use as determined by
the City.
      2.   In all cases where bicycle parking is required, a minimum of four
(4) spaces shall be provided.
      3.   After the first fifty (50) bicycle parking spaces are provided,
additional spaces are required at fifty percent (50%) of the number required by
this section.
      4.   Where the expected need for bicycle parking for a particular use is
uncertain due to unknown or unusual operating characteristics of the use or due
to a location that is difficult to access by bicycle, the building official may
authorize that the construction of up to fifty percent (50%) of the required
bicycle parking spaces be deferred. The land area required for the deferred
bicycle parking spaces must be maintained in reserve. If an enforcement
official of the City determines at some point in the future that the additional
parking spaces are needed, the property owner will be required to install the
parking in the reserved area. The owner of the property on which the bicycle
parking area is reserved must properly execute, sign, and record a written
agreement that is binding upon their successors and assigns as a covenant
running with the land that assures the installation of bicycle parking within
the reserved area by the owner if so ordered by an enforcement official of the
City.
Table 5A-1: Minimum Parking Requirements In The CB-5 And CB-10 Zones, Except As
Otherwise Set Forth In Subsection 14-5A-4B2 Of This Section
Use Categories Subgroups Parking Requirements Bicycle Parking
Use        Subgroups      Parking Requirements                                                         Bicycle
Categories                                                                                             Parking
Residential uses:
Household  Multi-    CB-                                                                               1.0 per
living     family    5    Efficiency, 1 bedroom units: 0.5 space per dwelling unit.                    dwelling
uses       dwellings Zone                                                                              unit
                       2 bedroom units: 1 space per dwelling unit.                                   
                       3 bedroom units: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.                                
                       Units with more than 3 bedrooms: 3 spaces per dwelling unit.                  
                       Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.                         
                     CB-
                   10   For buildings built on or before December 31, 2008:
                     Zone                                                                              1.0 per
                             Bedrooms 1-10: No parking required.                                    dwelling
                             All additional bedrooms: 0.5 space per bedroom.                        unit
                             (For purposes of this standard an efficiency apartment will be counted as
                          1 bedroom.)
                       For buildings built on or after January 1, 2009:                              
                             Efficiency and 1 bedroom units: 0.5 space per dwelling unit.
                             2 bedroom unit: 1 space per dwelling unit.
                             3 bedroom unit: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
                             Units with more than 3 bedrooms: 3 spaces per dwelling unit.
                          Elder apartments: 1 space for every 2 dwelling units.
 
Table 5A-2: Minimum Parking Requirements For All Zones, Except The CB-5, CB-10,
Riverfront Crossings Zones And Eastside Mixed Use District
Use Categories Subgroups Parking Requirement Bicycle Parking
Use Categories                   Subgroups             Parking       Bicycle
                                                       Requirement   Parking
Residential uses:
                                                       For 1-bedroom
                                                       and 2-bedroom
                                                       units: 1
                                                       parking
                                                       space, plus 1
                                                       additional
                                                       parking space
                                                       for each
                                                       adult
                                                       occupant
                                 Single family and two beyond 3.     None
                                 family uses           For units     required
                                                       with 3 or
                                                       more
                                                       bedrooms: 2
                                                       parking
                                                       spaces plus 1
                                                       additional
                                                       parking space
                                                       for each
                                                       adult
                                                       occupant
                                                       beyond 3.
                                 Group households      3 spaces.     None
                                                                     required
                                                       Efficiency
                                                       and 1 bedroom
                                                       units: 1
                                                       space per
                                                       dwelling
                                                       unit.
                                                       2 bedroom
                                                       units: 2
                                                       spaces per    0.5 per
                                                       dwelling      dwelling
                                                       unit.         unit
                                                       3 bedroom      
                                                       units: 2      1.0 per
                                                       spaces per    dwelling
                                                       dwelling      unit
                                         All zones,    unit.         1.5 per
                                         except PRM    4 bedroom     dwelling
                                         and CB-2      units: 3      unit
                                                       spaces per    1.5 per
                                                       dwelling      dwelling
                                                       unit.         unit
                                                       5 bedroom     1.5 per
                                                       units: 4      dwelling
                                                       spaces per    unit
                                                       dwelling
                                                       unit.
                                                       University
                                                       impact area:
                                                       1 space per
   Household living                                 bedroom (see
                                                       section
                                                       14-2B-6, map
                                                       2B.1).
                                                       Efficiency
                                                       and 1 bedroom
                                                       units: 0.75
                                                       space per
                                                       dwelling
                                                       unit.
                                                       2 bedroom
                                 Multi-                units: 1.5
                                 family                spaces per
                                 uses                  dwelling
                                                       unit.
                                                       3 bedroom
                                                       units: 2.5
                                                       spaces per    1.0 per
                                         PRM & CB-     dwelling      dwelling
                                         2 Zone        unit.         unit
                                                       Units with
                                                       more than 3
                                                       bedrooms: 3
                                                       spaces per
                                                       dwelling
                                                       unit.
                                                       University
                                                       impact area
                                                       in the PRM
                                                       zone: 1 space
                                                       per bedroom
                                                       (see section
                                                       14-2B-6, map
                                                       2B.1).
                                                       1 space per
                                                       dwelling unit
                                                       for
                                                       independent
                                                       living units
                                                       and 1 space
                                                       for every 2
                                                       dwelling
                                                       units for
                                         Elder         assisted
                                         apartments    living units, 5 percent
                                                       except in the
                                                       PRM and CB-
                                                       2 Zones.
                                                       In the PRM
                                                       and CB-
                                                       2 Zones, 1
                                                       space for
                                                       every 2
                                                       dwelling
                                                       units.
                                                       1 space for
                                                       every 3 beds,
                                                       plus 1 space
                                                       for each
                                                       staff member  None
                                 Assisted group living determined by required
                                                       the maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       staff present
                                                       at any 1
                                                       time.
                                                       1 space per
                                                       300 square
   Group living                                     feet of floor
                                 Independent group     area or 0.75  25 percent
                                 living                space per
                                                       resident,
                                                       whichever is
                                                       less.
                                                       1 space per
                                                       300 square
                                                       feet of floor
                                 Fraternal group       area or 0.75  25 percent
                                 living                space per
                                                       resident,
                                                       whichever is
                                                       less.
Commercial uses:
                                                       1 space per
                                 Retail type           300 square    15 percent
                                                       feet of floor
                                                       area.
                                                       Parking
                                                       spaces equal
                                                       to 1/3 the
   Adult business uses                              occupant load
                                 Entertainment/        of the
                                 nightclub type        largest       10 percent
                                                       assembly
                                                       space or
                                                       seating area
                                                       in the
                                                       building.
                                                       1 space for
                                                       each office,
                                                       examining
                                                       room, and     None
                                 General               treatment/    required
   Animal related commercial                        grooming
                                                       room, but not
                                                       less than 3
                                                       spaces.
                                 Intensive             3 spaces.     None
                                                                     required
                                                       1 space per
   Building trade uses                              750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                         Spectator
                                         type (major   Parking
                                         event         spaces equal
                                         facilities,   to 1/4 the    10 percent
                                         such as       occupant load
                                         arenas,       of the
                                         stadiums,     seating area.
                                         etc.)
                                 Outdoor Participatory Parking
                                         type (tennis  spaces equal
                                         courts,       to 2/3 the
                                         swimming      maximum
   Commercial recreational uses       pools,        number of     10 percent
                                         archery       participants
                                         ranges,       likely at any
                                         sports        1 time.
                                         fields, etc.)
                                                       Parking
                                                       spaces equal
                                                       to 1/3 the
                                 Indoor                occupant load 10 percent
                                                       of the area
                                                       used for the
                                                       participatory
                                                       activity.
   Commercial parking                               Not           None
                                                       applicable.   required
                                                       1 space per
                                                       150 square
                                                       feet of floor
                                                       area, or
                                                       parking
                                                       spaces equal
                                                       to 1/3 the
                                                       occupant load
                                                       of the
   Eating and drinking                              seating area,
establishments                                         whichever is  10 percent
                                                       less.
                                                       Carryout/
                                                       delivery
                                                       restaurants
                                                       that do not
                                                       have a
                                                       seating area
                                                       must provide
                                                       at least 4
                                                       spaces.
                                                       1 space per
                                                       300 square
                                                       feet of floor
                                                       area.
                                                       In the MU and
                                                       CB-2 zones,
                                 General office        no additional 15 percent
                                                       parking is
                                                       required for
                                                       that floor
                                                       area
                                                       exceeding
                                                       8,000 square
   Office uses                                      feet.
                                                       1.5 spaces
                                                       for each
                                                       office,
                                                       examining
                                                       room and
                                                       treatment
                                 Medical/dental office room;         15 percent
                                                       provided,
                                                       however,
                                                       there shall
                                                       not be less
                                                       than 5
                                                       spaces.
                                                       For gas
                                                       stations, 1
                                                       stacking
                                                       space is
                                                       required for
                                                       every service
                                                       stall or pump
                                                       station.
                                                       For car
                                                       washes, 4
                                                       stacking
                                                       spaces are
                                                       required for
                                                       each wash
                                                       rack, bay, or
                                                       tunnel.
                                                       Parking for
   Quick vehicle servicing                          convenience   None
                                                       retail must   required
                                                       be calculated
                                                       separately.
                                                       Parking
                                                       spaces must
                                                       be provided
                                                       in lieu of
                                                       stacking
                                                       spaces in
                                                       instances
                                                       where egress
                                                       from a
                                                       facility
                                                       would require
                                                       moving a
                                                       motor vehicle
                                                       waiting for
                                                       entry.
                                                       1 space per
   Redemption center                                1,000 square  None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area
                                                       1 space per
                                 Shopping centers,     250 square
                                 where a mix of uses,  feet of floor
                                 such as retail,       area. Spaces
                                 office, restaurants,  for
                                 theaters, commercial  residential
                                 recreational uses,    uses must be
                                 etc., share the same  calculated
                                 parking area. This    separately    15 percent
                                 parking minimum may   and must be
                                 be used as an         provided in
                                 optional alternative  addition to
                                 to calculating the    the parking
                                 parking for each of   spaces for
                                 the uses separately.  the
                                                       commercial
                                                       uses.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Sales oriented        300 square    15 percent
                                                       feet of floor
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Personal service      300 square    15 percent
                                 oriented              feet of floor
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Repair oriented       500 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
   Retail                                           For hotels
                                                       and motels, 1
                                                       space per
                                                       guestroom.
                                                       For
                                                       guesthouses,
                                                       as defined in
                                                       this title,
                                                       0.75 space
                                                       per
                                                       guestroom.
                                                       For meeting
                                                       facilities    None
                                 Hospitality oriented  and similar,  required
                                                       spaces equal
                                                       to 1/4 the
                                                       occupant load
                                                       of the
                                                       meeting area
                                                       or 1/4 the
                                                       occupant load
                                                       of the
                                                       seating area,
                                                       whichever is
                                                       most
                                                       applicable to
                                                       the use.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Outdoor storage and   500 square    10 percent
                                 display oriented      feet of floor
                                                       area.
   Surface passenger services                       No minimum    None
                                                       requirement.  required
                                                       1 space per
   Vehicle repair                                   300 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
Industrial uses:
                                                       1 space per
   Industrial service                               750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Technical/light       750 square    None
                                 manufacturing         feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
   Manufacturing and productioGeneral manufacturing 750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
                                 Heavy manufacturing   750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
   Salvage operations                               750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       2 spaces per
                                                       leasing
                                                       office, plus  None
   Self-service storage                             1 space per   required
                                                       100 leasable
                                                       storage
                                                       spaces.
                                                       1 space per
                                                       1,000 square
                                 For warehouses up to  feet of floor None
                                 25,000 square feet    area up to a  required
                                                       maximum of 5
   Warehouse and freight                            spaces.
movement                                               5 spaces,
                                                       plus 1 space
                                 For warehouses 25,000 for each      None
                                 square feet or        5,000 square  required
                                 greater               feet above
                                                       25,000 square
                                                       feet.
                                                       1 space per
   Waste related uses                               750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
                                                       1 space per
   Wholesale sales                                  750 square    None
                                                       feet of floor required
                                                       area.
Institutional and civic uses:
   Basic utilities                                  No minimum    None
                                                       requirement.  required
                                                       Based on
                                 Public                parking       25 percent
                                                       demand
                                                       analysis.
   Colleges and universities                        Per special
                                                       exception
                                 Private               review based  25 percent
                                                       on parking
                                                       demand
                                                       analysis.
                                                       1 space per
                                 General community     300 square    10 percent
                                 service               feet of floor
                                                       area.
                                                       0.1 space per
                                                       temporary
                                                       resident
                                                       based on the
                                                       maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       temporary
   Community service                                residents
                                                       staying at
                                 Community service -   the shelter   25 percent
                                 shelter               at any 1
                                                       time, plus 1
                                                       space per
                                                       employee
                                                       based on the
                                                       maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       employees at
                                                       the site at
                                                       any 1 time.
                                                       1 space per
                                                       employee
                                                       based on the
                                                       maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       employees at
                                                       the site at
                                                       any 1 time,
                                                       plus 1
                                                       parking space
                                                       for each 10
                                                       children or
                                                       clients
                                                       served, based
                                                       on the
                                                       maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       children
                                                       present on
                                                       the site at
                                                       any 1 time,
                                                       plus 1
                                                       stacking
                                                       space for
                                                       each 20
                                                       children or
                                                       clients
                                                       served, based
   Daycare                                          on the        10 percent
                                                       maximum
                                                       number of
                                                       clients or
                                                       children
                                                       present on
                                                       the site at
                                                       any 1 time.
                                                       Additional
                                                       parking
                                                       spaces at a
                                                       ratio of 1/20
                                                       clients or
                                                       children
                                                       served may be
                                                       substituted
                                                       for the
                                                       stacking
                                                       spaces, if
                                                       the city
                                                       determines
                                                       that such an
                                                       arrangement
                                                       will not
                                                       cause traffic
                                                       to stack into
                                                       adjacent
                                                       streets or
                                                       public rights
                                                       of way.
   Detention facilities                             No minimum    None
                                                       requirement.  required
                                 Elementary, middle,
                                 junior high schools,  2 spaces per
                                 and specialized       classroom.    25 percent
   Educational facilities     educational
                                 facilities
                                 High schools          10 spaces per 25 percent
                                                       classroom.
                                                       1.75 spaces   None
   Hospitals                                        per hospital  required
                                                       bed.
                                                       No minimum
                                                       requirement,
                                                       except for
                                                       recreational
                                                       uses within
                                                       private open
                                                       space areas
                                                       as follows:
                                                       For golf
                                                       courses, 3
                                                       spaces for
                                                       each green
                                                       (hole).
   Parks and open space                             For other     5 percent
                                                       recreational
                                                       or public
                                                       assembly type
                                                       uses, parking
                                                       is required
                                                       at half the
                                                       minimum
                                                       amount
                                                       required for
                                                       the most
                                                       similar
                                                       commercial
                                                       recreational
                                                       use.
                                                       Parking
                                                       spaces equal
                                                       to 1/6 the
                                                       occupant load
   Religious/private group                          of the main
assembly                                               auditorium or 5 percent
                                                       the largest
                                                       room in the
                                                       building,
                                                       whichever is
                                                       greater.
Other uses:
                                 Animal related        No minimum    None
   Agriculture                                      requirement.  required
                                 Plant related         No minimum    None
                                                       requirement.  required
                                 Airports              No minimum    None
   Aviation related uses                            requirement.  required
                                 Helicopter landing    No minimum    None
                                 facilities            requirement.  required
   Communication transmission                       No minimum    None
facilities                                             requirement.  required
   Extraction                                       No minimum    None
                                                       requirement.  required
 
Table 5A-3: Minimum Parking Requirements In The Riverfront Crossings District
And Eastside Mixed Use District
Use Categories Subdistricts Minimum Parking Requirement Bicycle Parking
Use Categories      Subdistricts        Minimum Parking     Bicycle Parking
                                        Requirement
                                        Efficiency, 1
                                        bedroom: 0.5 space
                                        per dwelling unit.
                                        2 bedrooms: 1 space
                                        per dwelling unit.
                                        3 bedrooms: 2
                                        spaces per dwelling
                                        unit.
                                        Elder apartments: 1
                                        space for every 2
                                        dwelling units.
                                        For multi-family
                                        dwelling units
                    South Downtown,     located within the  1 per dwelling unit
                    University          University
                                        Subdistrict or on
Household living                        property directly
units within the                        abutting or across
following building                      the street from the
types: apartment                        UI campus as
building, multi-                        illustrated on the
dwelling building,                      regulating plan,
mixed use building                      section
                                        14-2G-2,
                                        figure 2G-1 of this
                                        title, the parking
                                        requirement is 0.25
                                        per bedroom.
                                        Efficiency, 1
                                        bedroom: 0.75 space
                                        per dwelling unit.
                    Park, South         2 bedrooms: 1.5
                    Gilbert, Central    spaces per dwelling
                    Crossings, Gilbert, unit.               1 per dwelling unit
                    West Riverfront,    3 bedrooms: 2.5
                    Orchard, Eastside   spaces per dwelling
                    Mixed Use           unit.
                                        Elder apartments: 1
                                        space for every 2
                                        dwelling units.
                                        For 1-bedroom and
                                        2-bedroom units: 1
                                        parking space, plus
Household living                        1 additional
units within the                        parking space for
following building  All subdistricts    each adult occupant
types: cottage      where said building beyond 3.           None required
home, row house,    types are allowed.  For units with 3 or
townhouse, live-                        more bedrooms: 2
work townhouse                          parking spaces plus
                                        1 additional
                                        parking space for
                                        each adult occupant
                                        beyond 3.
                                        Parking shall be
                                        provided within the
                                        associated parking
                                        structure using the
                                        following ratios:
                                        Efficiency, 1
                                        bedroom: 0.5 space
                                        per dwelling unit.
                                        2 bedrooms: 1 space
                                        per dwelling unit.
Household living                        3 bedrooms: 2
units within liner  All subdistricts    spaces per dwelling 1 per dwelling unit
buildings                               unit.
                                        Elder apartments: 1
                                        space for every 2
                                        dwelling units.
                                        Specific parking
                                        spaces within the
                                        associated parking
                                        structure may or
                                        may not be reserved
                                        for use by
                                        residents within
                                        the liner building.
Assisted group      All subdistricts    1 space for every 3
living              where said uses are rooming units.      None
                    allowed.
                                        0.50 space per
                                        resident.
                                        If the use is
                                        located within the
                                        University
                                        Subdistrict or on
                                        property directly
                    All subdistricts    abutting or across
Fraternal group     where said uses are the street from the 0.50 space per
living              allowed.            main UI campus as   resident
                                        illustrated on the
                                        regulating plan,
                                        section
                                        14-2G-2,
                                        figure 2G-1 of this
                                        title, the parking
                                        requirement is 0.25
                                        per resident.
                                        0.50 space per
                                        resident.
                                        If the use is
                                        located within the
                                        University
                                        Subdistrict or on
                                        property directly
                    All subdistricts    abutting or across
Independent group   where said uses are the street from the 0.50 space per
living              allowed.            main UI campus as   resident
                                        illustrated on the
                                        regulating plan,
                                        section
                                        14-2G-2,
                                        figure 2G-1 of this
                                        title, the parking
                                        requirement is 0.25
                                        per resident.
                    South Downtown,     None required.      1/1,500 square feet
                    University                              of floor area
                                        1 space per 500
                                        square feet of
                                        floor area. On
                                        street parking
                                        provided along the
                    Park, South         frontage of a
                    Gilbert, Central    property may count
Nonresidential uses Crossings, Gilbert, toward this parking 1/1,500 square feet
                    West Riverfront,    requirement.        of floor area
                    Orchard, Eastside   Buildings with less
                    Mixed Use           than 1,200 square
                                        feet of
                                        nonresidential
                                        floor area are
                                        exempt from this
                                        parking
                                        requirement.
 
   F.   Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements:
      1.   Off Site Parking On Private Property: Off street parking may be
located on a separate lot from the use served according to the following rules.
When the proposed off site parking is located in a residential zone or CB-10
Zone, or is intended for a use located in the CB-10 Zone, the Board of
Adjustment may grant a special exception for the proposed parking, provided the
conditions contained in subsections F1a through F1f of this section are met.
When the proposed off site parking is located in the Eastside Mixed Use
District, a Riverfront Crossings Zone, an industrial zone, research zone, or
commercial zone, except the CB-10 Zone, the Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services may approve the proposed parking, provided the conditions
contained in subsections F1a through F1f of this section are met.
         a.   Special Location Plan: A special location plan must be submitted
with the application for off site parking. The location plan must include a map
indicating the proposed location of the off site parking, the location of the
use or uses served by the parking, and the distance and proposed walking route
between the parking and the use(s) served. The map must be drawn to scale and
include property boundaries, including boundaries of any intervening
properties. In addition, documentation must be submitted providing evidence
deemed necessary to comply with the requirements herein.
         b.   Location Of Off Site Parking:
            (1)   In residential, commercial zones, Eastside Mixed Use
District, and Riverfront Crossings Zones, any proposed off site parking space
must be located within three hundred feet (300') from an entrance to the use
served.
            (2)   In industrial and research zones, any proposed off site
parking space must be located within six hundred feet (600') from an entrance
to the use served.
         c.   Zoning: Off site parking spaces must be located in the same zone
as the principal use(s) served, or located as follows:
            (1)   In a multi-family zone serving a use located in a different
multi-family zone, Eastside Mixed Use District, or in the MU Zone or vice
versa.
            (2)   In a commercial zone serving a use located in a different
commercial zone, industrial zone, Eastside Mixed Use District, or Riverfront
Crossings Zone.
            (3)   In an industrial zone serving a use located in a different
industrial zone or commercial zone.
            (4)   In a Riverfront Crossings Zone serving a use located in a
different Riverfront Crossings Zone or commercial zone.
         d.   Shared Use Of Off Site Parking: Where two (2) or more uses will
jointly use the proposed off site parking, the number of parking spaces shall
equal the sum of off street parking spaces required, as indicated in tables 5A-
1, 5A-2, and 5A-3 of this section, except for reductions approved under the
provisions of subsection F2, "Allowed Reductions For Shared On Site Parking",
of this section.
         e.   Approval Criteria: In assessing a special location plan for off
site parking, the Board of Adjustment or Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services, as applicable, will consider the desirability of the
proposed off street parking and stacking spaces location; pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety; any detrimental effects on adjacent property; the
appearance of the streetscape as a consequence of the off street parking; and,
in the case of nonrequired parking, the need for additional off street parking.
         f.   Covenant For Off Site Parking: A written agreement between the
property owners must be submitted with the application for off site parking.
The agreement must assure the retention of the parking and stacking spaces,
aisles and drives and be binding upon their successors and assigns. The
agreement must provide that it cannot be released, and its terms and conditions
cannot be modified in any manner whatsoever, without prior written consent and
approval from the City. The written agreement must be reviewed and approved by
the City Attorney. Upon approval of the off site parking, the applicant shall
provide evidence to the building official confirming that the agreement has
been properly executed and has been recorded as a covenant running with the
land before issuance of a building permit.
      2.   Minor Modification For Parking Reduction For Shared On Site Parking:
The building official, in consultation with the Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services, may approve a minor modification as specified in section
14-4B-1 of this title to reduce the total number of parking spaces required by
up to fifty percent (50%) if the uses sharing the parking are not normally
open, used, or operated during the same hours. To qualify for a reduction under
this provision, a parking demand analysis must be submitted that provides
evidence that the amount of parking proposed for the shared parking area will
be sufficient to meet the parking demand. This reduction is not allowed for
residential uses.
      3.   Minor Modification For Parking Reduction in Commercial Zones: The
building official, in consultation with the Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services, may approve a minor modification as specified in 14-4B-
1 of this title to reduce the total number of parking spaces required by up to
fifty percent (50%) if it meets the following standards:
         a.   It must be in a CB-2, CB-5, CC-2, CN-1, CO-1, or MU zone;
         b.   Buildings must be limited to a footprint of 5,000 square feet;
         c.   A parking demand analysis must be submitted that provides
evidence that the amount of parking proposed will be sufficient to meet the
parking demand, which depending on the complexity of the site, may require an
engineered study, as determined by staff; and
         d.   The proposed development must not result in the demolition of a
property that is designated as an Iowa City landmark, registered in the
National Register of Historic Places, or individually eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.
      4.   Affordable Housing Parking Reduction: Affordable Housing dwelling
units allowed and regulated pursuant to Article 14-4F shall be exempt from
providing the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required by the zoning
code.
      5.   Minor Modification for Commercial Use Parking Reductions. The number
of required parking spaces for commercial uses may be reduced up to ten percent
(10%).
      6.   Downtown And Riverfront Crossings Parking District: For qualifying
development as set forth below, the number of required on site parking spaces
may be reduced in order to facilitate said development according to the
provisions of this subsection.
         a.   Qualifying Development: To qualify for a parking reduction under
this subsection, the proposed development:
            (1)   Must be located in the downtown and Riverfront Crossings
parking district;
            (2)   Must not result in the demolition of a property that is
designated as an Iowa City landmark, registered on the National Register of
Historic Places, or individually eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places; and
            (3)   Must include uses, elements or features that further housing,
economic development, or other goals of the comprehensive plan, including the
downtown and Riverfront Crossings master plan.
         b.   Parking District Boundaries: Properties described below shall be
considered part of the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Parking District:
            (1)   Properties located within the area bounded by Burlington
Street on the south, Van Buren Street on the east, Iowa Avenue on the north,
and Capitol Street on the west. For purposes of this subsection, this area
shall be referred to as the Central Business District; and
            (2)   Properties zoned South Downtown Subdistrict (RFC-SD),
University Subdistrict (RFC-U), and Central Crossings Subdistrict (RFC-CX) that
are located north of the Iowa Interstate rail line.
         c.   Reduction Of The On Site Parking Requirement:
            (1)   For qualifying development, the off street parking
requirement may be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), provided a fee is paid
in lieu based on the number of parking spaces that would otherwise have to be
provided.
            (2)   For qualifying development where it is infeasible to provide
at least fifty percent (50%) of the required parking on site due to specific
qualifying site constraints as noted below, a developer may request a special
exception to reduce the parking requirement by up to one hundred percent
(100%), provided a fee is paid in lieu of each parking space not provided on
site and the following review and approval criteria are met. The Board of
Adjustment will review such a request according to the following approval
criteria:
               (A)   Convincing evidence has been presented that it is not
feasible to provide at least fifty percent (50%) of the required residential
parking on site due to a lack of alley access, a lot width narrower than sixty
feet (60'), a lot orientation that makes it infeasible to provide on site
parking and meet storefront depth requirements of the zone, or other unique
circumstance; and
               (B)   The proposed project will be designed in a manner that is
sensitive and complementary to adjacent properties designated as Iowa City
landmarks, registered on the National Register of Historic Places, or
individually eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. See
subsection
14-3C-3C, “Design Review Guidelines”, of this title for guidance on the factors
to be considered to comply with this standard. This standard is not intended to
impose any particular architectural style, but rather to foster a harmonious
rhythm and proportion of building elements along a street frontage and ensure
that differences in mass and scale are mitigated through facade articulation
and upper story stepbacks; and
               (C)   The proposed project will be designed in a manner that
will contribute to the pedestrian oriented, urban character of central Iowa
City as envisioned in the downtown and riverfront crossings master plan.
         d.   Payment Of Fee In Lieu Of Required Parking:
            (1)   Where the City has allowed up to a fifty percent (50%)
reduction in the parking requirement, the developer shall pay a fee for each
space otherwise required in the amount of seventy five percent (75%) of the
estimated cost of constructing a structured parking space.
            (2)   Where a special exception has been granted reducing the
parking requirement by more than fifty percent (50%), the developer shall pay a
fee in lieu of the provision of each space otherwise required in the amount of
ninety percent (90%) of the estimated cost of constructing a structured parking
space.
            (3)   The estimated cost of a structured parking space is twenty
four thousand dollars ($24,000.00) in 2013 dollars. This fee shall be adjusted
annually based on the national historical cost indexes contained in the most
recent edition of “Engineering News Record”, as amended. In the event the
national historical cost index is negative in any edition, the fee shall remain
at the amount previously set under this paragraph.
            (4)   The City shall calculate and assess the entire fee upon
issuance of a building permit. The fee payor shall pay the entire fee prior to
the issuance of the building permit.
            (5)   All fees paid shall be deposited in the Downtown and
Riverfront Crossings Parking District Restricted Fund, as set forth in this
subsection. Monies held in the Restricted Fund, including any accrued interest,
shall be used for the purpose of acquiring land for and constructing public
parking facilities located in the Downtown and Riverfront Crossings Parking
District.
            (6)   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are
issued for the acquisition or construction of the aforementioned property,
infrastructure or facilities within the Parking District, monies held in the
Restricted Fund may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments.
      7.   Parking Reduction For Other Unique Circumstances: Where it can be
demonstrated that a specific use has unique characteristics such that the
number of parking or stacking spaces required is excessive or will reduce the
ability to use or occupy a historic property in a manner that will preserve or
protect its historic, aesthetic, or cultural attributes, the Board of
Adjustment may grant a special exception to reduce the number of required
parking or stacking spaces by up to fifty percent (50%) (up to 100 percent for
properties designated as a local historic landmark, listed on the National
Register of Historic Places, or listed as key or contributing structures in a
Historic District or Conservation District Overlay Zone).
      8.   Parking Reduction For Liner Buildings: For liner buildings
constructed to mask a Municipal parking facility, the private off street
parking requirement may be reduced by up to one hundred percent (100%) if
parking for uses located within the liner building is provided within the
associated public parking facility. Monthly permits shall be made available for
purchase to residents, businesses, or other tenants located within the liner
building, but specific parking spaces within the associated parking structure
may or may not be designated for use by said permit holders, at the discretion
of the City. Compensation for construction of said parking shall be made to the
City with the amount and terms of said compensation determined through an
agreement with the City, which shall be executed prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit for the subject liner building.
      9.   Allowance For Scooter Or Motorcycle Parking: Up to ten percent (10%)
of the parking spaces required for a use may be reconfigured to accommodate
motorized scooters or motorcycles. Conversion of a minimum of two (2) abutting
standard parking spaces (an area equal to 18 feet by 18 feet) is required to
ensure adequate access and vehicular movement for up to six (6) scooter/
motorcycle spaces. Design of the scooter/motorcycle parking shall be approved
by the City. This provision shall not increase or decrease the allowed
occupancy or residential density of the uses on the property, i.e., each
required vehicular space converted to scooter/motorcycle spaces shall still be
counted as one required parking space.
      10.   Sustainability Parking Reduction: The minimum parking requirement
may be reduced by ten percent (10%) where each of the following provisions is
met, up to a maximum reduction of twenty-five percent (25%). This reduction may
be used in conjunction with subsections
14-2A-7E,
14-2B-8D,
14-2C-11E, and
14-3A-4D3 (Sustainability Density Bonus).
         a.   A solar energy system is installed onsite where the size is equal
to at least forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the roofs of all
buildings.
         b.   All uses within the development utilize electricity for one
hundred percent (100%) of their regular energy consumption after construction.
         c.   All buildings within the development are constructed to the most
current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code standards
published by the International Code Council. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 08-4326, 12-22-2008; Ord. 11-4452, 10-18-2011;
Ord. 12-4483, 5-15-2012; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013; Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; Ord.
16-4667, 7-5-2016; Ord. 16-4668, 7-5-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-
2016; Ord. 17-4703, 5-2-2017; Ord. 17-4705, 5-16-2017; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018;
Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019; Ord. 20-4834, 11-17-2020; Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023;
Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 24-4940, 11-4-2024)
14-5A-5: CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The construction and design standards are intended to ensure
safe and efficient vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation on a site,
and to ensure that parking areas are designed with trees and landscaping in a
manner that will break up the appearance of large expanses of paving, provide
shade coverage, and ensure appropriate screening and buffering from
pedestrianways and adjacent streets and properties.
   B.   Paving Materials: All parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles
must be constructed of asphaltic cement concrete, portland cement concrete or
manufactured paving materials, such as brick, except in the following
situations:
      1.   Drives and aisles serving single-family dwellings or duplexes that
abut and access historic Woodlawn Avenue or a nonhard surfaced alley are exempt
from this standard.
      2.   The City building official may permit materials other than those
listed, but excluding crushed rock or chip seal surfaces, for parking spaces,
aisles, and drives if the use of such material provides a durable, permanent
surface deemed suitable for the intended purpose and intensity of use.
      3.   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all parking and
stacking spaces, drives and aisles must be paved with an approved surface as
specified above; except, that the building official may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy in those instances where the building official finds
that the paving cannot reasonably be completed due to adverse weather
conditions or settling of land on the site after demolition or filling. A
temporary certificate of occupancy will be effective only to a date specific.
Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate, the property owner must place
in an escrow account established with the City an amount equal to one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of paving.
   C.   Parking, Stacking Space Size, And Drive Dimensions:
      1.   The minimum size of a standard off street parking space is nine feet
by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), exclusive of aisle width.
      2.   The minimum size of a compact off street parking space is eight feet
by fifteen feet (8' x 15'), exclusive of aisle width.
      3.   For all uses, except single-family and two-family uses, the
following rules apply:
         a.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the required number of parking
spaces may be compact spaces. A "Compact Vehicles Only" sign must be posted on
or in front of each compact space.
         b.   All other spaces, both required and nonrequired, must meet or
exceed the minimum size specification for standard spaces.
         c.   Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities must be
sized and designed in accordance with State of Iowa Administrative Code, 661
IAC 18, "Parking for Persons With Disabilities", as amended.
      4.   For single-family and two-family uses, required parking spaces must
be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in size.
      5.   Required stacking spaces must be at least nine feet (9') wide and
nineteen feet (19') long.
      6.   In all required parking areas that contain more than four (4)
parking spaces, such spaces must be visibly delineated on the surface by
painted or marked stripes.
      7.   A drive providing access to any parking area, either structured or
surface, with more than eighteen (18) spaces must be no less than eighteen feet
(18') in width if designed for two- way traffic or ten feet (10') in width if
designed for one-way traffic.
   D.   Drainage:
      1.   All parking and stacking spaces, drives and aisles in parking areas
must be pitched or curbed and drained to prevent the flow of excess water from
such areas onto streets and alleys which do not have adequate drainage
facilities as determined by the City Engineer.
      2.   Drives and aisles that are located within three feet (3') of a side
or rear lot line must be pitched or curbed and drained to prevent flow of water
onto adjoining property. Alternatively, a drainage course must be established
along lot lines to handle stormwater runoff.
   E.   Location:
      1.   Off street parking and stacking spaces must be located on the same
lot as the use served except as allowed in subsection
14-5A-4F, "Alternatives To Minimum Parking Requirements", of this article.
      2.   Off street parking spaces, stacking spaces, aisles and drives are
subject to the location and setback requirements specified in the base zone and
any other location requirements of this title that specifically supersede or
augment these general location standards.
      3.   Unless otherwise specified in this title, stacking spaces must be
located in such a way that a required parking space or access to a required
parking space is not obstructed.
   F.   Standards For Structured Parking In Multi-Family, Commercial Zones, The
Eastside Mixed Use District, And The Riverfront Crossings Zones: The following
standards apply to structured parking in all Multi-Family Zones, all Commercial
Zones, except the CB-10 Zone, and on property zoned Riverfront Crossings or
Eastside Mixed Use. On properties zoned Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed
Use, these standards apply to tuck under, midblock structures, lined
structures, integrated structures, and underground structures, as described in
chapter 2, article G of this title. Standards for structured parking in the CB-
10 Zone are specified in subsection
14-5A-3D of this article.
      1.   Parking Within Building: In Multi-Family, CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU
Zones, the ground level floor of a building is reserved primarily for principal
uses allowed in the zone. Therefore, any parking located within the exterior
walls of the building must meet the following standards:
         a.   In the CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU Zones, structured parking is not
permitted on the ground level floor of the building for the first thirty feet
(30') of lot depth as measured from the minimum setback line, except as allowed
by subsection
14-4B-4A7f of this title.
         b.   In Multi-Family Zones, structured parking is not permitted on the
ground level floor of the building for the first fifteen feet (15') of building
depth as measured from the street-facing building wall. On lots with more than
one street frontage this parking setback must be met along each street
frontage, unless reduced or waived by minor modification. The Building Official
may also waive this requirement where a townhome-style multi-family unit has
parking along a side street. When considering a minor modification request, the
City will consider factors such as street classification, building orientation,
location of primary entrance(s) to the building, and unique site constraints
such as locations where the residential building space must be elevated above
the floodplain.
         c.   In the CN-1, CB-2, CB-5, and MU Zones, the ceiling height of any
underground parking may extend no more than one foot (1') above the level of
the adjacent sidewalk. On sloping building sites and for existing buildings,
the City may adjust this requirement by minor modification. However, on sloping
sites at least a portion of the ground level floor height of any new building
must be located no more than one foot (1') above the level of the abutting
sidewalk or pedestrian plaza; and the floor height of the ground level floor of
the building must be no more than four feet (4') above the level of the
abutting public sidewalk or pedestrian plaza at any point along a street-facing
building facade.
         d.   In Multi-Family Zones, the ceiling height of any underground
parking may extend no more than three feet (3') above grade. For purposes of
this subsection, "grade" shall be defined as the average point of elevation of
the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between
the building and the streetside property line(s) or when the streetside
property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the
building and line five feet (5') from the building. A parking level that has
more than three feet (3') of its floor to ceiling height above "grade" as
defined herein shall be considered ground level parking and therefore shall be
subject to the setback stated in subsection F1b of this section.
      2.   Riverfront Crossings Or Eastside Mixed Use Properties: On property
zoned Riverfront Crossings or Eastside Mixed Use, structured parking shall be
placed in accordance with the provisions set forth in chapter 2, article G,
"Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form Based Development
Standards", of this title.
      3.   Parking Area To Be Enclosed: Except for garage openings, the parking
area must be enclosed within the exterior walls of the building. In no case
shall a building have the appearance from the street or from abutting
properties of being elevated above a parking level or "on stilts" (see
figure 5A.1 of this subsection).
FIGURE 5A.1
STRUCTURED PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2729.png]
 
      4.   Exterior Walls: Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are
visible from a public or private street or from an abutting property must
appear to be a component of the facade of the building through the use of
building materials, window openings and facade detailing that is similar or
complementary to the design of the building and must comply with the other
standards of this section (see subsection F3,
figure 5A.1 of this section).
      5.   Parking Space Configurations: Parking spaces within the structure
must be perpendicular to parking aisles. However, angled parking or parallel
parking configurations may be allowed if parking aisles are one-way.
      6.   Landscaping: In addition to the facade detailing noted above, the
City may require landscaping as a means to soften the visual effect of any
garage walls located at the street level. Shrubs, small berms, and planters may
be used to form a landscaped screen generally ranging between two feet (2') and
four feet (4') in height. Trees may also be incorporated into the landscaped
area if sufficient area is available for tree growth.
      7.   Garage Entrances/Exits:
         a.   Vehicular access to parking within buildings should be located
and designed to minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians and to
preserve street frontages for active building uses.
         b.   Garage entrances/exits should be located along a building wall
that does not face a public street and accessed from a private drive, private
rear lane or public alley. In the CB-2, CB-5, MU, Eastside Mixed Use, and
Riverfront Crossings Zones, alley or rear lane access is preferred. If the Form
Based Code Committee, in consultation with the Director of Neighborhood and
Development Services, determines that such access is not feasible due to lack
of alley access, topographical limitations, or other unique circumstances, or
if allowing direct access from a street will better meet the objectives as
stated in subsection F7a of this section, garage openings may face a street,
but must be designed in a manner that will best meet the objectives listed in
subsection F7a of this section, and must meet the standards listed in
subsections F7b(1), F7b(2), and F7b(3) of this section.
            (1)   If the structured parking is intended for residents or
tenants of a building and not the general public, there may be no more than one
doublewide or two (2) singlewide garage openings per building. Doublewide
openings may not exceed twenty feet (20') in width; singlewide openings may not
exceed ten feet (10') in width. For existing buildings where it is not possible
to meet this standard due to structural constraints of the building, the
building official may adjust this provision to allow one additional garage
entrance/exit that faces a street, provided that the minor modification
approval criteria are met and the garage opening is designed to minimize its
effect on the streetscape and minimize hazards to pedestrians.
            (2)   For structured parking intended for use by the general
public, garage openings should be limited in width and number to only what is
necessary to provide adequate access for the types and numbers of vehicles
using the parking facility.
            (3)   Except in the CN-1, CB-2, MU and CB-5 Zones, the opening(s)
must occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the street-facing
building wall. On corner lots, only one street- facing garage wall must meet
this standard. In the Eastside Mixed Use, Riverfront Crossings Zones and in the
CN-1, CB-2, MU and CB-5 Zones, garage opening(s) along the primary street
frontage are not permitted if access is feasible from another local or
collector street or from a rear alley, private street or private rear lane. If
there is no feasible alternative, garage opening(s) may be allowed along the
primary street frontage, provided that they occupy no more than thirty five
percent (35%) of the length of the primary street frontage of the lot and
provided that all provisions of article C, "Access Management Standards", of
this chapter are met.
   G.   Standards For Structured Parking In Industrial And Research Zones:
Where parking is located within the exterior walls of a principal building, the
following standards apply:
      1.   Any exterior walls of a parking facility that are visible from an
arterial street must appear to be a component of the facade of the building
through the use of building materials, window openings and facade detailing
that is similar or complementary to the design of the building. In no case
shall a building have the appearance from an arterial street of being elevated
above a parking level or "on stilts". (See subsection F3,
figure 5A.1 of this section.)
      2.   Vehicular access to parking within buildings should be located and
designed to minimize traffic congestion and hazards to pedestrians; and to
preserve street frontages for active building uses to the extent feasible.
Garage openings should be limited in width and number to only what is necessary
to provide adequate access for the types and numbers of vehicles using the
parking facility.
   H.   Design And Layout Of Surface Parking Areas: Except for parking for
single-family and two-family uses, all parking and stacking spaces, aisles and
drives must be designed as follows:
      1.   Minimum Dimensions: Parking areas must be configured according to
the aisle and parking space angle dimensions as illustrated in subsection H2,
figure 5A.2 of this section. Where the edges of parking spaces are curved, as
on a curved aisle, all angles are to be measured between the straight edges of
the parking spaces and tangents to the curved edges at their point of
intersection.
      2.   Aisles:
         a.   All parking spaces must be connected to an aisle that has a
minimum width as indicated in subsection H2,
figure 5A.2 of this section. Aisles designed for two-way traffic must be a
minimum of twenty two feet (22') in width.
         b.   The greatest aisle width shown in subsection H2,
figure 5A.2 of this section, must be provided when combining different parking
space configurations on the same aisle.
         c.   The maximum aisle width is twenty four feet (24').
FIGURE 5A.2
PARKING CONFIGURATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2731.png]
 
      3.   Circulation: Parking areas must be designed to promote safe and
convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation according to the
following standards and the standards of the base zone in which the property is
located:
         a.   Parking areas must be set back from rights-of-way and abutting
properties and properly screened from view as specified in the applicable base
zone regulations.
         b.   The drive(s) on a property should be designed to facilitate
vehicular circulation and connect street access points to parking areas,
loading and unloading areas, drive-through facilities, and other vehicular use
areas on a lot or tract. In general, drives should not be used as aisles.
However, the City may allow parking spaces along a drive in situations where
vehicular and pedestrian safety will not be compromised. When determining the
length and location of drives and the configuration of parking spaces and
aisles, the City will consider such factors as:
            (1)   Size and shape of the parking lot. Large parking lots with
multiple aisles of parking may need a system of separated drives to facilitate
traffic circulation; parking spaces should not be located along main
circulation routes where traffic speeds may be higher, but may be allowed in
lower traffic volume areas. In small parking areas, circulation drives may not
be necessary.
            (2)   Proximity to street access points. Parking spaces should not
be located so as to impede vehicles entering or exiting the site. The throat
length of drives at street access points must be sufficient in length to
provide the necessary vehicle stacking based on the anticipated traffic volume.
Parking spaces and aisles will not be allowed in close proximity to the
necessary driveway throats, as determined by the City.
            (3)   Proposed use of the drive. Parking spaces should not be
located so as to impede drive-through lanes, loading and unloading areas, or
higher volume delivery or truck circulation routes.
         c.   To control vehicle speeds and facilitate traffic safety and
circulation, drives must be separated from parking aisles by landscaped medians
and islands as illustrated in subsection H4,
figure 5A.4 of this section.
         d.   When used, medians should be at least four feet (4') in width and
be landscaped. If a median contains trees, it should be at least eight feet
(8') wide. If medians are intended for pedestrian circulation they should be
approximately twelve feet (12') to twenty feet (20') wide to accommodate a
walkway and shrubs and/or trees to buffer pedestrians from surrounding vehicle
areas.
         e.   To guide turning vehicles, maintain sightlines, and protect
vehicles at row ends, the free end of all parking aisles must be capped with a
landscaped terminal island as illustrated in
 figure 5A.3 of this subsection. In the CN-1 Zone, at least one shade tree must
be provided within each terminal island.
FIGURE 5A.3
TERMINAL PARKING ISLANDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2733.png]
 
         f.   Parking spaces within parking areas must be provided with car
stops or curbing to prevent encroachment into landscaped setbacks, medians, and
islands.
         g.   Parking areas must be designed to permit ingress and egress of
vehicles without needing to move any other vehicle occupying a parking space.
         h.   No parking area shall be designed in such a manner that exiting a
parking area would require backing into a street.
         i.   If the number of parking spaces required or provided for a use or
a combination of uses on a lot is greater than eight (8) spaces, none of those
spaces may be located in such a manner that would require backing into an
alley.
      4.   Partition Of Large Parking Areas: Surface parking areas that are
larger than forty five thousand (45,000) square feet or that have any perimeter
dimension greater than three hundred feet (300') must be divided into smaller,
connected lots to slow traffic movement, improve pedestrian safety, and reduce
the visual impact of large parking areas. The following design techniques must
be utilized to meet this standard. These design techniques may also be utilized
as a means of meeting the pedestrian circulation standards of the base zone.
(See
figure 5A.4 of this subsection H4.)
         a.   Divide the parking into separate areas with the use of drives and
landscape medians. These "separate areas" should have no dimension greater than
approximately two hundred feet (200').
         b.   The parking layout should ensure that no aisle of parking is
longer than approximately two hundred feet (200') without being end capped and
crossed by a drive or landscaped median.
         c.   Some parking areas may not easily accommodate the techniques
described above, such as long and narrow parking lots, so other options may be
approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development, such as the use
of landscaped islands to interrupt parking aisles and provide opportunities for
pedestrian crossings.
Figure 5A.4 - Partition Of Parking Lots/Separation Of Aisles And Drives
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2735.png]
 
   I.   Landscaping And Tree Requirements Within Parking Areas:
      1.   Applicability:
         a.   Parking areas that contain more than eighteen (18) parking spaces
must be designed to include trees and planting areas according to the
requirements of this subsection.
         b.   If the number of parking spaces in an existing parking area is
increased to accommodate more than eighteen (18) parking spaces, then the newly
added parking area must comply with the requirements of this subsection.
         c.   If an existing parking area, which is not constructed with a
permanent durable surface according to the construction and design standards
above, is subsequently required to be surfaced or altered in any way, the
provisions of this subsection shall apply as if the parking area did not
previously exist.
         d.   Parking ramps, covered parking areas, and parking areas that are
an integral part of a building are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. However, in such cases, certain perimeter landscaping may be
required according to the provisions of the base zone.
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   Trees must be planted or preserved on the site so that every
parking space or portion thereof is within forty feet (40') of a small tree or
within sixty feet (60') of a large tree.
         b.   In addition to the required trees, all medians, islands and other
planting areas within the parking area must be landscaped with turf, grasses,
low shrubs or other living cover. Planting areas at the ends of parking aisles
must consist of low growing varieties of shrubs, grasses, and ground cover (2
feet in height or less) so as not to impede vehicular sight lines. Landscape
medians along drives and pedestrian walkways may utilize larger shrubs and
plants to visually break up the appearance of large parking areas and buffer
pedestrian walkways. Trees may be planted in any median or planting island,
provided the median or island meets the minimum planting area size specified in
chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this title.
         c.   Planting areas must be separated from parking spaces, drives,
aisles, and alleys with unmountable curbs or barriers at least five inches (5")
in height. Curbs and barriers must be constructed in a manner that will prevent
salt and sand from storm water runoff from damaging trees and plantings. The
city may waive this requirement when drainage swales are utilized to facilitate
storm water runoff.
         d.   The design of any drainage swales proposed must be approved by
the city. Drainage swales must be planted with salt tolerant prairie grasses,
sedges and reeds that will slow runoff and allow ground infiltration. The
plants used in such swales must be approved by the city.
         e.   Coniferous trees may not be used to satisfy parking lot coverage
requirements.
         f.   Trees planted to meet the street tree requirements or to meet the
tree requirements for residential uses (see chapter 5, article E of this title)
may also be used to fulfill the requirements of this subsection; provided, that
no parking space is further than forty feet (40') from a small tree or sixty
feet (60') from a large tree.
         g.   All trees and landscaping within parking lots are subject to the
provisions of sections
14-5E-3, "General Requirements And Measurements",
14-5E-4, "Tree Planting Requirements",
14-5E-5, "Protection And Maintenance", and
14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this title.
   J.   Screening And Setback Requirements: Parking areas must be set back from
rights of way and abutting properties and screened from view according to
applicable setback and screening provisions of the subject base zone.
   K.   Design Of Bicycle Parking Areas:
      1.   The minimum size for a bicycle parking space is one and one-half
feet by six feet (1.5' X 6'). Where required for access, a minimum aisle width
of four feet (4') shall be provided.
      2.   Bicycle parking areas must be constructed of asphaltic cement
concrete, Portland cement concrete or manufactured paving materials, such as
brick. However, the city building official may permit the use of rock or gravel
areas for bicycle parking, provided edging materials are used so that the
bicycle parking area is clearly demarcated and the rock material is contained.
      3.   Required bicycle parking racks must be designed to support the
bicycle by its frame and allow the use of either a cable lock or a U-shaped
lock. Bicycle parking racks shall be installed a minimum of two feet (2') from
any curb, pavement edge, parking space, drive, walkway, or obstruction such as
a well wall, fence, doorway, or landscaping. Bicycle lockers and secure indoor
storage facilities are also allowed.
      4.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in a clearly designated,
safe, visible, and convenient location and shall be located so as not to impede
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Bicycle parking is allowed in front and side
building setbacks in all zones; provided, that such a parking area results in
no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required setback area being
paved.
   L.   Special Vehicle Parking And Storage Requirements In Single-Family
Zones, T3 Neighborhood Edge Zone, And T3 Neighborhood General Zone: The
provisions of this subsection apply in all single-family residential zones and
the above listed Form-Based Zones. For purposes of this subsection, a “special
vehicle” is defined as any device, more than seven and one-half feet (7.5') in
height and more than twenty feet (20') in length, which is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, street, or body of water, including,
without limitation, any motor vehicle, truck, trailer, tractor, wagon,
watercraft or any combination thereof exceeding these dimensions. A storage
area for a special vehicle includes any space equal in size to the outer
perimeter of the subject special vehicle that is used for storage of such a
vehicle. The following provisions apply to all such special vehicles:
      1.   A special vehicle may be stored inside any building, provided it is
not stored in a required parking space.
      2.   A special vehicle stored outside a building must comply with the
following standards:
         a.   The vehicle must be in operational condition and properly
licensed as required by state and federal law.
         b.   The special vehicle must belong to the owner or tenant of the
property on which the vehicle is located, except for special vehicles of
guests, as provided in subsection L2c of this section.
         c.   A special vehicle may not be used for dwelling purposes except as
temporary lodging for guests of the property owner or tenant. Such temporary
lodging may occur for no more than twenty one (21) consecutive days nor may
temporary lodging exceed a total of forty five (45) days in any calendar year.
An extension may be approved by the city manager or designee.
         d.   The special vehicle may not be used for storage of items other
than those considered to be part of the unit.
         e.   The storage area must be surfaced with crushed rock, asphalt,
concrete or a similar surface designed and maintained to prevent muddy
conditions, erosion from the flow of water onto adjoining property and weed
growth. In cases where crushed rock is used, the perimeter of a storage area
must be lined with bricks, landscape timbers or similar material that will
effectively contain the crushed rock.
         f.   (1) A special vehicle may not be parked or stored on a vacant
residential lot.
            (2)   No special vehicle may be stored in a front setback, except
on a regularly constructed aisle for a period of no more than four (4) days for
the purpose of loading and unloading.
            (3)   A special vehicle may be stored in the required rear setback
or the required side setback, provided the outer edge of the storage area is no
closer than three feet (3') to a side lot line or to a rear lot line of a
reversed corner lot.
            (4)   The city manager or designee may permit outside storage of a
special vehicle in the required front setback or the required side setback
along a street, provided:
               (A)   Storage space is not available in the side or rear setback
or there is no access to either the side or rear setback. For purposes of this
provision, a corner lot will always be deemed to have access to the rear
setback. Accessory structures and buildings less than one hundred sixty (160)
square feet in area and vegetation that is transplantable are not deemed to
prevent access.
               (B)   Inside storage is not possible because the size of the
special vehicle exceeds either the space available or the size of the entrance
available in any existing building, or both.
               (C)   The special vehicle is parked perpendicular to the street.
               (D)   The special vehicle storage area is screened from view of
the street using landscaping, a fence or a wall. Fences, walls, and hedges must
meet the applicable standards specified in chapter 4, article C, "Accessory
Uses And Buildings", of this title.
               (E)   No part of the special vehicle extends beyond the property
line or over a public right of way. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-
4220, 7-18-2006; Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014; Ord. 16-
4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 17-4703, 5-2-2017; Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019; Ord. 21-4866,
11-16-2021; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023)
14-5A-6: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: In all zones, except the CB-5 and CB-10 zones, off
street loading spaces must be provided and maintained in compliance with the
requirements of this section.
   B.   Off Street Loading Requirements: Any nonresidential use that receives
or distributes materials or merchandise by trucks or vans and that has an
aggregate gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must
provide the minimum number of loading spaces as indicated in
table 5A-4 of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
Table 5A-4: Off Street Loading Requirements
 
Aggregate Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) Required Number Of Loading Spaces
10,000 to 20,000                         1
20,001 to 40,000                         2
40,001 to 80,000                         3
80,001 to 120,000                        4
120,001 to 160,000                       5
For each additional 80,000               1 additional
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
   C.   Rules For Computing Minimum Loading Requirements:
      1.   Where a fractional space results, the number of loading spaces
required is the closest whole number. A half space will be rounded down.
      2.   Any use that is nonconforming with regard to the number of required
loading spaces is subject to the applicable provisions of
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
   D.   Use And Restrictions:
      1.   The use of required loading spaces is reserved for loading. Other
uses of required loading areas are not permitted, except as approved for a
temporary use. (See
chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.)
      2.   The storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, refuse containers,
obsolete or junk vehicles or the major repair of vehicles in required loading
areas is prohibited.
   E.   Design And Maintenance Requirements: All loading spaces must be
constructed of asphalt, concrete or similar permanent dust free surface and in
accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   Loading spaces must be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide, twenty five
feet (25') long and twelve feet (12') high, exclusive of aisles. When more than
two (2) spaces are required, the spaces, other than the first two (2), must be
at least twelve feet (12') wide, seventy two feet (72') long and fourteen feet
(14') high.
      2.   All loading spaces must be pitched and drained to prevent the flow
of water from such areas onto streets and alleys that do not have adequate
drainage facilities as determined by the city engineer.
   F.   General Location Standards:
      1.   Loading spaces must be located so that trucks or vans loading or
unloading do not back onto or out of a street.
      2.   Off street loading areas are subject to the location and setback
requirements specified in the base zone.
   G.   Screening Requirements: Loading areas must be screened from view
according to applicable screening provisions of the base zone. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
14-5B-1: Findings, Purpose And Interpretation
14-5B-2: General Rules And Applicability
14-5B-3: General Location Standards
14-5B-4: Construction And Maintenance Requirements
14-5B-5: Nonconforming Situations
14-5B-6: Prohibited Signs
14-5B-7: Measurement Standards
14-5B-8: Signs Permitted By Zone
14-5B-9: Off Premises And Temporary Signs
14-5B-10: Privately Owned Signs In Public Places
14-5B-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
Signs can obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for
land and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the size, illumination, movement,
materials, location, height and condition of all signs placed on private
property meant to be visible to the public from a street or other public right
of way thus enhancing and protecting the physical appearance and safety of the
community, protecting property values and the character of the various
neighborhoods, and preserving Iowa City's areas of natural, historic and scenic
beauty.
These regulations are intended to reduce distractions and obstructions
contributing to traffic accidents; reduce hazards caused by signs projecting
over the public right of way; provide a reasonable opportunity for all sign
users to display signs without interference from other signage.
These regulations are further intended to provide fair and equitable treatment
for all sign users; to allow for creative design; to encourage economic
development; to distinguish between areas designed primarily for auto oriented
commerce and areas designed for residential living or pedestrian oriented
commerce; and to establish a reasonable period of time for the elimination of
nonconforming signs.
This article allows adequate communication through signage while encouraging
aesthetic quality and creativity in the design, location, size and purpose of
all signs. This article must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the
first amendment guarantee of free speech. A sign placed on land or on a
building for the purpose of identification, protection or directing persons to
a use conducted therein must be deemed to be an integral but accessory and
subordinate part of the principal use of land or building. Therefore, the
intention of this article is to establish limitations on signs in order to
ensure they are appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are
appurtenant and are adequate for their intended purpose while balancing the
individual and community interests identified above. These regulations are
intended to promote signs that are compatible with the use of the property to
which they are appurtenant, landscape and architecture of surrounding
buildings, are legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain,
are not distracting to motorists, and are constructed and maintained in a
structurally sound and attractive condition.
The regulations are not intended to and do not apply to signs erected,
maintained or otherwise posted, owned or leased by the city, state or federal
government.
A sign displaying a noncommercial message of any type is allowed anywhere that
commercial signs are allowed, subject to the same regulations applicable to
such commercial signs to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech
over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular commercial message
over any other noncommercial message. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-2: GENERAL RULES AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: All signs on private property must be installed,
maintained, and/or removed according to the provisions of this article, unless
specifically exempted or superseded by more specific provisions of this title.
   B.   Permit Required:
      1.   No sign requiring a permit in accordance with the requirements of
this article shall be installed, altered, moved, improved or converted without
first obtaining a sign permit from the building official or designee according
to the procedures specified in chapter 8, "Review And Approval Procedures", of
this title. A permit is not required for incidental repairs or routine
maintenance.
      2.   Certain types of signs are allowed without a permit and such
exemption from the sign permit requirements is clearly specified in the tables
included in sections
14-5B-8 and
14-5B-9 of this article. A permit is required for any sign that is not
specifically exempted from the permit requirements.
   C.   Sign Installer's License Required:
      1.   Except for those signs not requiring a permit, as listed in sections
14-5B-8 and
14-5B-9 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter,
move, improve, remove or convert any sign without having a sign installer's
license in good standing issued by the city. A onetime sign installer's license
shall be available to a tenant or owner of a building to permit the tenant's or
owner's own sign to be installed.
      2.   The license to install, alter, move, improve, remove or convert any
sign as required herein shall be known as a "sign installer's license" and
shall be issued by the city to the person desiring to perform the work
indicated above. No such license shall be issued to any person until such
person shall have paid to the city a license fee as established by resolution
of city council and shall have filed with the department of housing and
inspection services a copy or a certificate of a contractor's public liability
insurance policy with coverage limits as set out in this code. The city shall
be designated as an additional insured, and the policy shall provide that the
city is to be notified thirty (30) days in advance of the termination of the
policy. The license shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all
damage, judgment, cost or expense which the city may incur or suffer by reason
of said license issuance.
      3.   All sign installer's licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Renewal fees and reinstatement fees shall be as established by resolution
of the city council. Any license that has expired may be reinstated within
sixty (60) calendar days after the expiration date upon payment of an
additional reinstatement fee.
      4.   A onetime sign installer's license shall be valid for thirty (30)
days from the date of issuance.
      5.   The building official or designee is responsible for enforcement of
these provisions and is empowered to suspend or revoke a sign installer's
license for a violation of the sign regulations or if the license was obtained
by fraud or if the license allows any person not employed by the sign installer
without a valid installer's license to do or cause to be done any work
requiring a license.
      6.   A person aggrieved by the revocation, suspension or denial of a
license may appeal said action to the board of adjustment.
      7.   If a license is revoked for any reason, another installer's license
shall not be issued to such person for twelve (12) months after revocation.
   D.   Application Of State Law: In any case in which the code of Iowa, as
amended, contains more restrictive requirements than the regulations contained
herein, the code of Iowa, as amended, will govern. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008;
amd. Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5B-3: GENERAL LOCATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Location Standards For All Zones:
      1.   No sign shall be located in violation of the intersection visibility
standards set forth in article D of this chapter.
      2.   All nonbuilding signs, and all parts thereof, must be set back at
least five feet (5') from any property line, with the following exception:
Signs may be located closer than five feet (5') to a property line at ten feet
(10') or more above grade, provided no part of the sign or sign support
overhangs any property lines. In addition, freestanding wide base signs must
not be located closer than ten feet (10') to any right of way or closer than
thirty feet (30') to any street curb.
      3.   Building signs must comply with the building setback requirements of
the base zone. No part of a building sign or sign support may overhang a
property line, unless specifically allowed in this article.
      4.   For any sign that is allowed to project over the public right of way
according to the provisions of this article, a use of public right of way
agreement must be signed by the property owner as a part of the permitting
process.
      5.   No sign shall obstruct ingress to or egress from any door, window or
fire escape. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   B.   Signs Adjacent To Residential Zones:
      1.   Any sign located in a nonresidential zone, but within one hundred
feet (100') of a residential zone is subject to the standards and limitations
of subsection
14-5B-8C, "Sign Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this article.
      2.   Electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed within one hundred
feet (100') of a residential zone, except for allowed time and temperature
signs, as defined in chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title.
      3.   In nonresidential zones, except for fascia signs, no sign shall be
located in the required front building setback area within fifty feet (50') of
a residential zone.
      4.   Fascia signs located in nonresidential zones and within fifty feet
(50') of a residential zone on the same side of the street shall not be placed
on the wall of the building facing the residential zone. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-
2008)
14-5B-4: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Construction: All signs, except for temporary signs, shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30)
pounds per square foot of area and loads as required by the building code.
(Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
   B.   Minimum Clearance Height: The minimum clearance height is measured from
ground level to the lowest point on the sign. The minimum clearance height for
freestanding, banner, and time and temperature signs is ten feet (10'). For
freestanding wide base signs, the bottom of the sign face must be a minimum of
ten feet (10') above ground level, except if the sign is fifteen feet (15') or
less in height. For these shorter wide based signs, the bottom of the sign face
must be a minimum of three feet (3') above ground level. For storefront
projecting signs and canopy signs, the minimum clearance height is eight feet
(8'). Minimum clearance height is ten feet (10') for entranceway signs across
driveways and eight feet (8') for entranceway signs across walkways. (Ord. 16-
4685, 11-15-2016)
   C.   Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in such a manner as to avoid
becoming a hazardous sign.
   D.   Changeable Copy:
      1.   Copy Changed Manually: Any sign may contain copy that is changed
manually, unless precluded by definition or specifically prohibited herein.
      2.   Copy Changed Electronically: Signs where the copy is changed by
electronic means are only allowed as specified below:
         a.   The sign must be located in a commercial zone or in a public
zone. However, electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed within one
hundred feet (100') of a residential zone, except for allowed time and
temperature signs, as defined in
chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title. On properties zoned
public, electronic changeable copy signs are not allowed where said sign would
be visible from any adjacent residential zone. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
         b.   Electronic changeable copy is allowed on only one sign per lot.
In the CH-1, CI-1, CC-2, CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones, a "time and temperature
sign", as defined in
chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title, shall not count toward
the one sign limit. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
         c.   The changeable copy may not be animated. (See definition of
"animated sign" in
chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of this title.) The copy may be
changed no more than once per hour, except for designation of the time and
temperature, which may be changed more frequently.
         d.   The sign may not contain images or be of a brightness that will
interfere with, obstruct the view of, or confuse traffic. The sign may not
contain images that may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or
device. The sign may not make use of the words, "stop", "go slow", "caution",
"drive-in", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a
way as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
         e.   The sign must comply with the illumination standards as specified
in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
         f.   In the MU, CO-1, and CN-1 zones, electronic changeable copy is
only allowed on a time and temperature sign. (See definition of "time and
temperature sign" in
chapter 9, article C of this title.) The electronic changeable copy portion of
the sign is limited to the display of the time and/or temperature and may not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-
2008; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
         g.   In public zones and in CH-1, CI-1, and CC-2 Zones, electronic
changeable copy is only allowed on time and temperature signs, freestanding
signs, freestanding wide base signs, and monument signs. On time and
temperature signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign is
limited to the display of the time and/or temperature and may not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. On freestanding and freestanding
wide base signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. For monument signs,
the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign may not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the area of the sign face.
         h.   In the CB-2 and CB-5 Zones, electronic changeable copy is only
allowed on time and temperature signs and monument signs. On time and
temperature signs, the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign is
limited to the display of the time and/or temperature and may not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the area of the sign face. On monument signs, the electronic
changeable copy portion of the sign may not exceed seventy five percent (75%)
of the area of the sign face. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
         i.   In the CB-10 Zones, electronic changeable copy is only allowed on
time and temperature signs and window signs as permitted for indoor
recreational uses in section
14-5B-8,
table 5B-4 of this article. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
   E.   Illumination Requirements: Illuminated signs must conform to the
following requirements: (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
      1.   Except for signs in the ID and Residential Zones, all permitted
signs may be internally or externally illuminated. All signs permitted in the
ID and Residential Zones may only be externally illuminated with white light,
except that institutional uses in the PRM Zone may have one sign internally
illuminated. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
      2.   Illumination through the use of exposed lamps or inert gas tubes is
allowed, provided the exposed lamp does not exceed eleven (11) watts or that an
inert gas tube does not draw more than sixty (60) milliamps. When inside
frosted lamps or exposed lamps with a diffusing screen are used, no lamp shall
exceed twenty five (25) watts.
      3.   Illumination through the use of LEDs is allowed only as specified
for electronic changeable copy. All signs using LEDs must have installed
ambient light monitors and must at all times allow such monitors to
automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic sign based on
ambient light conditions. At no time shall the sign be operated at a brightness
level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels. The electronic
changeable copy must be monochromatic. It must utilize a dark background with
only the message or image lit in a single color.
      4.   Artificial external light sources used to illuminate a sign face
must be located and shielded such that the bulb is not directly visible from
any adjacent residentially zoned property or public right-of-way and must use a
narrow cone of light that does not extend beyond the illuminated sign face.
      5.   Illumination on a property, including illumination from signs, must
not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot-candle and 2.0 initial maximum foot-
candles as measured at any point along a property boundary that is adjacent to
or across the street from properties that are zoned residential, CN-1, or CO-1.
      6.   All illuminated signs are subject to the provisions of the
Electrical Code, including any permit fees.
      7.   Permit applications for electronic changeable copy signs must
include a copy of the manufacturer's operating manual, including any
recommended standards for brightness and other display operations.
      8.   For electronic changeable copy signs, whether the sign is programmed
from the site or from a remote location, the computer interface that programs
the sign shall be made available to City staff for inspection upon request. If
the computer interface is not immediately available, the sign shall cease
operation until such program can be provided. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-5: NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
   A.   Nonconforming Signs: All legally nonconforming signs must comply with
the provisions specified for nonconforming signs in
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. Signs deemed
"historic" may be eligible for a special exception according to the provisions
specified in
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 08-4319,
11-3-2008)
   B.   Signs For Nonconforming Uses: A nonconforming use is permitted to have
the same amount and type of signage as would be allowed for such use in the
most restrictive zone in which such use is allowed. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Regulations Are Exclusionary: These regulations are intended to be
exclusionary. Any type of sign not specifically listed in this article is
prohibited. In addition, the following signs are specifically prohibited in all
zones:
      1.   Animated signs, except for barbers' poles and three- dimensional
storefront projecting signs as expressly permitted by this article.
      2.   Hazardous signs.
      3.   Obsolete signs.
      4.   Painted wall signs except for wall mural painted signs.
      5.   Portable signs, including signs on wheels, trailers, and truck beds,
but excepting those portable signs expressly permitted by this article.
      6.   Roof signs.
      7.   Searchlights.
      8.   Spinners, balloons, pennants, or other similar devices.
      9.   Swinging signs except for storefront projecting signs.
      10.   Banners except for banner projecting signs as expressly permitted
in this article and banners permitted in section
14-5B-8,
table 5B-4 of this article.
      11.   No vehicle, including trailers, shall be parked so that it
functions primarily as a sign. A vehicle will be considered in violation of
this provision if the questions in subsections A11a through A11c of this
section can be answered in the affirmative, and there is no compelling answer
to the question in subsection A11d of this section to justify the parking
location as opposed to some less conspicuous location.
         a.   Is the vehicle parked at a prominent location?
         b.   Can people driving by the sign easily read the sign?
         c.   Is the vehicle in the same or similar locations for several hours
during the same day or for several days during the same week?
         d.   Are there any stated or apparent reasons, other than for signage
purposes, that justify the vehicle being at that location? (Ord. 16-4685, 11-
15-2016)
   B.   Removal Of Prohibited Or Illegal Signs: In accordance with the
following procedure, the building official or designee is authorized to require
the removal of any illegal or prohibited sign:
      1.   Before taking action to require the removal of any illegal or
prohibited sign, the building official or designee will provide written notice
to the owner or operator of the business to which the sign relates.
      2.   The notice will specify that the illegal or prohibited sign must be
removed or brought into compliance with this article within a reasonable time
of such notice.
      3.   If the sign is not removed or repaired, as the case may be, within
the time allowed, the building official or designee is hereby authorized to
have the sign removed to be used as evidence and assess the costs of removal
against the property for collection in the same manner as a Property Tax. (Ord.
08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-7: MEASUREMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Sign Area:
      1.   Where the size of a sign is regulated by the area of a wall, an
awning or a canopy, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the
total area of the wall, the awning, or the canopy on which the sign is affixed.
      2.   For entranceway signs located on the front elevation of the subject
archway, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the total area
delineated by the archway. For entranceway signs located on the side of the
archway, the maximum sign area is calculated as a percentage of the surface
area of the side of the archway support on which the sign is located.
Figure 5B.1 of this section illustrates how to measure the total area
delineated by the archway and the surface area of the side of the archway
support. The total area delineated by the archway in
figure 5B.1 of this section equals x(y). The surface area of the side of the
archway support in
figure 5B.1 of this section equals a(b).
FIGURE 5B.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2737.png]
 
      3.   The total building signage on a wall, canopy, or awning shall not
exceed the maximum sign allowance for that wall, canopy, or awning, regardless
of the number of uses or occupants in the building. For example, if the maximum
sign area for fascia signs is fifteen percent (15%), then no more than fifteen
percent (15%) of any single wall of the building may be covered by fascia
signs, regardless of how many businesses are located in the building.
   B.   Measuring Sign Area: The area of each sign, regardless of shape, shall
be computed by determining the area of a triangle, rectangle or circle that
completely encloses the outer perimeter of the sign face. In the case of a sign
composed of characters or words that are attached directly to a building, an
appurtenance to a building, or a masonry wall, the area of the sign will be
computed by determining the area of a triangle, rectangle, or circle that
completely encloses the whole group of characters or words.
   C.   Measuring Sign Height: The maximum height of a sign shall be the
measurement from grade to the highest point on the sign. In the case where a
minimum height is established, the minimum height shall be measured from grade
to the lowest point on the sign. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
14-5B-8: SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONE:
   A.   Sign Standards For ID And OPD Zones:
      1.   Permitted Signs:
         a.   Single-family uses and two-family uses are not allowed to install
permanent signs, except for one small identification building sign and one
integral sign, as specified in table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-
2008; amd. Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
         b.   Institutional uses in ID-RS and ID-RM Zones are permitted two (2)
identification signs from the following types: fascia, awning, canopy, monument
or masonry wall sign. One sign for an institutional use may also include copy
announcing its services or activities. All other nonresidential uses in the ID-
RS and ID-RM Zones are permitted one identification sign from the following
types: fascia, awning, canopy or monument sign. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
         c.   Signage for nonresidential uses in the ID-C, ID-I, and ID-RP
Zones must comply with the sign regulations contained in subsection C, "Sign
Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this section.
         d.   Residential uses in any OPD Zone are permitted signage in
accordance with the requirements of the underlying residential zone.
Nonresidential uses approved as part of a planned development are permitted
signage in accordance with the sign regulations contained in subsection C,
"Sign Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones", of this section.
      2.   Sign Specifications And Provisions:
         a.   All signs for residential uses in the ID and OPD Zones are
subject to the standards specified in
table 5B-1 of this section.
         b.   All signs in the ID-RS and ID-RM Zones are subject to the
standards specified in
table 5B-1 of this section.
         c.   All signs for nonresidential uses in the ID-C, ID-I, and ID-RP
Zones are subject to the standards specified in
table 5B-2 of this section.
         d.   In the OPD Zone, all signs for nonresidential uses approved as
part of a planned development are subject to the standards specified in
table 5B-2 of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
   B.   Sign Standards For All Residential Zones:
      1.   Permitted Signs:
         a.   Principal uses, other than single-family uses and two-family
uses, are permitted one identification sign from the following types: fascia,
awning, canopy or monument sign. Institutional uses are permitted two (2)
identification signs from the following sign types: fascia, awning, canopy,
monument or masonry wall sign. One sign for an institutional use may also
include copy announcing its services or activities. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
         b.   Parks and open space uses are permitted entranceway signs as
specified in
table 5B-1 of this section.
         c.   Single-family uses and two-family uses are not allowed to install
permanent signs, except for one small identification building sign and one
integral sign as specified in
table 5B-1 of this section.
         d.   One monument sign is permitted at each street entrance of a
subdivision or development of two (2) acres or more. The maximum sign area is
thirty two (32) square feet per side - may be double faced for a total of sixty
four (64) square feet - maximum height is five feet (5'). All other monument
signs are permitted as specified in
table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
      2.   Sign Specifications And Provisions: All signs in residential zones
are subject to the standards specified in table 5B-1 of this section.
Table 5B-1: Sign Specifications And Provisions In Residential And The ID And
OPD Zones
Permitted Signs Zone Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height And Special Provisions
Permitted      Zone        Maximum Sign  Maximum Height And Special Provisions
Signs                      Area
               ID-RS, RR-
               1, RS-5,    12 sq. ft. or Maximum height: Top of first story
               RS-8, RS-   25% of awning  
Awning signs1  12, RNS-12, surface,      Limited to identification only
               ID-RM, RM-  whichever is   
               12, RM-20,  less          Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
               RNS-20, RM-
               44, PRM
               ID-RS, RR-  Sign cannot   Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright on the top of the
               1, RS-5,    exceed 90% of canopy or underneath the canopy. Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may
               RS-8, RS-   street-facing not extend beyond the edges of the canopy. Signs mounted on the top of the
               12, RNS-12, canopy length canopy or underneath the canopy must consist of individual letter forms and may
Canopy signs1  ID-RM, RM-  and no more   not extend more than 15" in height above or below the canopy. The bottom of the
               12, RM-20,  than 15       canopy or any letter forms attached underneath the canopy must be, at minimum
               RNS-20, RM- inches in     8' above the level of the adjacent grade
               44, PRM     height         
                                         Canopy signs may not be illuminated
               ID-RS, RR-  2 sq. ft. per
               1, RS-5,    face
               RS-8, RS-    
Directional    12, RNS-12, May be double --
signs          ID-RM, RM-  faced for
               12, RM-20,  total area of
               RNS-20, RM- 4 sq. ft.
               44, PRM
                           For signs
                           located above
                           or across the
                           top of the
                           subject       Maximum height: 20'
                           archway, the   
                           area of the   Up to 1 sign per facade of the subject archway
                           sign may not   
                           exceed 25% of The sign may not contain changeable copy
                           the area
                           delineated by
                           the subject
                           archway
               Allowed for For a sign
               parks and   located on
               open space  the side of
Entranceway    uses in any the archway,
signs          residential the area of
               zone, ID    the sign may
               Zone, or    not exceed
               OPD Zone    33% of the
                           surface area  Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the entranceway structure
                           of the side    
                           of the        Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs across driveways and 8'
                           archway       for entranceway signs across walkways
                           support on             Entranceway signs are not allowed if the subject lot or tract already
                           which the     has a monument sign located at the subject entrance
                           sign is
                           located. (See
                           section
                           14-5B-7,
                           "Measurement
                           Standards",
                           of this
                           article.)
                           4 sq. ft.,
               ID-RS, RR-  except
               1, RS-5,    institutional
               RS-8, RS-   uses are      Maximum height: Top of first story
               12, RNS-12  allowed 12     
Fascia signs1              sq. ft.       Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
               ID-RM, RM-                 
               12, RM-20,                Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
               RNS-20, RM- 12 sq. ft.
               44, PRM

               ID-RS, RR-
               1, RS-5,
               RS-8, RS-                 Up to 1 of these signs is allowed per building
Integral signs 12, RNS-12, 2 sq. ft.      
               ID-RM, RM-                No permit is required
               12, RM-20,
               RNS-20, RM-
               44, PRM
               ID-RS, RR-
               1, RS-5,
               RS-8, RS-                 1' less than the height of the masonry wall
Masonry wall   12, RNS-12, 12 sq. ft.     
signs          ID-RM, RM-                Limited to institutional uses
               12, RM-20,
               RNS-20, RM-
               44, PRM
                           12 sq. ft.
               ID-RS, RR-  per sign face Maximum height: 5'
               1, RS-5,                  
               RS-8, RS-   May be double Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
               12, RNS-12  faced for a    
                           total area of Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
Monument                   24 sq. ft.
signs1                     24 sq. ft.
               ID-RM, RM-  per sign face Maximum height: 5'
               12, RM-20,                
               RNS-20, RM- May be double Limited to identification only, except as allowed for institutional uses
               44, PRM     faced for a    
                           total area of Not allowed for single-family and two-family uses
                           48 sq. ft.
               ID-RS, RR-
               1, RS-5,                  The sign must be a building sign
Small          RS-8, RS-                  
identification 12, RNS-12, 2 sq. ft.     Up to 1 of these signs is allowed per building
signs          ID-RM, RM-                 
               12, RM-20,                No permit is required
               RNS-20, RM-
               44, PRM
 
Note:
    1.    See subsections A1b and B1a of this section for the number of signs
allowed.
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; amd. Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
   C.   Sign Standards In CO-1, CN-1 And MU Zones:
      1.   All signs in the CO-1, CN-1, and MU Zones are subject to the
standards specified in table 5B-2 of this section, except signage for
residential uses must comply with the requirements for residential uses in the
RM Zones as stated in table 5B-1 of this section.
Table 5B-2: Sign Specifications And Provisions In The CO-1, CN-1, And MU Zones
Permitted Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted      Maximum Sign Maximum    Provisions
Signs          Area         Height
               25% of       Top edge   Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the following sign
Awning signs   awning       of first   types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting signs. Awning signs are
               surface      story      only allowed on first story awnings
                            awning
                                       Maximum diameter: 9"
Barbers' poles --           --          
                                       Maximum length: 3'
                                       Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the following sign
                                       types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting signs
               Sign cannot             Signs may be mounted on the face of the canopy, upright on the top of the
               exceed 90%              canopy or underneath the canopy. See applicable dimensional provisions for
               of street-   Top edge   each type
               facing       of first   Signs mounted under a canopy with the face perpendicular to the building will
Canopy signs   canopy       story      be considered storefront projecting signs and regulated accordingly. Said
               length and   canopy     signs may not project beyond the outer edge of the canopy
               no more than            Signs mounted on the face of the canopy may not project beyond the edges of
               24" in                  the canopy
               height                  Signs mounted on the top of the canopy must consist of individual letter
                                       forms and may not extend more than 24" in height above the canopy
                                       Canopy signs may be internally or externally illuminated or halo backlit
               3 sq. ft.
               per sign
               face
Directional     
signs          May be       --         --
               double faced
               for total
               area of 6
               sq. ft.
               For signs
               located
               above or
               across the
               top of the
               subject
               archway, the
               area of the
               sign may not
               exceed 25%
               of the area
               delineated
               by the                  Up to 1 sign per facade of the subject archway
               subject                  
               archway                 The sign may not contain changeable copy
                                       
               For a sign              Sign copy may not extend beyond the edges of the entranceway structure
               located on               
Entranceway    the side of  20'        Minimum clearance height is 10' for entranceway signs across driveways and 8'
signs          the archway,            for entranceway signs across walkways
               the area of              
               the sign may            Entranceway signage as specified herein will count as 1 sign toward the total
               not exceed              limit for monument signs on a lot or tract. Entranceway signs are not allowed
               33% of the              if the subject lot or tract already has a monument sign located at the
               surface area            subject entrance
               of the side
               of the
               archway
               support on
               which the
               sign is
               located.
               (See section
               14-5B-7,
               "Measurement
               Standards",
               of this
               article.)
               15% of sign  Top of
Fascia signs   wall area    first      Parapet signs are allowed only on one-story buildings
                            story
                                       1 additional flag may be displayed in conjunction with any city, county,
Flags          --           --         state or federal flags
                                        
                                       No permit is required
Identification 2 sq. ft.               No permit is required
and integral   except as    --          
signs          allowed in              A larger integral sign may be allowed when said sign delineates the name of
               provisions              the building. Size shall be regulated as a fascia sign. A permit is required
               Up to 2 sq.
               ft. of sign
               area per
               linear foot
               of lot
               frontage,               2 or more uses on a single lot may share a common monument sign
               not to                   
               exceed 50               The number of monument signs on a lot or tract is limited as follows:
Monument signs sq. ft. per  5'          
               sign face               • For lots or tracts with less than 160' of frontage on a single street, only
                                      1 monument sign is permitted along that frontage
               May be
               double faced
               for a total
               area of 100
               sq. ft. per
               sign
                                       • For lots or tracts with 160 to 300' of frontage along a single street, up
                                    to 2 monument signs are permitted. The monument signs must be at least 150'
                                       apart as measured along the frontage
                                       • For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of 300' along a single street,
                                    up to 3 monument signs are permitted, provided the signs are at least 150'
                                       apart as measured along the frontage
                                       • For lots or tracts with frontage along more than 1 street, each frontage is
                                       allowed signs based on the formulas stated above up to a maximum of 5 signs.
                                    Any sign that is located within 25' of a corner (at the point where property
                                       lines intersect) will count as 2 signs; 1 toward the sign allowance for each
                                       frontage
               9 sq. ft.               Each storefront is allowed up to a total of 3 signs from the following sign
                                      types: canopy signs, awning signs, and projecting signs. There must be at
               May be                  least 12' between projecting signs
               double faced            May not project more than 4' from the building wall
               for a total             Allowed to be a three- dimensional model of an object, such as a globe or
               of 18 sq.               book. If three-dimensional, the sign may rotate
               ft.                     External illumination is permitted provided there are no more than 2
                                      spotlights of no more than 2000 lumens shining directly on the sign and
               The size may            provided they meet the light trespass standards in article G of this chapter
               be increased            Internal illumination is allowed for halo backlit or neon letters. Internally
               up to 18 sq.            illuminated plastic trim cap letters and internally illuminated cabinet signs
               ft. (may be  Top of the where the entire face of the cabinet is illuminated are prohibited
               double faced first      Shall not project more than 6' into public right of way
               for a total  story,
Storefront     area of 36   located
projecting     sq. ft.) if  below any
signs          the sign and second
               storefront   floor
               meet the     windowsill
               following               If located on or in required storefront windows, window signs shall be
               criteria:               displayed or affixed in a manner that does not block views into the interior
               The floor to            of the storefrontTime and temperature signs25 sq. ft. per sign face
               ceiling                  
               height of               May be double faced for a total of 50 sq. ft.--
               the ground
               level floor
               is a minimum
               of 18' and
               the sign is
               vertically
               proportioned
Window signs   25% of       --
               window area
 
   D.   Sign Standards In CH-1, CC-2 And CI-1 Zones:
      1.   All signs in the CH-1, CC-2, and CI-1 Zones are subject to the
standards specified in
table 5B-3 of this section except that signage for residential uses must comply
with the requirements for residential uses in the RM Zones as stated in table
5B-1 of this section.
      2.   The total number of freestanding signs, freestanding wide base signs
and monument signs on a lot or tract is limited as follows. Any combination of
these three (3) types of signs is allowed within the stated limits.
         a.   For lots or tracts with less than one hundred sixty feet (160')
of frontage on a single street, only one (1) such sign is permitted along that
frontage. Freestanding wide base signs are not permitted on lots or tracts with
less than one hundred sixty feet (160') of frontage. The City Engineer will
determine that the location of a wide base freestanding sign will not obstruct
the visibility of vehicles entering or exiting the property.
         b.   For lots or tracts with one hundred sixty feet to three hundred
feet (160' - 300') of frontage along a single street, up to two (2) such signs
are permitted, provided the signs are at least one hundred fifty feet (150')
apart as measured along the frontage.
         c.   For lots or tracts with three hundred one feet to six hundred
feet (301' - 600') of frontage along a single street, up to three (3) such
signs are permitted, provided the signs are at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') apart as measured along the frontage.
         d.   For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of six hundred feet
(600') along a single street, up to three (3) such signs are permitted,
provided the signs are at least one hundred fifty feet (150') apart as measured
along the frontage. One (1) additional monument sign is allowed, provided the
sign is at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any other monument,
freestanding, or freestanding wide base sign.
         e.   For lots or tracts with frontage along more than one (1) street,
each frontage is allowed signs based on the formulas stated in subsections D2a
through D2d of this section. However, a maximum of five (5) such signs are
allowed on any one (1) lot or tract. Any sign that is located within twenty
five feet (25') of a corner (the point where property lines intersect) will
count as two (2) signs; one (1) toward the sign allowance for each frontage.
Table 5B-3: Sign Specifications And Provisions In The CH-1, CC-2, And CI-
1 Zones
Permitted Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted Signs    Maximum Sign Area   Maximum Height      Provisions
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
Awning signs       25% of awning       Top edge of first   sign types: canopy
                   surface             story awning        signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting
                                                           signs. Awning signs
                                                           are only allowed on
                                                           first story awnings
                                                           Maximum diameter: 9"
Barbers' poles     --                  --                   
                                                           Maximum length: 3'
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
                                                           sign types: canopy
                                                           signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting signs
                                                           Signs may be mounted
                                                           on the face of the
                                                           canopy, upright on
                                                           the top of the
                                                           canopy or underneath
                                                           the canopy. See
                                                           applicable
                                                           dimensional
                                                           provisions for each
                                                           type
                                                           Signs mounted under
                                                           a canopy with the
                                                           face perpendicular
                   Signs cannot exceed                     to the building will
                   90% of street-                          be considered
                   facing canopy       Top edge of first   storefront
Canopy signs       length and be no    story canopy        projecting signs and
                   more than 24" in                        regulated
                   height                                  accordingly. Said
                                                           sign may not project
                                                           beyond the outer
                                                           edge of the canopy
                                                           Signs mounted on the
                                                           face of the canopy
                                                           may not project
                                                           beyond the edges of
                                                           the canopy
                                                           Signs mounted on top
                                                           of the canopy must
                                                           consist of
                                                           individual letter
                                                           forms and may not
                                                           extend more than 24"
                                                           in height above the
                                                           canopy
                                                           Canopy signs may be
                                                           internally or
                                                           externally
                                                           illuminated or halo
                                                           backlit
                   3 sq. ft. per sign
                   face
Directional signs                     --                  --
                   May be double faced
                   for total area of 6
                   sq. ft.
                                                           Up to 1 sign per
                                                           facade of the
                                                           entranceway arch
                                                            
                                                           The sign may not
                                                           contain changeable
                                                           copy
                                                            
                                                           Sign copy may not
                   For signs located                       extend beyond the
                   above or across the                     edges of the
                   top of the subject                      entranceway
                   archway, the area                       structure
                   of the sign may not                      
                   exceed 25% of the                       Minimum clearance
                   area delineated by                      height is 10' for
                   the subject archway                     entranceway signs
                                                          across driveways and
                   For a sign located                      8' for entranceway
                   on the side of the                      signs across
                   archway, the area                       walkways
Entranceway signs  of the sign may not 20'                  
                   exceed 33% of the                       Entranceway signage
                   surface area of the                     as specified herein
                   side of the archway                     will count as 1 sign
                   support on which                        toward the total
                   the sign is                             limit for
                   located. (See                           freestanding,
                   section                                 freestanding wide
                   14-5B-7,                                base signs and
                   "Measurement                            monument signs on a
                   Standards", of this                     lot or tract.
                   article.)                               Entranceway signs
                                                           are not allowed if
                                                           the subject lot or
                                                           tract already has a
                                                           monument sign,
                                                           freestanding sign,
                                                           freestanding wide
                                                           base sign, or
                                                           masonry wall sign
                                                           located at the
                                                           subject entrance
Fascia signs       15% of sign wall    --                  --
                   area
                                                           1 additional flag
                                                           may be displayed in
                                                           conjunction with any
Flags              --                  --                  city, county, state
                                                           or federal flags
                                                            
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                   Individual sign in
                   CC-2 and CI-1:
                    
                   Up to 2 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of lot
                   frontage, not to
                   exceed 125 sq. ft.
                   per sign face
                    
                   May be double faced
                   for a total area of
                   250 sq. ft.
                                      25', however, in
                   Individual sign in  the CH-1 District,
                   CH-1: For property  property within
                   within 1,000' of an 1,000' of an        When 2 or more uses
                   interstate highway  interstate highway  are located on a
Freestanding signs right-of-way, 1 of  right-of-way may    lot, a common sign
                   the property's      have 1 freestanding may be installed
                   allotted            sign with a maximum
                   freestanding signs  height not to
                   is allowed to be up exceed 65'
                   to 250 sq. ft. per
                   sign face, which
                   may be double faced
                   for a total area of
                   500 sq. ft.
                    
                   Common sign: The
                   maximum area of a
                   common sign may be
                   50% larger than the
                   area of the maximum
                   individual sign
                   allowed
                   Individual sign: Up
                   to 2 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of lot
                   frontage, not to
                   exceed 125 sq. ft.
                   per sign face
                                                          Maximum width: 10'
                   May be double faced                      
Freestanding wide  for a total of 250  26'                 When 2 or more uses
base signs         sq. ft.                                 are located on a
                                                          lot, a common sign
                   Common sign: The                        may be installed
                   maximum area of a
                   common sign may be
                   50% larger than the
                   area of the maximum
                   individual sign
                   allowed
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                                                            
                                                           A larger integral
                   2 sq. ft. except as                     sign may be allowed
Identification and allowed in          --                  when said sign
integral signs     provisions                              delineates the name
                                                           of the building.
                                                           Size shall be
                                                           regulated as a
                                                           fascia sign. A
                                                           permit is required
                   Up to 1 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of lot
                   frontage, not to                        1 masonry wall sign
                   exceed 50 sq. ft.   1' less than the    is allowed in lieu
                   per sign            height of the       of a monument,
Masonry wall signs                    masonry wall, not   freestanding, or
                   In addition, the    to exceed 12'       freestanding wide
                   sign may not exceed                     base sign
                   15% of the total
                   area of the face of
                   the masonry wall
                   Individual sign: Up
                   to 2 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of lot
                   frontage, not to
                   exceed 50 sq. ft.
                   per sign face
                    
                   May be double faced                     When 2 or more uses
Monument signs     for a total area of 5'                  are located on a
                   100 sq. ft.                             lot, a common sign
                                                          may be installed
                   Common sign: The
                   maximum area of the
                   common sign may be
                   50% larger than the
                   area of the maximum
                   individual sign
                   allowed
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
                                                           sign types: canopy
                                                           signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting
                                                           signs. There must be
                                                           12' between
                                                           projecting signs
                                                            
                                                           May not project more
                                                           than 4' from the
                   9 sq. ft.                               building wall
                                                           
                   May be double faced                     External
                   for a total of 18                       illumination is
                   sq. ft.                                 permitted provided
                                                          there are no more
                   The size of a                           than 2 spotlights of
                   storefront                              no more than 2000
                   projecting sign may                     lumens shining
                   be increased up to  Top of the first    directly on the sign
Storefront         18 sq. ft. (may be  story located below and provided they
projecting signs   double faced for a  any second floor    meet the trespass
                   total area of 36    windowsill          standards in article
                   sq. ft.) if the                         G of this chapter
                   sign and storefront                      
                   meet the following                      Internal
                   criteria: The floor                     illumination may be
                   to ceiling height                       permitted for halo
                   of the ground level                     backlit or neon
                   floor is a minimum                      letters. Internally
                   of 18' and the sign                     illuminated plastic
                   is vertically                           trim cap letters and
                   proportioned                            cabinet signs where
                                                           the entire face of
                                                           the cabinet is
                                                           illuminated are
                                                           prohibited
                                                            
                                                           Permitted to be a
                                                           three- dimensional
                                                           model of an object,
                                                           such as a globe or
                                                           book. If three-
                                                           dimensional, the
                                                           sign is permitted to
                                                           rotate
                   25 sq. ft. per sign                     Permitted only in
                   face                                    the CC-2 Zone
Time and                                                   
temperature signs  May be double faced --                  Signs must not
                   for a total area of                     project more than 6'
                   50 sq. ft.                              into the public
                                                           right-of- way
                                                           Only permitted when
                                                           the use occupies the
                                                           entire building and
                                                           the building
                                                           frontage is greater
                                                           than 60' or when the
                   2 story: 30 sq. ft.                     use is an indoor
                   with maximum 4'                         commercial
                   projection from the                     recreational use or
                   face of the                             hospitality oriented
                   building                                retail use
                                      Cannot extend above  
                   3 story: 80 sq. ft. the bottom of the   Sign can be no
                   with maximum 5'     cornice and/or      closer than 5' from
Upper level        projection from the roofline at the top adjacent buildings
projecting signs   face of the         of the building and and no closer than
                   building            no lower than the   15' from adjacent
                                      bottom of the       upper level and
                   4 story and taller: second floor        storefront
                   150 sq. ft. with a  windowsill          projecting signs
                   maximum of 6' from                       
                   the face of the                         Internal and
                   building                                external
                                                          illumination is
                   May be double faced                     allowed except
                                                           internally
                                                           illuminated plastic
                                                           trim cap letters and
                                                           internally
                                                           illuminated cabinet
                                                           signs are prohibited
                                                           If located on or in
                                                           required storefront
                                                           windows, window
                                                           signs shall be
Window signs       25% of window area  --                  displayed in a
                                                           manner that does not
                                                           block views into the
                                                           interior of the
                                                           storefront
 
   E.   Sign Standards In CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10 Zones:
      1.   All signs in the CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 Zones are subject to the
standards specified in
table 5B-4 of this section.
      2.   The maximum sign area for each type of sign, special provisions, and
any restrictions on the number of signs allowed are specified in
table 5B-4 of this section. Unless specifically limited in
table 5B-4 of this section, any number of signs may be installed.
      3.   Signage for residential uses must comply with the requirements for
residential uses in the RM Zones as stated in
table 5B-1 of this section. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
      4.   Cabinet signs where the entire face of the cabinet is internally
illuminated are prohibited. Internally illuminated plastic trim cap letters are
prohibited, except as specifically allowed in
table 5B-4 of this section. (Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-2018)
Table 5B-4: Sign Specifications And Provisions In The CB-2, CB-5 And CB-10
Zones
Permitted Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted Signs    Maximum Sign Area   Maximum Height      Provisions
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
                                                           sign types: canopy
                                                           signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting
                   25% of awning       Top edge of first   signs. Awning signs
Awning signs       surface             story awning        are only allowed on
                                                           first story awnings
                                                            
                                                           Note: See subsection
                                                           14-3C-3C of this
                                                           title for awning and
                                                           canopy design
                                                           standards
                                                            
                                                           Only permitted on
                                                           multiuse buildings
                                                           where access to uses
                                                           is primarily through
                                                           a common lobby from
                                                           the street such as
                                                           an indoor shopping
                                                           mall or where a
                                                           single use occupies
                                                           a large multi-story
                                                           building with more
                                                           than 100' of
                                                           frontage
                                                            
                                                           Banners must be
                                                           mounted
                   Same allowances as  Same restrictions   perpendicular to the
Banner projecting  upper level         as upper level      building with
signs              projecting signs    projecting signs    permanent brackets
                                                           at both top and
                                                           bottom
                                                            
                                                           Banners can be no
                                                           closer than 5' from
                                                           adjacent buildings
                                                           and no closer than
                                                           15' from adjacent
                                                           upper level and
                                                           storefront
                                                           projecting signs
                                                            
                                                           A minimum of 3
                                                           banners is required
                                                           to establish a
                                                           consistent rhythm
                                                           and visual impact
                                                           Maximum diameter: 9"
Barbers' poles     --                  --                   
                                                           Maximum length: 3'
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
                                                           sign types: canopy
                                                           signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting signs
                                                            
                                                           Signs may be mounted
                                                           on the face of the
                                                           canopy, upright on
                                                           the top of the
                                                           canopy or underneath
                                                           the canopy. See
                                                           applicable
                                                           dimensional
                                                           provisions for each
                                                           type
                                                            
                                                           Signs mounted under
                                                           a canopy with the
                                                           face perpendicular
                                                           to the building
                                                           facade will be
                   Sign cannot exceed                      considered
                   90% of street-                          storefront
Canopy signs       facing canopy       Top edge of first   projecting signs and
                   length and no more  story canopy        regulated
                   than 24" in height                      accordingly. Said
                                                           signs may not
                                                           project beyond the
                                                           outer edge of the
                                                           canopy
                                                            
                                                           Signs mounted on the
                                                           face of the canopy
                                                           may not project
                                                           beyond the edges of
                                                           the canopy
                                                            
                                                           Signs mounted on the
                                                           top of the canopy
                                                           must consist of
                                                           individual letter
                                                           forms and may not
                                                           extend more than 24"
                                                           in height above the
                                                           canopy
                                                            
                                                           Canopy signs may be
                                                           internally or
                                                           externally
                                                           illuminated or halo
                                                           backlit
                   3 sq. ft. per sign
                   face
Directional signs                     --                  --
                   May be double faced
                   for total area of 6
                   sq. ft.
                                                           Up to 1 sign per
                   For signs located                       facade of the
                   above or across the                     entranceway arch
                   top of the subject                       
                   archway, the area                       The sign may not
                   of the sign may not                     contain changeable
                   exceed 25% of the                       copy
                   area delineated by                       
                   the subject archway                     Sign copy may not
                                                          extend beyond the
                   For a sign located                      edges of the
                   on the side of the                      entranceway
                   archway, the area                       structure
Entranceway signs  of the sign may not 20'                  
                   exceed 33% of the                       Minimum clearance
                   surface area of the                     height is 10' for
                   side of the archway                     entranceway signs
                   support on which                        across driveways and
                   the sign is                             8' for entranceway
                   located. (See                           signs across
                   section                                 walkways
                   14-5B-7,                                 
                   "Measurement                            An entranceway sign
                   Standards", of this                     is not allowed if
                   article.)                               the property has a
                                                          masonry wall sign,
                                                           monument sign, or
                                                           freestanding sign
                                                           No longer than 90%
                                                           of the length of the
                                                           sign wall, sign band
                                                           or storefront,
                                                           whichever is most
                                                           applicable to the
                                                           location of the sign
                                                            
                                                           Back lit cabinet
                                                           signs, where the
                   Square footage                          entire face is
                   equal to 1.5 times                      illuminated, are
Fascia signs       the length of the   --                  prohibited
                   sign wall                                
                                                           Internally
                                                           illuminated plastic
                                                           trim cap letter
                                                           forms are prohibited
                                                           except for buildings
                                                           of more than 5
                                                           stories when the
                                                           sign is above the
                                                           5th story. Limited
                                                           to identification
                                                           only
                                                           1 additional flag
                                                           may be displayed in
                                                           conjunction with any
Flags              --                  --                  City, County, State
                                                           or Federal flags
                                                            
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                                                           Allowed only in the
                                                           CB-2 Zone
                                                            
                                                           Only 1 freestanding
                                                           sign is allowed per
                                                           lot
                                                            
                                                           Allowed only through
                                                           approval of a minor
                                                           modification.
                                                           Applicant must
                                                           provide convincing
                                                           evidence that the
                                                           existing
                                                           configuration of the
                                                           site and location of
                   2 sq. ft. per                           the building or
                   linear foot of lot                      buildings on the
Freestanding signs frontage, not to    20'                 site make it
                   exceed 40 sq. ft.                       practically
                   per sign face                           difficult to install
                                                           a monument sign and
                                                           that other types of
                                                           allowed signage
                                                           would not be readily
                                                           visible from the
                                                           street due to the
                                                           location of building
                                                           (s) or other unique
                                                           site characteristics
                                                            
                                                           A freestanding sign
                                                           is not allowed if
                                                           the property has a
                                                           monument sign,
                                                           entranceway sign, or
                                                           masonry wall sign
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                                                            
                                                           A larger integral
                   2 sq. ft. except as                     sign 1.5 times the
Identification and allowed in          --                  length of the
integral signs     provisions                              street-facing facade
                                                           may be allowed when
                                                           said sign delineates
                                                           the name of the
                                                           building. A permit
                                                           is required
                   1 sq. ft. per                           Only 1 masonry wall
                   linear foot of lot                      sign is allowed per
                   frontage, not to                        lot
                   exceed 50 sq. ft.   1' less than the     
Masonry wall signs                    height of the       A masonry wall sign
                   In addition, the    masonry wall, not   is not allowed if
                   sign may not exceed to exceed 12'       the property has a
                   15% of the total                        monument sign,
                   area of the face of                     entranceway sign or
                   the masonry wall                        freestanding sign
                                                           Only 1 monument sign
                                                           is allowed per lot
                                                           or tract
                                                            
                                                           When 2 or more uses
                                                           are located on a
                                                           lot, a common
                   24 sq. ft. per sign                     monument sign may be
                   face                                    installed. A common
Monument signs                        5'                  monument sign may
                   May be double faced                     identify up to 4
                   for a total area of                     uses per sign face
                   48 sq. ft.                               
                                                           A monument sign is
                                                           not allowed if the
                                                           property has a
                                                           freestanding sign,
                                                           an entranceway sign,
                                                           or a masonry wall
                                                           sign
                                                           Up to 1
                                                           nonilluminated
                                                           portable sign is
                                                           allowed per
                                                           storefront. A
                                                           maximum of 1
                                                           additional sign is
                                                           allowed for
                                                           businesses not
                                                           located on the
                                                           ground floor, which
                                                           may be for 1 or more
                                                           of those businesses
                                                            
                                                           The entire sign must
                                                           be placed: 1) on
                                                           private property; 2)
                                                           within or on the
                                                           fenced delineated
                                                           area of a sidewalk
                                                           cafe; or 3) on City
                                                           right-of-way within
                                                           an area no more than
                                                           30" from the front
                                                           facade wall and/or
                                                           front property line
                                                           of the building
                                                           containing the
                                                           business
                                                            
                                                           The sign may not
                                                           block access to any
                                                           doorway
                   6 sq. ft. per sign                       
                   face                                    When placed on City
                                                          right-of- way, a
Portable signs     May be double faced 4'                  clear, unobstructed
                   for a total area of                     8' path between the
                   12 sq. ft.                              sign and any
                                                           streetscape
                                                           amenities, planters,
                                                           delineated sidewalk
                                                           cafe areas or
                                                           obstructions must be
                                                           maintained
                                                            
                                                           The sign must be
                                                           moved inside the
                                                           business when the
                                                           business is closed
                                                            
                                                           The sign must be
                                                           constructed of
                                                           durable materials
                                                           and weighted to
                                                           provide stability in
                                                           all weather
                                                           conditions. Plastic
                                                           signs are prohibited
                                                            
                                                           External weights
                                                           separate from the
                                                           sign itself, such as
                                                           sandbags, are not
                                                           permitted
                                                            
                                                           A maximum of 2 sign
                                                           faces are allowed
                                                           per sign. Sign faces
                                                           can be separated if
                                                           placed on a fence
                                                           for sidewalk cafe
                                                           permitted
                                                           Each storefront is
                                                           allowed up to a
                                                           total of 3 signs
                                                           from the following
                                                           sign types: canopy
                                                           signs, awning signs,
                                                           and projecting
                                                           signs. There must be
                                                           at least 12' between
                                                           projecting signs
                                                            
                                                           A projecting sign
                   9 sq. ft.                               may not project more
                                                          than 4' from the
                   May be double faced                     building wall
                   for a total of 18                        
                   sq. ft.                                 Storefront
                                                          projecting signs are
                   The size of a                           permitted to be a
                   storefront                              three- dimensional
                   projecting sign may                     model of an object,
                   be increased up to  Top of the first    such as a globe or
Storefront         18 sq. ft. (may be  story located below book. If three-
projecting signs   double faced for a  any second floor    dimensional, the
                   total area of 36    windowsill          sign is permitted to
                   sq. ft.) if the                         rotate
                   sign and storefront                      
                   meet the following                      External
                   criteria: The floor                     illumination is
                   to ceiling height                       permitted provided
                   of the ground level                     there are no more
                   floor is a minimum                      than 2 small
                   of 18' and the sign                     spotlights of no
                   is vertically                           more than 2000
                   proportioned                            lumens shining
                                                           directly on the sign
                                                           and provided they
                                                           meet the light
                                                           trespass standards
                                                           in article G of this
                                                           chapter
                                                            
                                                           Internal
                                                           illumination may be
                                                           permitted for halo
                                                           backlit or neon
                                                           letters
                   25 sq. ft. per sign
                   face                                    Signs must not
Time and                              --                  project more than 6'
temperature signs  May be double faced                     into the public
                   for a total area of                     right-of- way
                   50 sq. ft.
                                                           Only permitted when
                                                           a use occupies the
                                                           entire building and
                                                           the building
                   2 story: 30 sq. ft.                     frontage is greater
                   with maximum 4'                         than 60' or when the
                   projection from the                     use is an indoor
                   face of the                             commercial
                   building                                recreational use or
                                      Cannot extend above a hospitality
                   3 story: 80 sq. ft. the bottom of the   oriented retail use
                   with maximum 5'     cornice and/or       
                   projection from the roofline at the top Sign can be no
Upper level        face of the         of the building and closer than 5' from
projecting signs   building            no lower than the   adjacent buildings
                                      bottom of the       and no closer than
                   4 story and taller: second floor        15' from adjacent
                   150 sq. ft. with a  windowsill          upper level and
                   maximum of 6' from                      storefront
                   the face of the                         projecting signs
                   building                                 
                                                          Internal and
                   May be double faced                     external
                                                           illumination is
                                                           allowed except as
                                                           set forth in
                                                           subsection E4 of
                                                           this section
                                                           Sign must be
                                                           incorporated into a
                   1.5 times the                           larger mural and can
                   length in feet of                       only be placed on an
Wall mural painted the street- facing  --                  alley facade or a
sign               facade of the                           nonstreet-facing
                   building                                facade when it
                                                           contains a public
                                                           entrance to a
                                                           business
                                                           Only permitted in
                                                           first floor windows
                                                            
                                                           If located on or in
                                                           required storefront
                                                           windows, window
                                                           signs shall be
                                                           displayed or affixed
                                                           in a manner that
                                                           does not block views
                                                           into the interior of
                                                           the storefront
                                                            
                                                           In CB-10 Zones, an
Window signs       25% of window area  --                  indoor recreational
                                                           use may have an
                                                           electronic
                                                           changeable copy
                                                           window sign. Maximum
                                                           size permitted is 75
                                                           sq. ft. or 25% of
                                                           the window area,
                                                           including all other
                                                           window signs,
                                                           whichever is less.
                                                           Subject to all
                                                           regulations found in
                                                           section
                                                           14-5B-4 of this
                                                           article
 
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4702, 4-18-2017; Ord. 18-4735, 1-2-
2018)
   F.   Sign Standards In Industrial And Research Park Zones:
      1.   All signs in the I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP Zones are subject to the
standards specified in
table 5B-5 of this section.
      2.   The total number of freestanding signs and monument signs on a lot
or tract is limited as follows. Any combination of these types of signs is
allowed within the stated limits.
         a.   For lots or tracts with less than one hundred sixty feet (160')
of frontage on a single street, only one such sign is permitted along that
frontage.
         b.   For lots or tracts with frontage in excess of one hundred sixty
feet (160') of frontage along a single street, up to two (2) such signs are
permitted, provided the signs are located at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') apart as measured along the frontage.
         c.   For lots or tracts with frontage along more than one street, each
frontage is allowed signs based on the formulas stated in subsections F2a and
F2b of this section.
      3.   Masonry wall signs and entranceway signs are limited according to
the provisions specified in
table 5B-5 of this section.
      4.   Other than for the types of signs listed in subsections F2 and F3 of
this section, any number of signs may be installed, provided the maximum sign
area for each type of sign is not exceeded and the provisions specified in
table 5B-5 of this section, are met. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
Table 5B-5: Sign Specifications And Provisions In The Industrial And Research
Park Zones
Permitted Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted Signs    Maximum Sign Area    Maximum Height     Provisions
                   Must not exceed 25%
Awning signs       of awning surface or Top of first story --
                   12 sq. ft. per sign,
                   whichever is less
                                                           Signs may be mounted
                                                           on the face of the
                                                           canopy, upright on
                                                           the top of the
                                                           canopy or underneath
                                                           the canopy. See
                                                           applicable
                                                           dimensional
                                                           provisions for each
                                                           type
                                                           Signs mounted under
                                                           a canopy may not
                                                           project beyond the
                                                           outer edge of the
                                                           canopy
                                                           Signs mounted on the
                   Sign cannot exceed                      face of the canopy
                   90% of street-facing                    may not project
Canopy signs       canopy length and no Top of first story beyond the face of
                   more than 24" in                        the canopy and must
                   height                                  not extend above or
                                                           below the top and
                                                           bottom edges of the
                                                           canopy
                                                           Signs mounted on the
                                                           top of the canopy
                                                           must consist of
                                                           individual letter
                                                           forms and may not
                                                           extend more than 24"
                                                           in height above the
                                                           canopy
                                                           Canopy signs may be
                                                           internally or
                                                           externally
                                                           illuminated or halo
                                                           backlit
                   In industrial zones:
                   15 sq. ft. per sign
                   face
                    
                   May be double faced
                   for total area of 30
                   sq. ft.
Directional signs                      --                 --
                   In research park
                   zones: 3 sq. ft. per
                   sign face
                    
                   May be double faced
                   for total area of 6
                   sq. ft.
                                                           Up to 1 sign per
                   For signs located                       facade of the
                   above or across the                     entranceway arch
                   top of the subject                       
                   archway, the area of                    The sign may not
                   the sign may not                        contain changeable
                   exceed 25% of the                       copy
                   area delineated by                       
                   the subject archway                     Sign copy may not
                                                          extend beyond the
                   For a sign located                      edges of the
                   on the side of the                      entranceway
Entranceway signs  archway, the area of 20'                structure
                   the sign may not                         
                   exceed 33% of the                       Minimum clearance
                   surface area of the                     height is 10' for
                   side of the archway                     entranceway signs
                   support on which the                    across driveways and
                   sign is located.                        8' for entranceway
                   (See section                            signs across
                   14-5B-7,                                walkways
                   "Measurement                             
                   Standards", of this                     An entranceway sign
                   article.)                               is not allowed if
                                                           the property has a
                                                           masonry wall sign
Fascia signs       15% of sign wall     --                 --
                   area
                                                           1 additional flag
                                                           may be displayed in
                                                           conjunction with
Flags              --                   --                 city, county, state
                                                           and federal flags
                                                            
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                   1 sq. ft. per linear                    When 2 or more uses
                   foot of lot                             are located on a
                   frontage, not to                        lot, a common sign
                   exceed 50 sq. ft.                       may be installed.
                   except as allowed in                    The maximum area of
                   provisions for                          the common sign may
Freestanding signs common signs         25'                be 50% larger than
                                                          the area of the
                   May be double faced                     maximum individual
                   for a total of 100                      sign allowed
                   sq. ft. or as                            
                   allowed in                              Freestanding signs
                   provisions for                          are limited to
                   common signs                            identification only
                                                           Up to 1 of these
                                                           signs is allowed per
                                                           building
                                                            
                                                           No permit is
                                                           requiredMasonry wall
                                                           signsUp to 2 sq. ft.
                                                           per linear foot of
                                                           lot frontage, not to
                                                           exceed 75 sq. ft.
                                                           per sign face
                                                            
                                                           May be double faced
                                                           for a total area of
                                                           150 sq. ft.
                                                            
                                                           In addition, the
                                                           sign may not exceed
                                                           15% of the total
                                                           area of the face of
                                                           the masonry wall1'
Identification and                                         less than the height
integral signs     2 sq. ft.            --                 of the masonry
                                                           wallAt each
                                                           entranceway, up to 2
                                                           masonry wall signs
                                                           may be established,
                                                           if no freestanding,
                                                           entranceway,
                                                           monument or other
                                                           nonbuilding signs
                                                           are located at that
                                                           entranceway
                                                            
                                                           In the ORP Zone,
                                                           masonry wall signs
                                                           up to 12' in height
                                                           may be established
                                                           in the required
                                                           front setback,
                                                           provided the signs
                                                           are located a
                                                           minimum of 20' back
                                                           from street right-
                                                           of-way lines
                                                           When 2 or more uses
                                                           are located on a
                   Up to 2 sq. ft. per                     lot, a common sign
                   linear foot of lot                      may be installed.
                   frontage, not to                        The maximum area of
                   exceed 75 sq. ft.                       the common sign may
Monument signs     per sign face        5'                 be 50% larger than
                                                          the area of the
                   May be double faced                     maximum individual
                   for a total area of                     sign allowed
                   150 sq. ft.                              
                                                           Monument signs are
                                                           limited to
                                                           identification only
Window signs       25% of window area   --                 --
 
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
   G.   Sign Standards For Riverfront Crossings And Eastside Mixed Use Zones:
      1.   In the South Downtown, University, Central Crossings, Park, South
Gilbert Subdistricts of Riverfront Crossings and Eastside Mixed Use Zone,
signage on mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall be allowed according to
the standards that apply in the CB-10 Zone, except that in the South Gilbert
Subdistrict the maximum sign area for fascia signs for Cottage Industries and
associated uses located in existing buildings that are legally non-compliant
with storefront frontage standards is fifteen percent (15%) of the sign wall.
      2.   In the Gilbert Subdistrict, signage for mixed use and nonresidential
buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply in the CN-
1 Zone.
      3.   In the West Riverfront Subdistrict, signage on mixed use and
nonresidential buildings shall be allowed according to the standards that apply
in the CC-2 Zone, except that new freestanding signs shall be limited to
fifteen feet (15') in height.
      4.   Signage for residential buildings shall be allowed according to the
standards that apply in residential zones. For multi- family buildings, the
larger sign area for fascia and monument signs as specified in multi-family
zones applies.
      5.   Signs shall be integrated into the architectural design of the
building and not dominate the facade or interfere with adjacent buildings. For
buildings with multiple storefronts, a sign plan is required at the time of
development that ensures that signage allowances are fairly apportioned
according to the relative width of the individual storefronts and that the
signage type and designs are consistent and complementary along the building
frontage.
      6.   On storefront and urban flex frontages, storefront level signs shall
be primarily oriented to pedestrians and scaled appropriately. Window signs and
temporary signs in windows shall not block views into the interior and shall
not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the storefront window area.
      7.   Sign installations shall comply with all other generally applicable
sign regulations, standards, and requirements as set forth in this article.
   H.   Sign Standards And Types For Form-Based Zones:
      1.   Purpose: This section ensures that all signs installed in Form-Based
Zones subject to Article 14-2H are compatible with the intended physical
character, and in compliance with all applicable plans of the City. This
section promotes public health, safety, and welfare through a comprehensive
system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and
nondiscriminatory sign standards to:
         a.   Promote and accomplish the goals, policies, and actions of
applicable City plans;
         b.   Balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate
avenues for effective messaging;
         c.   Improve pedestrian, bicycle, and traffic safety from injury or
property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributed to,
cluttered or distracting signage;
         d.   Prevent property damage, personal injury, and litter caused by
signs that are improperly constructed or poorly maintained;
         e.   Protect property values, improve the local economy and quality of
life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape; and
         f.   Provide clear and unambiguous sign standards that enable fair and
consistent enforcement of these sign standards.
      2.   The sign types established in this section are intended to be viewed
from the public right-of-way and from outdoors in areas of public and private
property used for public pedestrian access.
      3.   Sign Types:
Table 14-5B-8H-1 (Sign Types Allowed in Form- Based Zones) establishes the
allowed sign types and standards for the identified zones. Any allowed sign
type may be established on any design site within the zone, subject to a sign
permit in compliance with section
14-8B-9 (Sign Permit).
Table 14-5B-8H-1: Sign Types Allowed in Form-Based Zones
Sign Type T3         T4                 Sign Standards
          NE NG NG-O NS NS-O NM NM-O MS
Table 14-5B-8H-1: Sign Types Allowed in Form-Based Zones
Sign Type                  T3         T4                 Sign Standards
                           NE NG NG-O NS NS-O NM NM-O MS
Awning Sign                -  -  P1   -  P1   -  P1   P2 14-5B-8C
Canopy Sign                -  -  -    -  -    -  -    P2 14-5B-8C
Directional Sign           -  -  -    -  -    -  -    P2 14-5B-8C
Masonry Wall Sign          -  -  -    -  -    -  -    P2 14-5B-8E
Monument Sign              -  -  -    -  -    -  -    -  Not Applicable
Porch Sign                 -  -  P1   -  P1   -  P1   P2 14-5B-8H- 4a
Portable Sign              -  P1 P1   P1 P1   P1 P1   P2 14-5B-8E
Post Sign                  -  -  P1   -  P1   -  P1   P2 14-5B-8H- 4b
Small Identificatio n Sign -  -  -    -  P1   -  P1   P2 14-5B-8B
Storefront Projecting Sign -  -  -    -  -    -  P1   P2 14-5B-8C
Temporary Sign             P1 P1 P1   P1 P1   P1 P1   P2 14-5B-9
Wall Mural Painted Sign    -  -  -    -  -    -  -    P2 14-5B-8E
Window Sign                -  -  -    -  -    -  P1   P2 14-5B-8E
1   Illumination shall be consistent with section
14-5B-4E (Illumination Requirements) and the applicable provisions in
Table 5B-1 (Sign Specifications And Provisions In Residential And The
ID And OPD Zones).
2   Illumination shall be consistent with section
14-5B-4E (Illumination Requirements) and the applicable provisions in
Table 5B-2 (Sign Specifications And Provisions In The CO-1, CN-1, and
MU Zones).
Key:      P = Allowed with a Sign Permit         - = Not Allowed
 
      4.   Certain sign types are only allowed in Form-Based Zones. Those sign
types and their applicable standards are as follows.
         a.   Porch Sign:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3362.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3690.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/IMAGES/0-0-0-3360.png]
                           Example of a Porch Sign.
      b.   Post Sign:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3358.png]
1. Description
A sign that is mounted on a porch parallel to the main facade, pedestrian-
scaled, and intended for viewing from the sidewalk.
2. Size
Signable Area         12 sf max. per side;
-                     2 sides max
Width                 4' max.    (A)
Height                3' max.     (B)
Overall Height        5' max.     (C)
Signs per building    1 max.
3. Location
Clear Height          2' min.    (D)
Setback from sidewalk       (E)
   T4MS            5' min.
   T3NG-O1         15' min.
   T4NS-O1         15' min.
   T4NM-O1         15' min.
1   If utility easement along alley, 8' min.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3356.png]
   Example of a Post Sign.
   General Note: Photos on this page are illustrative, not regulatory.
(Ord. 17-4702, 4-18-2017; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
14-5B-9: OFF PREMISES AND TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   In addition to the signage permitted in each zone, as described in
section
14-5B-8 of this article, the following signs may be installed in any zone
according to the specifications and provisions contained in
table 5B-6 of this section. These signs shall not be applied toward the maximum
sign area specified in section
14-5B-8 of this article, except as otherwise indicated in
table 5B-6 of this section. (Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008)
Table 5B-6: Sign Specifications And Provisions For Off Premises And Temporary
Signs
Permitted Signs Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Provisions
Permitted Signs    Maximum Sign Area   Maximum Height      Provisions
                                                           Not permitted in
                                                           residential, CO-1,
                                                           CN-1, CB-5, CB-10,
                                                           ORP and RDP Zones
                                                            
                                                           May take the form of
                                                           any type of sign
                                                           allowed in the zone
                                                           in which the sign is
                                                           located and must
                                                           comply with all
                                                           other provisions
                                                           specified for the
                                                           subject zone
                   Not to exceed the                        
                   maximum sign area                       Only 1 off premises
                   for the subject                         sign is allowed per
                   sign type as                            lot or tract
                   specified in the                         
                   applicable zone and Not to exceed the   2 or more uses may
                   will be deducted    maximum sign height install a common off
Billboards and     from the maximum    for the subject     premises directional
other off premises sign allowance for  sign type as        sign
signs              the subject         specified in the     
                   property            applicable zone     Shall not be located
                                                         within 300' of
                   Billboards: 72 sq.  Billboards: 25'     another off premises
                   ft.                                     sign
                                                           
                   May be double faced                     Shall not be located
                   for a total area of                     within 120' of a
                   144 sq. ft.                             residential zone,
                                                           parks and open space
                                                           use, educational
                                                           facility, religious/
                                                           private group
                                                           assembly use, public
                                                           museum or government
                                                           administrative or
                                                           judicial office
                                                            
                                                           Billboard signs
                                                           shall not apply
                                                           toward maximum sign
                                                           allowance for the
                                                           lot or tract
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                   --                  --                   
                                                           No illumination is
                                                           allowed
                                                           1 sign may be
                   In ID and                               located on a lot
                   residential zones:                      and/or parcel when
                   4 sq. ft.                               being advertised for
                                      In residential      sale or lease
                   In all other zones: zones: 5'            
                   32 sq. ft.                             Must be displayed in
                                      In all other zones: yard or window.
                   May be double faced 10'                 Cannot be affixed to
                   for a total of 8                        building
                   sq. ft. and 64 sq.                       
                   ft. respectively                        Must be removed 48
                                                           hours after the sale
                                                           or lease of property
                                                           1 sign may be
                                                           located on a lot
                                                           and/or parcel when
                   All zones: 32 sq.                       construction and/or
                   ft.                 In residential      development is
                                      zones: 5'           occurring on said
                   May be double faced                    lot or parcel. Must
                   for a total of 64   In all other zones: be removed upon
                   sq. ft.             10'                 issuance of
                                                           certificate of
                                                           occupancy or upon
                                                           completion of
                                                           construction
                                                           1 sign may be
Temporary signs    All zones: 32 sq.                       located on a
                   ft.                 In residential      development area of
                                      zones: 5'           2 acres or more.
                   May be double faced                    Must be removed upon
                   for a total of 64   In all other zones: the sale or lease of
                   sq. ft.             10'                 50% of the lots or
                                                           units in the
                                                           development
                                                           1 sign may be
                                                           located on a lot
                                                           and/or parcel for a
                                                           period not to exceed
                                                           60 days when a
                                                           business has
                                                           recently opened or
                                                           is in the process of
                   100 sq. ft. allowed                     closing or when
                   in all zones except 10'                 events of civic
                   residential zones                       interest, a
                                                           philanthropic or
                                                           nonprofit
                                                           organization are
                                                           occurring on the
                                                           property
                                                            
                                                           Banners are
                                                           permitted for these
                                                           situations
                                                           1 sign may be
                   4 sq. ft.                               located on a lot
                                                          and/or parcel for a
                   May be double sided In all zones: 5'    period not to exceed
                   for a total of 8                        14 days and no more
                   sq. ft.                                 than 2 occasions in
                                                           any calendar year
                                                           No permit is
                                                           required
                                                            
                                                           Posters and other
                                                           nonpermanent signs
                                                           in windows are
                                                           allowed, but may
                                                           only be displayed
                                                           for a temporary
Temporary signs in --                  --                  period of time, not
windows                                                    to exceed 60 days.
                                                           If located in or on
                                                           required storefront
                                                           windows, window
                                                           signs shall be
                                                           displayed in a
                                                           manner that does not
                                                           block views into the
                                                           interior of the
                                                           storefront
 
(Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016)
14-5B-10: PRIVATELY OWNED SIGNS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Purpose: In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the population, no privately owned signs shall be placed on or over a “public
place”, as defined in chapter 9, article C of this title, except as permitted
by the City.
   B.   Removal: Existing privately owned signs currently located on or over a
public place that are not in compliance with this Code shall be eliminated and
removed. If the sign owner fails to remove the sign after so ordered by the
City, the City may remove the sign and assess the costs against the sign owner.
(Ord. 08-4319, 11-3-2008; amd. Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
ARTICLE C. ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5C-1: Purpose
14-5C-2: Applicability And Rules Of Interpretation
14-5C-3: Permit Required
14-5C-4: Driveway Spacing Standards
14-5C-5: Location And Dimensional Standards For Driveways
14-5C-6: Arterial Street Access Requirements
14-5C-7: Cross Access Easements
14-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to ensure safe and adequate access to the public
street network by establishing standards to control the location and number of
access points, separate and control intersection conflict areas, remove turning
vehicles from through travel lanes when appropriate, provide adequate spacing
between driveways, and minimize impervious driveway surface in the parkway
portion of the public right of way. These standards help to ensure that the
city's street network is designed to balance the functions of access to
adjoining property, pedestrian circulation, and vehicular traffic circulation.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-2: APPLICABILITY AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to cut, break, or remove any curb along a
street except in compliance with the requirements of this article, or unless
specifically exempted or superseded by more specific provisions of this title.
   B.   No building permit will be issued and no site plan or subdivision will
be approved unless the proposed development is in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
   C.   Every residential and nonresidential property will be permitted at
least one means of vehicular access to a public street. However, direct
driveway access to a public street may not be permitted in all instances. Use
of alleys, private rear lanes, backage roads, and cross access easements may be
required as alternatives to direct street access.
   D.   The specifications, design, and construction of all curb cuts, access
drives and sidewalks must comply with the Iowa City municipal design standards
(MDS), as amended. In cases where the provisions of the MDS conflict with the
provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern.
   E.   Arterial streets, as referenced in this article, are those streets
shown on the Iowa City arterial street map in
figure 5C.1 (found in subsection
14-5C-6F of this article), and include future arterial streets as shown on the
map. Said map is based on the JCCOG arterial street map, as amended. If the
JCCOG arterial street map, as amended, conflicts with
figure 5C.1 of this article, the JCCOG map will supersede
figure 5C.1. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 20-
4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5C-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as otherwise specified in subsections B through D of this
section, an access permit must be obtained prior to cutting, breaking, or
removing any curb. Procedures for obtaining an access permit are specified in
chapter 8, "Review And Approval Procedures", of this title.
   B.   An access permit is always required for access to an arterial street,
unless the specific access point has already been approved through the site
plan review process.
   C.   For local and collector streets, if access locations are specified and
approved as a part of a subdivision or site plan review process, separate
access permits are not required upon development of the individual lots within
the subdivision. However, an access permit is required if the request for an
access point is other than what was approved through the site plan review or
the subdivision process or if access was not addressed through the subdivision
or site plan review process.
   D.   For access to a state highway, an access permit must be approved by the
Iowa department of transportation (IDOT), with a recommendation from the city.
A recommendation from the city is required prior to filing an application with
the IDOT. However, a separate city access permit is not required. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
   E.   Historic review, as set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title, is required for any new access to property designated as an Iowa
City landmark or property located in a historic or conservation district. (Ord.
06-4245, 12-12-2006)
14-5C-4: DRIVEWAY SPACING STANDARDS:
   A.   Driveway Spacing From Street Intersections: On corner lots, driveways
must be constructed as far away from the intersection as possible while
maintaining the driveway spacing standards specified in subsection B of this
section. In addition to this general standard, the following standards apply,
based on the functional classification of the street.
      1.   Along local streets and collector streets, there must be a minimum
of twenty feet (20') between the end of a radius of a street intersection and
the beginning of a driveway curb cut as measured at the curb line, except as
required in the subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Along collector streets, where they intersect with arterial streets,
there must be a minimum of fifty feet (50') between the end of a radius of a
street intersection and the beginning of a driveway curb cut as measured at the
curb line.
      3.   Along arterial streets, there must be a minimum of one hundred fifty
feet (150') between the end of a radius of a street intersection and the
beginning of a driveway curb cut as measured at the curb line.
      4.   Additional distance between the radius of a street intersection and
the beginning of a driveway curb cut may be required by the city where deemed
necessary due to high traffic volumes or other safety concerns.
      5.   The city may adjust the driveway spacing standards so that driveways
line up with existing driveways across the street.
   B.   Minimum Spacing Between Driveways:
      1.   Along arterial streets, there must be at least fifty feet (50')
between curb cuts, measured at the curb line. No portion of a driveway may be
constructed within twenty five feet (25') of a side property line extended,
except when a common driveway agreement has been reached with an adjacent
property owner and is of record.
      2.   Along local and collector streets, there must be at least six feet
(6') between curb cuts, measured at the curb line. No portion of a driveway may
be constructed closer than three feet (3') to a side property line extended,
except when a common driveway agreement has been reached with an adjacent
property owner and is of record.
   C.   Modifications To Driveway Spacing Standards: If it can be demonstrated
that there is practical difficulty meeting a driveway spacing standard
contained in this section due to topographical limitations, natural features of
the site, or other circumstances peculiar to the property in question, a
property owner may request a modification or waiver of said standard according
to the applicable approval criteria for a minor modification as set forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-5: LOCATION AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS:
The following location and dimensional standards for access points provide the
opportunity for access to streets while setting limits on the number of curb
cuts permitted and the width of driveways. Maximums are intended as an upper
limit on the number and dimensions of driveways and should not be construed as
minimum requirements. In many cases, fewer and narrower driveways may be
desirable to reduce interruption of the city's street and sidewalk system, to
preserve opportunities for on street parking, and to reduce impervious surface
and storm water runoff.
   A.   Household Living Uses, Except Multi-Family Uses:
      1.   Group Households: Group households must comply with the access
regulations that pertain to the type of dwelling in which the group household
is located. For example, a group household located in a two-family use must
comply with the access regulations for two-family uses.
      2.   Number Of Access Points Allowed:
         a.   For detached single-family dwellings and detached zero lot line
dwellings, a maximum of two (2) access points may be approved per property,
regardless of whether it is a single frontage, double frontage, or corner lot.
For lots with less than fifty feet (50') of frontage, only one access point is
allowed.
         b.   For attached single-family dwellings and two-family uses, a
maximum of one access point per dwelling unit will be allowed, regardless of
whether it is a single frontage, double frontage, or corner lot.
      3.   Access Based On Street Classification: Direct lot access to city
streets is allowed according to the following rules. Single- family and two-
family uses must also comply with the single- family site development standards
as set forth in section
14-2A-6 of this title and/or according to any applicable provisions of the
single-family density bonus options set forth in section
14-2A-7 of this title.
         a.   If two (2) access points are approved for a single lot, the
primary access drive must be from the lower classified street.
         b.   Where a lot is adjacent to a paved alley or paved private rear
lane, primary access must be from the alley or private rear lane, unless, due
to topographical limitations or other unique circumstances, such access is not
feasible.
         c.   For properties without feasible access to a paved alley or paved
private rear lane, the primary access may be located along a local or collector
street. For lots with frontage along more than one street, primary access must
be located along the lower classified street.
         d.   Direct lot access to an arterial street may be requested when
access to a paved alley, private rear lane, local street, or collector street
is not feasible due to inadequate frontage, topographical limitations or other
unique circumstances. When land is being subdivided or resubdivided into lots
intended for single-family or two-family uses, individual lot access to
arterial streets is discouraged. The city, at its discretion, may deny a
request for a subdivision design that would necessitate individual lot access
for single-family and two-family uses to an arterial street. Requests for
direct lot access to an arterial street are subject to the provisions of
section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this article.
         e.   For two-family uses and attached single-family dwellings in the
RS-5 and RS-8 zone, if access to a paved alley or private rear lane is not
feasible, the garage entrance and access drive for a dwelling unit must be
oriented towards the same street as that dwelling unit's main entrance.
      4.   Narrow Lots: Additional access restrictions may apply to lots less
than sixty feet (60') in width. See the single-family site development
standards contained in
chapter 2, article A, "Single- Family Residential Zones", of this title.
      5.   Shared Driveways: Dwellings may share drives and aisles; provided,
that a shared access easement is secured from the owners of each property
sharing the drive or aisle. The easement must be recorded and proof of such
recording must be submitted prior to issuance of an access permit.
      6.   Dimensional Standards:
         a.   For alley or rear lane access, the driveway is allowed to be as
wide as necessary to provide access to the garage or parking space(s).
         b.   For properties with a single access point, the maximum driveway
width is twenty four feet (24') measured at the property line and thirty feet
(30') measured at the curb line.
         c.   If two (2) access points are approved on a single frontage lot,
the maximum dimension for each driveway is twelve feet (12') measured at the
property line and eighteen feet (18') measured at the curb line.
         d.   For single-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved,
one from an alley or private rear lane, and one from a street, the primary
access drive must be from the alley or private rear lane. In such a case, the
maximum driveway width for the secondary driveway from the street is twelve
feet (12') measured at the property line and eighteen feet (18') measured at
the curb line. The access drive from the alley or rear lane is allowed to be as
wide as necessary to provide access to the garage or parking space(s).
         e.   For single-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved on
a double frontage or corner lot, one on each frontage, maximum driveway width
for the primary driveway is twenty four feet (24') measured at the property
line and thirty feet (30') measured at the curb line. The maximum driveway
width for the secondary driveway is twelve feet (12') measured at the property
line and eighteen feet (18') measured at the curb line.
         f.   For two-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved, one
from an alley or private rear lane, and one from a street, the maximum driveway
width for the driveway from the street is twenty feet (20') at the property
line and twenty six feet (26') at the curb line. The access drive from the
alley or rear lane is allowed to be as wide as necessary to provide access to
the garage or parking space(s).
         g.   For two-family uses, if two (2) access points are approved on a
double frontage or corner lot, one on each frontage, the maximum driveway width
for each driveway is twenty feet (20') at the property line and twenty six feet
(26') at the curb line.
         h.   The maximum width for shared driveways is twenty four feet (24')
measured at the property line and thirty feet (30') measured at the curb line.
         i.   Additional driveway width restrictions may apply to lots narrower
than sixty feet (60'). (See single-family site development standards contained
in
chapter 2, article A of this title.)
         j.   In all cases, at least fifty percent (50%) of the area within the
front building setback must remain open space free of impervious surface.
Drives may not be constructed such that this limit is exceeded, except when a
special exception is granted by the board of adjustment according to the
applicable approval criteria as stated in the base zone.
   B.   Multi-Family Uses And Group Living Uses:
      1.   Group Households: Group households located within multi-family uses
are subject to the standards of this subsection.
      2.   Determining Number And Location Of Access Points:
         a.   The city will grant direct lot access to local or collector
streets based on the size of the residential development, anticipated traffic,
the location, the surrounding land uses, and the availability of cross access
easements, or alley or private rear lane access. Based on these factors, the
city will determine the number and location of access points.
         b.   Direct lot access to arterial streets may be requested if access
to an alley, private rear lane, local street, or collector street is not
feasible and if access is not feasible by means of a cross access easement.
Requests for direct lot access to an arterial street are subject to the
provisions of section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this article.
         c.   No more than two (2) driveways will be allowed on any single
frontage property. No more than three (3) driveways will be allowed on any
double frontage/corner lot, with a maximum of two (2) driveways permitted along
any one street.
      3.   Driveway Dimensional Standards: The city will determine driveway
specifications, including width and configuration of lanes, for multi-family
and group living uses based on the size of the development, the anticipated
traffic generated by the use, the location, the surrounding land uses, and the
functional classification of the street to which the driveway provides access.
Driveway widths may not exceed twenty four feet (24') measured at the property
line and thirty two feet (32') at the curb line, except as required by the city
for high traffic volume situations.
   C.   Nonresidential Uses:
      1.   Determining Number And Location Of Access Points:
         a.   The city will grant direct lot access to local or collector
streets that are nonresidential in nature, provided traffic circulation and/or
public safety will not be compromised. The city will determine the number,
location, and design of the access based on the size and location of the
nonresidential development, the type of use, the anticipated traffic and safety
issues, and the surrounding land uses.
         b.   When a site is being developed or redeveloped for nonresidential
uses, existing access points along local or collector streets may be retained
in most instances. However, the city may require that an access point be moved
or combined with another access point in order to prevent public safety or
traffic circulation problems that might reasonably be expected to occur due to
the development or redevelopment of the site.
         c.   Institutional uses that are allowed in residential zones may be
permitted access to residential local and collector streets, provided such
access does not conflict with the approval criteria for provisional and special
exception uses contained in
chapter 4, article B of this title.
         d.   Direct lot access to arterial streets may be requested if access
to a local or collector street is not feasible and if access is not feasible by
means of a cross access easement. Requests for direct lot access to an arterial
street are subject to the provisions of section
14-5C-6, "Arterial Street Access Requirements", of this article.
         e.   No more than two (2) driveways will be allowed on any single
frontage property. No more than three (3) driveways will be allowed on any
double-frontage/corner lot, with a maximum of two (2) driveways permitted along
any one street.
      2.   Driveway Dimensional Standards:
         a.   The city will determine driveway specifications, including width
and configuration of lanes, for nonresidential uses based on the size of the
nonresidential development, the anticipated traffic generated by the use, the
location, the surrounding land uses, and the functional classification of the
street to which the driveway provides access.
         b.   Driveway widths may not exceed thirty four feet (34') measured at
the property line and forty two feet (42') at the curb line, except as required
by the city for high traffic volume situations and for commercial and
industrial properties that need to accommodate large truck traffic. The Iowa
City municipal design standards, as amended, describe and illustrate type A, B,
and C driveways that are intended for these situations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-5C-6: ARTERIAL STREET ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Direct lot access to an arterial street (see
 figure 5C.1 at subsection F of this section) will only be granted upon
presentation by the applicant of convincing evidence that an alternative means
of access is not feasible from an intersecting local or collector street or
through means of a cross access easement.
   B.   The city will approve or deny a request for direct lot access to an
arterial street based on whether an alternative means of access is available,
the size and nature of the proposed development, the anticipated amount of
traffic that will be generated by the development, the capacity of the
surrounding streets, and the character of surrounding land uses. At the
discretion of the city, a traffic study may be required as described in
subsection C of this section for any request for access to an arterial street.
   C.   When an applicant makes a request for driveway access from any use to
an arterial street, either as part of an access permit application or an
application for a new subdivision, the city may require the applicant to
conduct and submit a traffic study. The city will determine the scope of the
traffic study. The traffic study must provide accurate and convincing evidence
justifying the need for the proposed access point and also determine whether
additional traffic control improvements are necessary for safe access. These
improvements may include, but are not limited to the following:
      1.   Right turn lanes.
      2.   Left turn lanes, including two-way left turn lanes.
      3.   Opening or closing a median.
      4.   Cross access roads or driveways.
      5.   Installation or modification of traffic signals, or other traffic
control devices.
      6.   Widening or narrowing driveways and improving on site vehicle
storage areas.
      7.   Consolidating or closing existing driveways.
      8.   Relocating or re-orienting access to provide better sight distance.
      9.   Redesigning internal road and parking layout.
      10.   Modifications to on street parking or off street parking.
   D.   If the city determines that a cross access easement, road or driveway
is required as a condition of approval, the development must adhere to the
standards for cross access easements outlined in section
14-5C-7 of this article.
   E.   In addition to any traffic control improvements required based on the
traffic study, the driveway spacing, location, and dimensional standards
contained in this article must be met.
   F.   
Figure 5C.1 - Iowa City Arterial Street System:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2739.png]
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5C-7: CROSS ACCESS EASEMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: Cross access easements provide the opportunity to minimize the
number of access points along an arterial street in order to maximize the
traffic carrying capacity of the street and improve the overall safety of the
transportation corridor.
   B.   Applicability And Rules Of Interpretation:
      1.   If a property with frontage along an arterial street is proposed to
be subdivided, developed or redeveloped for any multi-family, group living,
commercial, or industrial use, a cross access easement must be provided by the
property owner to all adjoining properties that front on the same arterial
street that are or may be developed as multi-family, group living, commercial,
or industrial uses.
      2.   The city may waive the requirement for a cross access easement in
cases where unusual topography, existing buildings, utility substations or
other unique conditions would render such an easement functionally unusable.
The city may also waive cross access easement requirements between properties
that contain dissimilar uses, such as between residential uses and commercial
or industrial uses.
      3.   The city may approve the vacation of cross access easements in those
cases where the adjoining parcels are subsequently developed with a dissimilar
use such as a single-family dwelling or duplex, multi-family dwellings adjacent
to commercial uses, or other similar situation.
   C.   Requirements:
      1.   The cross access easement must be at least twenty four feet (24') in
width, unless a narrower width is approved by the city due to topography,
existing buildings, or other site conditions.
      2.   The drive or lane constructed in the cross access easement must be
at least twenty feet (20') wide, unless a greater width is required due to fire
apparatus access drive requirements or driveway width requirements contained in
chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this
title.
      3.   The cross access drive must meet any other applicable standards for
access drives contained in
chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this
title.
      4.   Cross access easements should function as rear service lanes or as
traffic circulation drives between parking areas of adjacent properties. See
figures 5C.2 and
5C.3 below.
Figure 5C.2 - Rear Service Lane As A Cross Access Easement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2741.png]
 
Figure 5C.3 - Cross Access On A Site With Shared Traffic Circulation And
Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2743.png]
 
      5.   Permanent structures that would interfere with the proposed access
are not permitted within the easement. Improvements such as medians and parking
islands may be constructed within a cross access easement if it can be
demonstrated that adequate circulation and cross access will be accomplished.
      6.   The property owner is responsible for properly maintaining the cross
access easement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. INTERSECTION VISIBILITY STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5D-1: Purpose
14-5D-2: Applicability
14-5D-3: Vision Triangles
14-5D-4: Standards Within Vision Triangles
14-5D-1: PURPOSE:
The intersection visibility standards establish triangular areas on corner
lots, referred to herein as "vision triangles", within which the placement of
buildings, fences, hedges, walls, and other structures is restricted in order
to maintain clear lines of sight at street intersections for the purposes of
traffic and pedestrian safety. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5D-2: APPLICABILITY:
Lots located at the corner of any street intersection must comply with the
requirements of this article, unless specifically exempted or superseded by
more specific provisions of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord.
20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5D-3: VISION TRIANGLES:
The dimensions of vision triangles are determined as follows: (See also
 figure 5D.1, located at the end of this section.)
   A.   At the intersection of two (2) local streets, a local street with a
collector street, or two (2) collector streets, the legs of the vision triangle
will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the curb line from the
point where the curbs of the two (2) streets intersect. In the absence of a
curb, the legs of the triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured
along the edge of the street pavement from the point where the pavement of the
two (2) streets intersect.
   B.   At the intersection of two (2) arterial streets, the legs of the
triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the right of
way line from the point the right of way lines of the two (2) streets
intersect.
   C.   At the intersection of a local street with an arterial or at the
intersection of a collector street with an arterial, the local or collector leg
of the triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the curb
line from the point where the curbs of the streets intersect. The arterial leg
of the triangle will be thirty feet (30') in length, as measured along the
right of way line from the point the right of way lines of the two (2) streets
intersect.
Figure 5D.1 - Vision Triangles At The Intersections Of Various Street Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2745.png]
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5D-4: STANDARDS WITHIN VISION TRIANGLES:
   A.   Prohibited Obstructions: The following obstructions are prohibited
within vision triangles:
      1.   Hedges and walls higher than two feet (2') above the curb level.
      2.   Fences higher than two feet (2') above the curb level. However,
fences that are of a type that is less than twenty percent (20%) solid, such as
split rail, open weave, or wrought iron, are permitted within the vision
triangle; provided, that such fences are kept free from plantings and other
materials that are more than two feet (2') in height. Solidity is the percent
of the fence over a random area that is made up of solid, opaque material that
does not allow light or air to pass through.
      3.   Signs, except as specifically exempted in subsection B of this
section.
      4.   Structures of any type, including principal and accessory buildings,
except as exempted in subsection B of this section.
      5.   Items of outdoor display or storage, including ornamental features,
such as fountains, statues, garden structures and similar features.
      6.   Parking and vehicular display areas.
   B.   Exemptions: The following structures are exempt from the provisions of
this article:
      1.   Structures, including signs, in the CB-2, CB-5 and CB-10 zones.
      2.   After review by the city, buildings on lots at intersections where
both streets are signalized. The city will approve or deny a request to
construct a building within the vision triangle based on such factors as street
right of way width, speed and volume of traffic through the intersection, and
the number of turning movements.
      3.   Utility and street light poles.
      4.   Traffic control equipment, including control boxes, traffic signs,
and structures that support traffic signals.
      5.   Building signs located on buildings that are exempt from the vision
triangle requirements as specified in subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
      6.   A sign established according to
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, provided the bottom
edge of the sign and any supporting structure is at least eight feet (8') above
the adjacent curb level, so that visual clearance is maintained within the
vision triangle. Poles and supporting structures for signs are prohibited
within the vision triangle. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. LANDSCAPING AND TREE STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5E-1: Purpose
14-5E-2: Application Of Provisions
14-5E-3: General Requirements And Measurements
14-5E-4: Tree Planting Requirements
14-5E-5: Protection And Maintenance
14-5E-6: Preservation Of Existing Trees
14-5E-7: Street Tree Requirements
14-5E-8: Tree Requirements For Residential Uses
14-5E-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this article is to encourage the retention of existing trees and
to provide for the planting of new trees along streets, on two-family, multi-
family and group living residential properties, and to provide planting and
maintenance standards for required trees and landscaping. Trees and landscaping
provide shade, reduce heat island effects in paved areas, improve the
appearance of Iowa City streets and create attractive and functional living
environments that will protect and enhance property values. Standards for
screening and buffering are contained in
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicability: No building permit shall be issued for the construction,
reconstruction or structural alteration of a building nor shall any use be
established or converted nor shall a certificate of occupancy be granted for a
use without conformity with the provisions of the tree regulations, unless
specifically exempted or superseded by more specific provisions of this title.
   B.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from the requirements of this
article:
      1.   Any individual lot occupied by a detached single-family dwelling or
a detached zero lot line dwelling, including group households, if located
within such a dwelling.
      2.   Property in the ID and CB-10 zones.
      3.   In commercial zones, property developed in accordance with the
setback requirements of the base zone in such a manner that insufficient area
is available to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article;
however, all trees that can be provided in compliance with the requirements
must be provided. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006;
Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5E-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MEASUREMENTS:
   A.   Permitted Species: The list of recommended trees for Iowa City, as
established by the city forester, specifies the varieties of trees permitted
for the uses indicated by this article. References to "large" or "small" trees
herein refer to the mature heights of the trees as indicated in said list.
   B.   Landscape Plans Required: When the provisions of this article are
applicable, a landscaping plan must be submitted that illustrates and lists the
following information:
      1.   The size and location of required planting areas.
      2.   The mature height (small or large) of both proposed trees and trees
that will be preserved.
      3.   The species of trees (both preserved and proposed).
      4.   The location of the preserved and proposed trees.
      5.   The location of any existing trees within the right of way.
   C.   Measurements:
      1.   When measuring to determine the location or spacing of required
trees or shrubs, the distance is measured to the center of the tree or shrub.
      2.   Where fractional numbers of trees result from calculations, the
number of trees required will be rounded to the closest whole number. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-4: TREE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plantings Required Prior To Occupancy:
      1.   All plantings required by this article must be installed prior to
occupancy or commencement of a use, except as allowed in subsection A2 of this
section.
      2.   If the plantings cannot be installed prior to occupancy or
commencement of a use due to seasonal conditions that may reduce survivability,
the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and grant
a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates of June 1 or November
1, whichever occurs first, and the property owner must place in an escrow
account, established with the city, an amount which will cover one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated cost of plants and installation.
   B.   Planting Sizes:
      1.   Deciduous Trees: At the time of planting, deciduous trees must have
a single stem and have a minimum trunk diameter of one and one-half inches
(1.5") measured at a point six inches (6") above ground level or above the top
of burlap wrapping. It must demonstrate the growth capabilities, branching
formation and crown balance that are indigenous to the particular variety. The
tree must be straight of trunk with the main leader intact and must be healthy
and free of disease and pests.
      2.   Coniferous Trees: At the time of planting, coniferous trees must
have a minimum height of three feet (3') measured from the planted level to the
top of the tree. The needle color and branching habits must be normal for the
species, and the overall appearance must be indicative of previous care in
pruning and development. The tree must be healthy and free of disease and
pests.
   C.   Siting Requirements:
      1.   Trees must be located in a manner that, at maturity, will avoid
interference with the construction, maintenance and operation of public and
private utilities and services aboveground or belowground.
      2.   The minimum planting area required for large trees is two hundred
fifty six (256) square feet. The minimum planting area required for small trees
is one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
      3.   At the time of planting, trees and plantings must be separated from
other structures and features on a site in order to minimize conflicts as
plants mature.
Table 5E-1 below specifies the minimum spacing between plantings and various
features of a site. However, the minimum distances between trees, between trees
and shrubs, and between shrubs may be reduced by twenty five percent (25%) to
permit design flexibility or to create denser screening where desired.
Table 5E-1: Minimum Spacing Between Plantings And Other Features (In Feet)
 
              Large Tree Small Tree Shrub
Large tree    30         24         4
Small tree    24         16         3
Shrub         4          3          See
                                    chapter 5, article F of this title2
Building      14         8          2
Sidewalk      41         41         31
Curb/pavement 41         41         21
 
Notes to
table 5E-1:
   1.   The minimum distance between plantings and sidewalks or pavement also
applies to the anticipated location of a future sidewalk or paved surface.
   2.   See spacing requirements listed in
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-5: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The provisions of this section apply to all plantings required by this
title, whether newly planted or preserved.
   B.   Required planting areas must be separated from abutting vehicular use
areas, including parking spaces, drives, aisles, alleys, vehicle display and
loading areas, etc., by an unmountable curb or barrier that is a minimum of
five inches (5") in height. The curb or barrier must be constructed in such a
manner that salt water runoff will not damage the tree or plantings.
   C.   The property owner must keep all trees properly maintained, pruned as
needed, and free from trash and litter. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to maintain and replace trees and plantings required by this
title. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy
manner. Plants that die must be replaced. Improper maintenance, pruning, or
removal of plantings may be subject to municipal infraction proceedings, up to
and including environmental infraction proceedings. Any preserved tree that has
been improperly maintained, pruned, or removed may be required to be replaced
by the same number of trees for which it substituted.
   D.   Any trees that overhang the public right of way must be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of title 10, chapter 8, "Trees And Plant
Materials", of this code.
   E.   Maintenance of trees within street rights of way will be the
responsibility of the city. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-6: PRESERVATION OF EXISTING TREES:
Existing trees may be used to comply with the requirements of sections
14-5E-7, "Street Tree Requirements", and
14-5E-8, "Tree Requirements For Residential Uses", of this article, and to meet
the tree requirements for parking areas contained in article A, "Off Street
Parking And Loading Standards", of this chapter. Existing trees used to satisfy
these requirements must be in good health prior to and following site
development. The city forester is authorized to approve substitutions based on
determination of health and survivability.
Table 5E-2, "Schedule Of Substitution Values", of this section, will be used to
determine the ratio of substitution. The following provisions must also be
observed:
   A.   The same minimum separation distances that are required of new
plantings must be observed when possible; except, that extant groupings of two
(2) or more trees may be preserved upon approval by the city forester, who will
also determine if trees or branches must be removed from such groupings in the
interest of public safety and/or to assure survival of the specimen.
   B.   The building official will determine if a preserved tree will be a
substitute for a street tree or a residential use tree, depending on its
location on a lot.
   C.   The roots of a tree must be protected during site development with
barrier fencing extending out at least as far as the drip line of the tree, or
as far as the city forester deems necessary to minimize damage. Any limbs that
might be damaged during construction must be pruned according to the direction
of the city forester.
   D.   No paving or construction will be allowed within the drip line of a
preserved tree.
   E.   Any preserved tree that dies within five (5) years of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy must be replaced by the same number of trees for which
it substituted.
Table 5E-2: Schedule Of Substitution Values1
 
Diameter Of Existing Tree  (Measured 4 Feet Above Ground   Substitution Value
Level)
   36 inches or more                                   3 required trees
   12 to 35 inches                                     2 required trees
   2 to 12 inches                                      1 required tree
 
Note:
   1.    The substitution value of groupings of 1 or more trees, provided their
preservation as a group is approved by the city forester, will be based on the
caliper measure of the largest tree of the group.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5E-7: STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements of this section provide for trees along streets to complement
and soften the edges of development, to provide a tree canopy for pedestrians,
and to define and unify the street edge. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   A.   Street Trees Adjacent To Public Right Of Way:
      1.   On single frontage lots, one large tree is required for every forty
(40) linear feet of frontage or one small tree for every thirty (30) linear
feet of frontage, but not less than one tree per lot.
      2.   On lots with more than one frontage, one tree is required for every
sixty (60) linear feet of frontage.
      3.   Required trees must be located as follows:
         a.   Trees must be planted on private property adjacent to the right
of way, except when subsection A3b or A3c of this section apply. For purposes
of this section, "adjacent" means that large trees must be planted within
fourteen feet (14') of the right of way line and small trees must be planted
within eight feet (8') of the right of way line. All other siting requirements
contained in this article must be observed.
         b.   The number of trees required may be reduced by the number of
qualifying trees that already exist in the right of way or adjacent to the
right of way. To qualify, a tree must meet the requirements of section
14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this article.
         c.   Trees that cannot be planted adjacent to the right of way due to
a conflict with any provision of this title must be planted within the right of
way according to the provisions of subsection B, "Street Trees Within Public
Right Of Way", of this section. However, trees that cannot be planted in
conformity with the provisions of said subsection B may be omitted.
   B.   Street Trees Within Public Right Of Way:
      1.   Required street trees are to be planted within the right of way only
in those cases where trees cannot be planted adjacent to the street right of
way in accordance with subsection A of this section.
      2.   Trees planted in the public right of way must meet the following
requirements:
         a.   A tree planting permit must be obtained from the city forester.
         b.   Trees may not be planted in the area between a curb and a
sidewalk if the width of the planting area is less than nine feet (9'), unless
approved by the city forester.
         c.   All other siting requirements contained in section
14-5E-4 of this article must be observed.
         d.   Any tree planted within the street right of way must have a
single trunk, with a minimum of four feet (4') from grade to the first branch,
at the time of planting and must conform to the requirements of title 10,
chapter 8, "Trees And Plant Materials", of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005; amd. Ord. 12-4472, 4-3-2012)
14-5E-8: TREE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Minimum Requirements:
      1.   For lots containing two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, or
group living uses, trees must be planted on site at a minimum ratio of at least
one tree for every five hundred fifty (550) square feet of total building
coverage of the lot. Any combination of small and large trees is allowed,
provided this coverage ratio is met.
      2.   For lease lot developments, trees must be planted at a ratio of one
tree for every lease lot in the development. Any combination of small and large
trees is allowed, provided this coverage ratio is met.
   B.   Reductions And Substitutions:
      1.   Trees planted to meet the requirements of section
14-5E-7, "Street Tree Requirements", of this article, or to meet the tree
requirements for parking areas specified in article A, "Off Street Parking And
Loading Standards", of this chapter, may also be used to fulfill the
requirements of this section.
      2.   Existing trees preserved according to the provisions of section
14-5E-6, "Preservation Of Existing Trees", of this article may be used to
fulfill the requirements of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord.
12-4472, 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE F. SCREENING AND BUFFERING STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5F-1: Purpose
14-5F-2: Applicability
14-5F-3: General Requirements
14-5F-4: Planting Requirements
14-5F-5: Protection And Maintenance
14-5F-6: Screening Standards (S-Series)
14-5F-1: PURPOSE:
The screening and buffering standards are intended to improve the appearance of
Iowa City streetscapes for the benefit of its citizens; to create aesthetically
pleasing and functional living environments; to protect and enhance property
values; and to provide for transitions between dissimilar uses. This article
contains a menu of screening tools collectively referred to as "S-series
standards". These standards are applied in situations where uses, activities,
materials, or equipment must be separated from or screened from view of public
ways, other zones, or adjacent properties. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-2: APPLICABILITY:
The screening and buffering standards will be applied throughout this title,
unless specifically exempted or superseded by more specific provisions of this
title, where they will be referenced with the numbers S1, S2, S3, etc. The
regulations in this article address materials, placement, layout, and timing of
installation. The standards in this article are expressed as minimum standards;
additional landscaping and screening materials may be used as long as they do
not conflict with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5F-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permitted Plant Species:
Table 5F-2, located at the end of section
14-5F-6 of this article, lists the various plant species that are allowed to be
used to satisfy screening and buffering requirements. These plants were chosen
because of characteristics, such as hardiness, growth rate, type and density of
foliage, and mature height. Deviations from the listed plants are allowed if
the replacement shrubs are similar in form or hardiness to a permitted variety
and are approved by the city.
   B.   Landscape Plans Required: When provisions of this article are
applicable, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the request for a
building permit, which, in addition to the information normally required, must
indicate the following:
      1.   The size and location of required planting areas.
      2.   The estimated mature height of required plantings, both preserved
and proposed.
      3.   The common and scientific names of any required shrubs, including
any shrubs preserved in lieu of new plantings.
      4.   On the plan, preserved shrubs must be distinguished from new shrubs.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-4: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plantings Required Prior To Occupancy:
      1.   All plantings required by this article must be installed prior to
occupancy or commencement of a use, except as allowed in subsection A2 of this
section.
      2.   If the plantings cannot be installed prior to occupancy or
commencement of a use due to seasonal conditions that may reduce survivability,
the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and grant
a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates of June 1 or November
1, whichever occurs first, and the property owner must place in an escrow
account, established with the city, an amount which will cover one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated cost of plants and installation.
   B.   Plant Materials Specifications:
      1.   The minimum planting height of shrubs is eighteen (18) to thirty six
inches (36"), depending on species or as noted in the S-series requirements.
      2.   The use of mulch must be confined to the areas around plantings.
Lawn grass or other living ground cover, such as low growing shrubs and/or
creeping plants should be used for exposed areas. Decorative landscaping
gravel, cobbles or small stones may be used as a mulch alternative.
   C.   Planting Area Specifications:
      1.   The minimum width of a planting area will be specified in the base
zone requirements, use regulations, or development standards for the use or
development being screened or buffered. If not specified in any of the above
listed provisions, the minimum width of a planting area is five feet (5').
However, a wider planting area may be needed to accommodate the number and
types of plants proposed and the spacing requirements listed in table 5F-1,
located at the end of this section, and
table 5F-2, located at the end of section
14-5F-6 of this article.
      2.   Screening and buffering requirements will often coincide with
required trees. (See
chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this title.) In such
a case, the landscaping design and the size and width of the planting area must
accommodate both trees and shrubs.
   D.   Siting Requirements:
      1.   Plantings may not be located in violation of the provisions of
chapter 5, article D, "Intersection Visibility Standards", of this title.
      2.   At the time of planting, trees and plantings must be separated from
other structures and features on a site in order to minimize conflicts as
plants mature. Table 5F-1 below lists the minimum spacing between plants and
between plants and other features and structures on a site. However, the
minimum distances between trees, between trees and shrubs, and between shrubs
may be reduced by twenty five percent (25%) to permit design flexibility or to
create denser screening where desired. Distances are measured to the center of
a tree or the approximate center of individual shrubs.
Table 5F-1: Minimum Spacing Between Plantings And Other Features (In Feet)
 
              Large Tree Small Tree Shrub
Large tree    30         24         4
Small tree    24         16         3
                                    See spacing requirements in
Shrub         4          3          table 5F-2, located at the end of section
                                    14-5F-6 of this article
Building      14         8          2
Sidewalk      41         41         31
Curb/pavement 41         41         21
 
Note to table 5F-1:
   1.   The minimum distance between plantings and sidewalks or pavement also
applies to the anticipated location of a future sidewalk or paved surface.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-5: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The provisions of this section apply to all plantings required by this
title, whether newly planted or preserved.
   B.   Required planting areas must be separated from abutting vehicular use
areas, including parking spaces, drives, aisles, alleys, vehicle display and
loading areas, etc., by an unmountable curb or barrier that is a minimum of
five inches (5") in height. The curb or barrier must be constructed in such a
manner that salt water runoff will not damage trees or plantings.
   C.   The property owner must keep all plantings properly maintained, pruned
as needed, and free from trash and litter. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to maintain and replace trees and plantings required by this
title. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy
manner. Plants that die must be replaced. Improper maintenance, pruning, or
removal of plantings may be subject to municipal infraction proceedings, up to
and including environmental infraction proceedings.
   D.   Any trees that overhang the public right of way must be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of title 10, chapter 8, "Trees And Plant
Materials", of this code.
   E.   To prevent interference with pedestrian traffic, plantings must be
located appropriately and maintained so that foliage does not grow any closer
than one foot (1') to the edge of a sidewalk or pedestrian trail. This one foot
(1') setback must be maintained for at least the first nine feet (9') of plant
height.
   F.   Maintenance of trees within street rights of way is the responsibility
of the city. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5F-6: SCREENING STANDARDS (S-SERIES):
The screening and buffering standards listed below will be applied throughout
this title, where they will be referenced with the numbers S1, S2, S3, etc. The
plant varieties listed in
table 5F-2, located at the end of this section, are to be used to satisfy the
requirements of these various standards. Deviations from the listed plants are
allowed if the replacement shrubs are similar in form or hardiness to a
permitted variety and are approved by the city.
   A.   General Buffering, S1:
      1.   Intent: The S1 standard is a basic transitional buffering standard,
where planting areas separate uses from the public right of way, define edges
and separate vehicular use areas from pedestrians, yet allow views to easily
penetrate, as for outdoor sales display lots and for general landscaping on
commercial properties.
      2.   Requirements: A grass lawn must be maintained within the landscaped
area, with groupings of low growing shrubs and ground plants. Approximately
half the landscaping plants must be of an evergreen variety to provide texture
and color throughout the year. Plantings should be arranged to achieve the
desired buffering effect, but there is no established minimum or maximum
height.
      3.   
Figure 5F.1 - General Buffering, S1:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2747.png]
 
   B.   Variable Height Screen, S2:
      1.   Intent: The S2 standard is a buffering treatment that uses distance
and low level screening to separate uses from the public right of way, from
other zones, to define edges and separate vehicular use areas from pedestrians.
The standard is applied where moderate screening is necessary to soften the
impact of uses or paved areas, but where some visibility between areas is more
desirable than a total visual screen.
      2.   Required Materials: The S2 standard requires enough shrubs to form a
landscape screen ranging between two feet (2') and four feet (4') in height. At
least a third of the shrubs must grow to no less than four feet (4') in height.
         a.   Alternative Materials (Option A): Low berms or planters may be
used to elevate shrubs as long as the overall height of the screening ranges
from two feet (2') to four feet (4'). At least one-third (1/3) of the shrubs
must grow to no less than four feet (4') in height.
         b.   Alternative Materials (Option B): A continuous or semicontinuous
two (2) to three foot (3') high masonry wall. Breaks in the wall are permitted
for sidewalk access and to accommodate required street trees. One shrub per ten
(10) linear feet of wall, on average, is required. Shrubs may be grouped, but
long stretches without any shrubs should be avoided. At least one-third (1/3)
of the shrubs must grow to no less than four feet (4') in height.
      3.   
Figure 5F.2 - Variable Height Screen, S2:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2749.png]
 
   C.   High Screen, S3:
      1.   Intent: The S3 standard is a buffering treatment that uses dense
landscape screening to provide a visual and physical separation between uses
and zones. It is commonly applied between residential uses and commercial and
industrial uses and to screen outdoor work or storage areas.
      2.   Required Materials: Enough shrubs and small evergreens to form a
continuous screen or hedge at least five feet (5') to six feet (6') in height
and more than fifty percent (50%) solid year round. Screening materials must be
at least three feet (3') high when planted. At least one-half (1/2) the shrubs
must be evergreen varieties.
         a.   Alternative Materials (Option A): A berm may be used in
conjunction with a hedge to achieve an overall height of six feet (6').
         b.   Alternative Materials (Option B): A continuous or semicontinuous
five (5) to six foot (6') high masonry wall or solid fence. Breaks in the wall
or fence are permitted for access and to accommodate required street trees. One
shrub per ten (10) linear feet of wall, on average, is required. Shrubs may be
grouped, but long stretches without any shrubs should be avoided. At least one-
third (1/3) of the shrubs must grow to no less than five feet (5') in height.
      3.   Figure 5F.3 - High Screen, S3:
Figure 5F.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2751.png]
 
   D.   Open Pattern Fence Or Wall, S4:
      1.   Intent: The S4 standard provides a tall, semiopaque visual
separation. The standard is applied where separation is required, but where
visibility between areas is more desirable than a total visual screen. This
standard provides for instances where security may be an issue and where
landscaping is not a practical option.
      2.   Required Materials: A four (4) to six foot (6') high fence of fifty
percent (50%) or greater opacity constructed of wood, brick, metal, masonry or
other permanent materials.
   E.   Opaque Fence Or Wall, S5:
      1.   Intent: The S5 standard provides a complete visual separation. The
standard is applied in instances where complete screening is needed to protect
abutting uses. This standard provides for instances where security may be an
issue and where landscaping is not a practical option.
      2.   Required Materials: A four (4) to eight foot (8') high fence,
completely opaque, constructed of wood, brick, metal, masonry or other
permanent materials. When used for dumpster or utility enclosures, the material
must match the primary building material or be complementary to it. The height
of the fence or wall will be determined based on the activity, materials, or
equipment being screened. In general, the fence or wall should be of sufficient
height to screen the activity, materials, or equipment from public view.
Table 5F-2: Permitted Plants For Screening And Buffering1
 Plant Name/ Variety Mature Height, Form, Color Spacing
                  Plant Name/ Variety  Mature Height, Form, Spacing
                                       Color
General Buffering Dwarf Summer Blooming Spirea (Spirea japonica or x bumalda)
S1
                 Daphne spirea        1 foot, mounding,    3 feet on center
                                       pink flowers
                 Lime mound spirea    2 feet, mounding,    3.5 feet on center
                                       yellow/green leaves
                 Japanese white       2 feet, mounding,    3.5 feet on center
                  spirea               white flowers
                 Magic carpet spirea  2 feet, mounding,    3.5 feet on center
                                       pink flowers
                 Spreading Juniper (Juniper horizontalis or Juniperus
                  chinensis) Evergreen
                                       1 to 1.5 feet,
                 Andorra              spreading, gray-     4.5 feet on center
                                       green foliage, turns
                                       to plum in fall
                                       1 foot, spreading,
                 Blue chip            bright silvery blue  4.5 feet on center
                                       foliage, dense
                                       1 to 1.5 feet,
                 Buffalo              spreading, feathery  4.5 feet on center
                                       green branches
                                       1 foot, spreading,
                 Sargent, blue        blue-gray foliage    4.5 feet on center
                                       all year
                 Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergi)
                                       1 foot, spiny mound,
                 Crimson pygmy        red leaves in        3.5 feet on center
                                       summer, red berries
                                       in winter
                                       1 foot, spiny mound,
                 Kobold               green leaves, red    3.5 feet on center
                                       berries in winter
Variable Height   Dwarf Summer Blooming Spirea (Spirea japonica or x bumalda)
Screen S2
                                       2 to 3 feet,
                 Anthony waterer      mounding, rose-pink  4 feet on center
                  spirea               flowers, red fall
                                       color
                                       2 to 3 feet,
                                       mounding, red leaves
                 Goldflame spirea     in spring, yellow in 4 feet on center
                                       summer, red in fall;
                                       pink flowers
                                       2 to 3 feet,
                 Little princess      mounding, covered    4 feet on center
                  spirea               with pink flowers
                                       throughout summer
                 Magic carpet spirea  2 feet, mounding,    3.5 feet on center
                                       pink flowers
                                       2 to 3 feet,
                                       upright, dense;
                 Neon flash spirea    abundant with bright 3.5 feet on center
                                       red flowers in
                                       summer
                  Dwarf Korean Lilac   4 to 5 feet, dense
                 (Syringa meyeri      shrub, small foliage 4.5 feet on center
                  "Palibin")           with very fragrant
                                       blooms
                 American Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis) Evergreen
                                       10 to 15 feet,
                 Emerald              narrow, bright green 3.5 feet on center
                                       year round
                 Holmstrup            3 to 5 feet, dense,  3 feet on center
                                       slow growing
                 Globe                3 to 5 feet,         3.5 feet on center
                                       globular, dark green
                                       2 to 3 feet, 4 to 5
                 Taunton Spreading    feet width, dense;   4 feet on center
                  Yew Evergreen        soft, dark green
                                       needles
High Screen S3    American Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis) Evergreen
                                       10 to 15 feet,
                 Emerald              narrow, bright green 3.5 feet on center
                                       year round
                                       15 to 30 feet, wide
                 Techny               pyramidal, dark      4 feet on center
                                       green
                                       5 to 6 feet, dense
                                       shrub, brilliant
                  Compact Burning Bush purple-red fall
                 (Euonymus alatus     color (Note:         3.5 feet on center
                  "compacta")          potentially invasive
                                       near woodlands and
                                       pasture)
                 Hatfield Yew (Taxus  10 feet, pyramidal,  3.5 feet on center
                  media) Evergreen     dense
 
Note to
table 5F-2:
   1.   Deviations from the listed plants are allowed if the replacement shrubs
are similar in form or hardiness to a permitted variety and are approved by the
city.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE G. OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5G-1: Purpose
14-5G-2: Applicability
14-5G-3: Standards For Single-Family And Two-Family Uses
14-5G-4: Physical Controls
14-5G-5: Total Outdoor Light Output Standards
14-5G-6: Prohibited Lighting And Bulbs
14-5G-7: Exemptions For Special Uses
14-5G-8: Measurement
14-5G-1: PURPOSE:
The outdoor lighting standards are intended to reduce the obtrusive aspects of
outdoor light usage while preserving safety, security, and the nighttime use
and enjoyment of property. These measures will encourage lighting practices
that direct appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed and
decrease glare resulting from overlighting and poorly shielded or
inappropriately directed lighting fixtures. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The standards contained in this article
apply to all uses in all zones, except for the exemptions listed in subsection
B of this section, or unless specifically exempted or superseded by more
specific provisions of this title.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   Single-family uses, two-family uses, and group households located
within single-family or two-family dwellings are exempt from all provisions of
this article, except for the provisions contained in section
14-5G-3 of this article.
      2.   Airport lighting for navigational purposes is exempt from the
provisions of this article.
      3.   FAA required lighting on towers and buildings is exempt from the
provisions of this article.
      4.   The temporary use of lighting for public festivals and celebrations
and for temporary commercial activities such as carnivals and fairs may be
exempted from the provisions of this article if the building official
determines, through the temporary use permitting process, that the proposed
lighting will not create a hazard or nuisance from glare, light trespass, or
overlighting.
      5.   Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities that are accessory to
community service uses, colleges and university uses, educational facility
uses, parks and open space uses, and religious/private group assembly uses may
be exempted from the minimum standards or exceed the maximum standards of this
article; provided, that the provisions specified in section
14-5G-7, "Exemptions For Special Uses", of this article are met.
      6.   Lighting for outdoor display lots accessory to outdoor storage and
display oriented retail uses may exceed the total outdoor light output
standards specified in section
14-5G-5 of this article; provided, that the provisions specified in section
14-5G-7, "Exemptions For Special Uses", of this article are met. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5G-3: STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY USES:
The regulations of this section apply to all single-family uses, two-family
uses, and any group household that is located within a single-family or two-
family dwelling.
   A.   Height And Glare Control:
      1.   Light fixtures must be mounted no higher than fifteen feet (15')
above grade.
      2.   All bulbs that exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens must be fully
shielded as installed.
      3.   Bulbs used for floodlights must not exceed two thousand (2,000)
lumens.
   B.   Light Trespass Standards:
      1.   Any floodlights that are visible from any neighboring residential
property must be aimed downward at an angle no higher than forty five degrees
(45°) from vertical.
      2.   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or objects mounted
on a pole or pedestal must use a narrow cone of light that does not extend
beyond the illuminated object. Lights that are intended to architecturally
highlight a building or its features must use a limited pattern of light that
does not extend beyond the wall of the building. Bulbs must be shielded from
view of abutting properties and the public right of way.
   C.   Lighting For Private Recreational Facilities: All floodlights used to
illuminate outdoor private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools,
tennis courts, and basketball courts, must be turned off by ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Underwater lighting in swimming pools and hot tubs are exempt from this
provision.
   D.   Prohibited Lighting: Laser lights, searchlights, mercury vapor bulbs,
and any other type of lamp capable of producing comparable levels of
ultraviolet radiation per watt are prohibited. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-4: PHYSICAL CONTROLS:
   A.   Height Limitations:
      1.   Light fixtures located within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential zone, Neighborhood Form-Based Zone, riverfront crossings zone, or
the eastside mixed use district must be mounted no higher than twenty five feet
(25') above grade.
      2.   Light fixtures located farther than three hundred feet (300') from a
residential zone, Neighborhood Form-Based Zone, riverfront crossings zone, or
the eastside mixed use district must be mounted no higher than thirty five feet
(35') above grade.
   B.   Glare Control:
      1.   All bulbs that exceed two thousand (2000) lumens must be fully
shielded as installed.
      2.   Unshielded or partially shielded bulbs that are two thousand (2000)
lumens or less must be frosted glass or be installed behind a translucent
cover.
      3.   All under canopy lights or lights mounted in eaves must either be
recessed into the canopy/eave and fully shielded or use flat lenses instead of
drop lenses.
      4.   The city may permit the use of light reflectors, refractors or house
shields as a substitute for fully shielded light fixtures on lower wattage or
low voltage ornamental or pedestrian light fixtures. The shielding on such
fixtures must control for uplighting. These substitute shielding options are
not permitted for general illumination of large areas, such as parking,
service, or outdoor product display areas. Fixtures used to illuminate such
areas must be fully shielded.
   C.   Light Trespass: The trespass standards are intended to prevent light
from one property extending beyond the property line onto adjacent properties.
Compliance with this subsection is achieved with fixture shielding, directional
control designed into the fixture, fixture location, fixture height, fixture
aim, or a combination of these methods.
      1.   Except for lighting of loading areas, service areas, and for
architectural emphasis, floodlighting is prohibited. Floodlights are not
permitted for the illumination of parking or outdoor product display areas.
      2.   Floodlights, when permitted, are exempt from subsection B2 of this
section, but must be aimed no higher than forty five degrees (45°) from
vertical. Floodlights must also comply with subsections C3, C4 and C5 of this
section.
      3.   Lighting fixtures must be located and shielded such that the bulb is
not directly visible from any adjacent residential use or public right of way.
The right of way trespass standard does not apply in the CB-2, CB-5, or CB-10
zones.
      4.   Illumination must not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot-candle and
2.0 initial maximum foot-candles as measured at any point along a property
boundary that is adjacent to or across the street from properties that are
zoned residential, CN-1, or CO-1, or is adjacent to or across the street from a
Neighborhood Form-Based Zone. The city may increase the maximum up to 1.0
horizontal foot-candle for building code required lighting on buildings located
on or close to the property line. However, lighting must be located and
shielded in a manner that will be least obtrusive to any abutting residential
properties.
      5.   On any property containing multi-family uses or group living uses,
lighting fixtures must be located and shielded such that the bulbs are not
visible from any residential window on the property.
      6.   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or objects mounted
on a pole or pedestal must use a narrow cone of light that does not extend
beyond the illuminated object. Lights that are intended to architecturally
highlight a building or its features must use a limited pattern of light that
does not extend beyond the wall of the building. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-
2021)
14-5G-5: TOTAL OUTDOOR LIGHT OUTPUT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Outdoor Light Output:
      1.   Total Outdoor Light Output Defined: The "total outdoor light output"
on a property is the total amount of light, measured in initial lumens, from
all bulbs used in outdoor light fixtures. It includes all lights and luminous
tubing used for display lighting, general illumination, architectural/accent
lighting, and lights used for external illumination of signs, but does not
include lights used to illuminate internally illuminated signs or luminous
tubing used in neon signs. For bulb types that vary in their output as they
age, such as high pressure sodium, fluorescent and metal halide, the initial
lumen output, as defined by the manufacturer, is the value to be considered
when calculating total outdoor light output.
      2.   Applicability: The total outdoor light output on any property that
is subject to the provisions of this article may not exceed the limits in
table 5G-1 of this section, except for those that are exempted in subsection A3
of this section and in section
14-5G-7 of this article. The values in this table are upper limits and not
design goals; design goals should be the lowest light levels that meet the
requirements of the task.
      3.   Exemptions:
         a.   Seasonal decorations, permitted between Thanksgiving and the end
of January, are not counted toward the total outdoor light output.
         b.   In the E2 and E3 districts, properties where the building
coverage is eighty percent (80%) or greater are exempt from the maximum total
outdoor light output standard, but are subject to the limitation on unshielded
fixtures, as stated in
table 5G-1 of this section.
   B.   Lighting Environment Districts: All zones, except public (P) zones, are
grouped into three (3) lighting environment districts that control lighting
output on applicable lots in each zone. Uses, for which the lighting standards
are applicable, located within the public (P) zone must comply with the
lighting requirements of the adjacent zone; those on the border between two (2)
or more zones must comply with the standards of the strictest adjacent zone.
Zones are grouped into the lighting environment districts as follows:
      1.   Low illumination district, E1: Areas of low ambient lighting levels.
This district includes single-family and low density multi-family residential
zones. This district applies to the following zones: ID-RS, ID-RM, RR-1, RS-5,
RS-8, RS-12, RM-12, RNS-12, T3NE, T3NG, T4NS, and T4NM.
      2.   Medium illumination district, E2: Areas of medium ambient lighting
levels. This district includes higher density multi-family zones and lower
intensity commercial and office zones. This district applies to the following
zones: ID-C, ID-I, ID-RP, CN-1, CO-1, PRM, RM-20, RM-44, RNS-20, MU, T4MS, EMU,
and all RFC zones, except the RFC-WR.
      3.   High illumination district, E3: Areas of high ambient lighting
levels. This district includes higher intensity commercial, industrial, and
research zones. This district applies to the following zones: CC-2, CH-1, CI-1,
CB-2, CB-5, CB-10, I-1, I-2, RDP, ORP, and the RFC-WR.
   C.   Measuring Total Outdoor Light Output:
      1.   The maximums in
table 5G-1 of this section are based on a calculation of initial lumens per net
acre. The lot size less the total building coverage of the lot determines the
number of net acres used for this calculation.
      2.   Lumen output from an under canopy or under eave light fixture
mounted fifteen (15) or more feet from any edge of the eave or canopy will be
measured at 0.5 its full value.
Table 5G-1: Maximum Outdoor Light Output Standards
 
                    Lighting Environment District
Shielding           E1, Low Ambient    E2, Medium Ambient E3, High Ambient
Combinations        Lighting (In       Lighting (In       Lighting (In Initial
                    Initial Lumens Per Initial Lumens Per Lumens Per Acre)
                    Acre)              Acre)
Maximum total
outdoor light
output (including   50,000             100,000            200,000
both fully shielded
and unshielded
fixtures)
Maximum outdoor
light output from   4,000              10,000             10,000
unshielded fixtures
 
(Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 16-4675, 9-20-2016; Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-
2021)
14-5G-6: PROHIBITED LIGHTING AND BULBS:
The following types of lighting are prohibited:
   A.   Laser lights.
   B.   Searchlights.
   C.   Mercury vapor bulbs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-7: EXEMPTIONS FOR SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Outdoor Recreational Facilities: Lighting for outdoor recreational
facilities that are accessory to community service uses, colleges and
university uses, educational facility uses, parks and open space uses, and
religious/private group assembly uses may be exempted from the minimum
standards or exceed the maximum standards of this article; provided, that the
following specific approval criteria are met. To apply for this exemption, a
lighting plan must be submitted to the city and must be certified as conforming
to the standards listed below by a registered engineer with lighting certified
(LC) status according to the national council on qualifications for the
lighting professions (NCQLP).
      1.   The facility must satisfy the requirements set forth in the most
current editions of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) RP-6 recommended practice for sports and recreational area lighting and
the IESNA lighting handbook. Appropriate lighting criteria must be selected
based on the class of play of the facility and participants as defined by the
IESNA.
      2.   Fixtures must be located, aimed and shielded to the extent possible
to prevent light trespass and glare onto adjacent properties according to the
following standards:
         a.   Luminaires must be aimed no greater than a distance two (2)
mounting heights or less from the base of the pole (a maximum angle of 63
degrees up from nadir or a minimum of 27 degrees down from horizontal).
         b.   Fixtures must be mounted so as to meet the criteria of a "cutoff
fixture" as defined in
chapter 9, article D, "Outdoor Lighting Definitions", of this title.
         c.   Illumination must not exceed 0.5 initial horizontal foot- candles
and 2.0 initial maximum foot-candles as measured at any point along a property
boundary that is adjacent to or across the street from properties that are
zoned residential.
      3.   Laser lights, searchlights, and mercury vapor bulbs are prohibited.
      4.   Use of such lighting is restricted to those hours when the
recreational facility is in use. Lighting for recreational facilities must be
turned off by one hour after conclusion of the recreational activity. For
facilities located in or adjacent to residential zones, the curfew for
recreational facility lighting is eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Illumination of
such facilities shall be permitted after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. only to
conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to
unusual circumstances.
   B.   Outdoor Display Lots: Lighting for outdoor display lots that are
accessory to outdoor storage and display oriented uses may exceed the total
outdoor light output standards specified in section
14-5G-5 of this article; provided, that the following specific approval
criteria are met. To apply for this exemption, a lighting plan must be
submitted to the city and must be certified as conforming to the standards
listed below by a registered engineer with LC status according to the NCQLP.
      1.   The display lot must be designed to achieve no greater than the
minimal illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
      2.   Display lot lighting that exceeds the total outdoor light output
standards specified in section
14-5G-5 of this article must be turned off at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or
within thirty (30) minutes after close of business, whichever is later. After
this time, lighting on the property must comply with the total outdoor light
output standards specified in section
14-5G-5 of this article.
      3.   All other standards and requirements of this article must be met.
   C.   Other Lighting On Properties Containing Special Uses: All lighting not
directly associated with the special use areas listed in subsections A and B of
this section must conform to the lighting standards contained in this article.
If recreational facilities or outdoor display lots take advantage of the
exemptions allowed in this section, the net acreage for the determination of
compliance with the total outdoor light output standards for other lighting on
the property must not include the area of the recreational facility or outdoor
display lot. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5G-8: MEASUREMENT:
All measurements shall be made thirty six inches (36") above the ground.
Horizontal foot-candle measurements shall be taken with the meter held parallel
to the ground pointing up. Maximum foot- candle measurements shall be taken
with the meter oriented towards the brightest light bank. Light levels are
specified, calculated and measured in foot-candles. All foot-candle values are
expressed in initial foot-candles. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE H. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5H-1: Purpose
14-5H-2: Applicability
14-5H-3: Certification May Be Required
14-5H-4: Noise
14-5H-5: Air Quality Standards
14-5H-6: Odor
14-5H-7: Vibration
14-5H-8: Storage Of Combustible And Flammable Materials
14-5H-1: PURPOSE:
The performance standards are intended to protect property from off site
impacts. These impacts include noise, air pollutants, odor, vibrations, and
storage of combustible/flammable materials. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this article apply to all uses located within the city of
Iowa City, unless specifically exempted or superseded by more specific
provisions of this title. Nonconforming development is subject to the
provisions of chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 20-4833, 11-17-2020)
14-5H-3: CERTIFICATION MAY BE REQUIRED:
When necessary, the building official may require, at the expense of the
applicant, that a registered professional engineer or other qualified person
certify that the provisions of this article will be met. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-5H-4: NOISE:
Permissible noise levels for uses and activities are specified in title 6,
chapter 4, "Noise Control", of this code. All applicable uses must be in
compliance with these regulations. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-5: AIR QUALITY STANDARDS:
The emissions of smoke, particulate matter or chemicals into the air must
comply with the standards and permitting requirements of the Iowa department of
environmental quality and the U.S. environmental protection agency, or their
successors. Upon request by the city, a property owner must provide evidence
that the subject operation is in compliance with these standards. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-6: ODOR:
The emission of offensive odorous matter from any operation or activity shall
not exceed the odor threshold concentration defined in the American Society for
Testing and Materials "Method D1391-57 Standard Method For Measurement Of Odor
In Atmospheres (Dilution Method)", as amended, as the level which will just
evoke a response in the human olfactory system when measured as follows:
   A.   All Zones, Except Industrial Zones: When measured beyond lot lines at
ground level or habitable elevation, odorous matter shall not exceed the odor
threshold concentration.
   B.   All Industrial Zones: Odorous matter shall not exceed the odor
threshold concentration beyond zone boundary lines at ground level or habitable
elevation. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-7: VIBRATION:
   A.   Vibrations from any operation or activity shall not exceed the
displacement values below.
   B.   Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of
simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The
maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration displacement
permitted. The maximum displacements shall be determined by the following
formula:
         D   =   K/f, where
      D   =   displacement in inches
      K   =   a constant given in
table 5H-1 below
      f   =   the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in
cycles per second
Table 5H-1: Vibration Displacement Standards
 
                                             Impulsive (At
                                             Least 1 Second   Less Than 8
Zone              Point Of        Continuous Rest Between     Pulses Per 24
                  Measurement                Pulses That Do   Hour Period
                                             Not Exceed 1
                                             Second Duration)
All zones, except At lot lines    0.003      0.006            0.015
industrial
                  At industrial
                  zone boundary   0.030      0.060            0.150
                  line
                  At the boundary
Industrial zones  of residential
                  zones,
                  recreational    0.003      0.006            0.015
                  areas, or
                  educational
                  facilities
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5H-8: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   Any combustible materials must be stored in such a way as to include,
where necessary, access drives for firefighting equipment.
   B.   The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals in aboveground
storage tanks, when allowed, must be located no closer to a lot line or any
principal building than is permitted by the international fire code, as
amended. However, for aboveground storage tanks of two hundred seventy six
(276) gallons' capacity or more, the minimum distance between such aboveground
tanks and any residential zone boundary must be at least one hundred feet
(100'). If the aboveground tank is located in an approved vault, the minimum
separation distance from a residential zone boundary may be reduced to no less
than fifty feet (50').
   C.   The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids, when allowed, must
be located in accordance with the international fire code, as amended. However,
the minimum distance between such underground tanks and any residential zone
boundary must be at least ten feet (10').
   D.   The bulk storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers
is prohibited in all zones, except in the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones.
In these listed zones, storage of such fluids may be allowed, but only as
specified and strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended.
   E.   The bulk storage of class I and class II liquids in aboveground tanks
is prohibited in all zones, except in the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones.
In these listed zones, the storage of such liquids may be permitted, but only
as specified and strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended.
   F.   The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in all zones,
except the CI-1, I-1, I-2, RDP, and ORP zones. In these listed zones, the
storage of liquefied petroleum gas may be allowed, but only as specified and
strictly regulated by the international fire code, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
ARTICLE I. SENSITIVE LANDS AND FEATURES
SECTION:
14-5I-1: Purpose
14-5I-2: Applicability
14-5I-3: Levels Of Sensitive Areas Review
14-5I-4: Modifications To Zoning And Subdivision Requirements
14-5I-5: Compliance Measures
14-5I-6: Jurisdictional Wetlands
14-5I-7: Stream Corridors
14-5I-8: Regulated Slopes
14-5I-9: Wooded Areas
14-5I-10: Fully Hydric Soils
14-5I-11: Prairie Remnants
14-5I-12: Archaeological Sites
14-5I-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose for this article is to accomplish the following:
   A.   Implement the environmental policies of the comprehensive plan, as
amended.
   B.   Permit and define the reasonable use of properties that contain
environmentally sensitive features and natural resources while recognizing the
importance of environmental resources and protecting such resources from
destruction.
   C.   Provide for ecologically sound transitions between protected
environmentally sensitive areas and urban development.
   D.   Protect the public from injury and property damage due to flooding,
erosion, and other natural hazards, which can be exacerbated by development of
environmentally sensitive land.
   E.   Foster urban design that preserves open space and minimizes disturbance
of environmentally sensitive features and natural resources.
   F.   Provide for the mitigation of disturbances of environmentally sensitive
features and natural resources by requiring and implementing mitigation plans,
as needed. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Application Required: Unless specifically exempted as specified below,
an application for sensitive areas review must be submitted to and approved by
the city prior to woodland clearing, grading or any development activity on
tracts of land or portions of tracts of land where any regulated sensitive
features specified in subsection B of this section exist. This application
process may occur as part of site plan review, a planned development overlay
rezoning and/or subdivision review.
   B.   Regulated Sensitive Features: Properties containing any of the
following environmentally sensitive features are subject to the regulations of
this article. References to "regulated" sensitive features, such as "regulated
wetlands", "regulated slopes", etc., within the text of this article are
references to the regulated features as listed below. The sensitive areas
inventory map - phase I may be used as a tool to determine the locations of
potential environmentally sensitive areas. However, it is the applicant's
responsibility to investigate and fully delineate such potential sensitive
areas in order to determine whether the sensitive area or feature is subject to
the regulations of this article.
      1.   Jurisdictional Wetlands: Jurisdictional wetlands as regulated by the
U.S. army corps of engineers, or its successor. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      2.   Stream Corridors:
         a.   Floodways designated on either the current federal emergency
management agency flood boundary and floodway maps for Iowa City and Johnson
County or the Iowa City (1 inch = 100 feet scale) flood boundary and floodway
maps.
         b.   A watercourse, such as a river, stream or drainageway, which is
shown in blue (the blue line) on the most current U.S. geological survey
quadrangle maps. In cases where no floodway is delineated, the blue line will
serve as the centerline within a thirty foot (30') wide stream corridor. If a
watercourse is designated a blue line stream, but does not have a bed and bank
defined by an "ordinary high water mark", as defined in
chapter 9, article E, "Sensitive Lands Definitions", of this title, and a
definite direction of flow, either continuously or intermittently, then said
watercourse will not be considered a regulated stream corridor, provided the
absence of these defining characteristics is verified in the field by a
qualified professional (see section
14-5I-7, "Stream Corridors", of this article for more information). (Ord. 10-
4398, 7-12-2010)
      3.   Regulated Slopes: Slopes of eighteen percent (18%) or greater.
      4.   Wooded Areas:
         a.   Woodlands, two (2) acres in size or greater.
         b.   "Groves of trees", as defined in this title.
      5.   Fully Hydric Soils: Fully hydric soils as designated in the USDA
soil conservation service soil survey of Johnson County, Iowa, as amended.
      6.   Prairie Remnants: Prairie remnants as shown on the Iowa City
sensitive areas inventory map - phase I, as amended.
      7.   Archaeological Sites: Archaeological sites as determined by the
state historic preservation officer or the state archeologist.
   C.   Exemptions: The following uses, activities, and structures are exempt
from the requirements of this article. However, an applicant must first apply
for and obtain an exemption, prior to any woodland clearing, grading or
development activity on a property.
      1.   Emergency/Public Safety: Grading, clearing, removal or other
activities required for emergency situations involving immediate danger to
life, health and safety, or which create an immediate threat to person or
property or create substantial fire hazards are exempt from the requirements of
this article.
      2.   Maintenance/Expansion Of Single-Family Or Two-Family Residential
Uses: Normal maintenance, expansion, exterior remodeling, reconstruction or
replacement of single-family or two-family uses in existence as of December 13,
1995, are exempt from the requirements of this article, provided the new
construction or related activity will not increase the footprint of the
structure and/or paving lying within the sensitive area by more than a
cumulative total of one thousand (1,000) square feet, and also provided there
is no encroachment by said activities, including grading, into a jurisdictional
wetland, a designated sensitive areas conservation tract or protected sensitive
area.
      3.   Construction Of Single-Family Or Two-Family Residential Uses:
Grading, clearing or development activities on a tract of land for the purpose
of construction, landscaping or associated improvements for one single-family
use or one two-family use are exempt from the requirements of this article,
provided the development activities do not exceed a maximum total of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area, and provided there is no encroachment by
said activities into a jurisdictional wetland, a designated sensitive areas
conservation tract or protected sensitive area.
      4.   Groundwater Monitoring Wells And Stormwater Facilities: Normal and
routine maintenance of existing drainage and stormwater management facilities
are exempt from the requirements of this article. This exemption includes
vegetative maintenance for access and stormwater/flood control purposes within
and adjacent to drainageways. Except for temporary storage outside a wetland or
water body, placement of fill or dredge spoils is not exempt under this
subsection C4. Groundwater monitoring wells, when constructed to standards
approved by the city, are exempt.
      5.   Woodland Management Activities: Practices associated with "timber
management standards" as defined by the International Society Of Arboriculture,
or its successor, are exempt from the requirements of this article. Existing
tree farming operations, such as Christmas tree farming, fruit or nut tree
production and tree nurseries, during such time as the land is used for tree
farming operations, are exempt from the requirements of this article.
   D.   Uses, Activities And Structures Allowed Within Protected Sensitive
Areas: The following uses, activities, and structures are allowed within
protected sensitive areas and required buffers where it can be shown that such
a use, activity, or structure will not be detrimental to the functioning of
sensitive areas or associated buffers, or pose a public safety hazard, subject
to city approval, during the applicable sensitive areas review process:
      1.   Parkland, private open space, and trails that provide opportunities
for environmental interpretation and are designed to incorporate features that
protect areas of wildlife habitat, water quality and the natural amenities in
protected sensitive areas and buffers.
      2.   Stream crossings, such as bridges, roads and culverts, or stream
bank stabilization measures, provided they are designed to minimize any
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of the stream caused by such
structures and are in compliance with all federal and state regulations.
      3.   Essential public utilities such as storm and sanitary sewers; water
mains; gas, telephone and power lines; and storm water detention facilities are
permitted if they are designed and constructed to minimize their impact upon
the protected sensitive areas and associated buffers. The design and
construction of utilities should also include measures to protect against
erosion, pollution and habitat disturbance, and result in minimal amounts of
excavation and filling. Upon completion of the installation of the public
facility or line, the sensitive protected areas and associated buffers shall be
restored by those persons responsible for the disturbance. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-5I-3: LEVELS OF SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
   A.   Level I Sensitive Areas Review:
      1.   Except for exempted activities as listed in subsection
14-5I-2C of this article, a level I sensitive areas review is required prior to
development activity on property that contains any regulated sensitive feature
listed in section
14-5I-2 of this article, but for which a level II sensitive areas review is not
required.
      2.   A sensitive areas development plan submitted with the application
for a level I sensitive areas review must delineate any regulated sensitive
areas and associated buffers according to the specific regulations contained in
sections
14-5I-6 through
14-5I-12 of this article and will be approved according to the procedures for a
level I sensitive areas review as set forth in
chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
   B.   Level II Sensitive Areas Review:
      1.   Except for exempted activities listed in subsection
14-5I-2C of this article, a level II sensitive areas review is required prior
to development on properties for which any of the following activities are
proposed:
         a.   The disturbance of a wetland or an associated buffer.
         b.   The removal of portions of a woodland in excess of the woodland
retention requirements contained in section
14-5I-9, "Wooded Areas", of this article.
         c.   The disturbance of more than thirty five percent (35%) of the
critical slopes on a property.
         d.   Disturbance of a protected slope buffer or an altered protected
slope.
         e.   Any development that contains regulated sensitive features and
for which modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision regulations are
requested.
      2.   The submittal of a sensitive areas development plan is required for
properties containing regulated sensitive areas for which a level II sensitive
areas review is required. Such sensitive areas development plan must delineate
regulated sensitive areas and associated buffers according to the specific
regulations contained in sections
14-5I-6 through
14-5I-12 of this article.
      3.   A level II sensitive areas review is considered a type of planned
development and as such, must comply with the applicable approval criteria set
forth in
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title
and will be reviewed according to the approval procedures for a planned
development overlay rezoning as set forth in
chapter 8, article D, "Planning And Zoning Commission Approval Procedures", of
this title.
      4.   If a level II sensitive areas review is required, according to this
subsection, and other regulated sensitive features exist on the property, the
planned development rezoning application must include all evidence and required
information for all regulated sensitive features on the property. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-4: MODIFICATIONS TO ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
Through the planned development process, certain specified modifications to the
underlying zoning and subdivision standards are allowed to provide for
flexibility in the design of a site. On sites that contain sensitive features,
the planned development process may be used in order to cluster development
away from sensitive features. The types of zoning and subdivision modifications
allowed and the associated site development standards are listed in
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title.
If modifications to the underlying zoning or subdivision standards are
requested, a level II sensitive areas review is required, regardless of the
nature of the sensitive features on the site. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-5: COMPLIANCE MEASURES:
   A.   Compliance With Approved Plans Required: Approval of a sensitive areas
development plan is authorization to proceed with development activity
according to the provisions and restrictions set forth in said plan and
associated legal papers, including, but not limited to, compliance with all
construction area limits, conservation easements, and specified construction
practices. Any development activity at variance with the approved plan and/or
associated legal papers shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and
subject to any enforcement action and penalties allowed according to chapter 7,
article C, "Penalties And Enforcement", of this title.
   B.   Recording Requirement: Approved sensitive areas development plans shall
be recorded in the Johnson County recorder's office prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy for the property. The recording is intended to provide
notice to subsequent property owners that environmental limitations apply to
the subject property.
   C.   Performance Guarantee: A performance guarantee may be required to
ensure completion of conservation measures, including plantings and other
mitigation or maintenance efforts, as stipulated in this article. Required
performance guarantees must be submitted according to the procedures for
performance guarantees as set forth in title 18, "Site Plan Review", of this
code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-6: JURISDICTIONAL WETLANDS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around wetlands
is to:
      1.   Preserve the unique and valuable attributes of wetlands as areas
where storm water is naturally retained, thereby controlling the rate of
runoff, improving water quality, recharging ground water resources, providing
erosion control and lessening the effects of flooding;
      2.   Promote the preservation of habitat for plants, fish, reptiles,
amphibians or other wildlife;
      3.   Minimize the impact of development activity on wetland areas;
      4.   Provide a greater degree of protection for many wetland areas above
and beyond that provided by the federal and state government; and
      5.   Minimize the long term environmental impact associated with the loss
of wetlands.
   B.   Wetland Regulation By Other Agencies: The approval of a sensitive areas
development plan under the provisions of this article is in addition to the
applicant's need to obtain permits required by other local, state, or federal
agencies, and does not alter the applicant's obligation to satisfy and obtain
all other applicable local, state or federal regulations and permits.
   C.   Wetland Mitigation Plan Required:
      1.   A sensitive areas development plan for property containing a
regulated wetland shall include a wetland mitigation plan demonstrating that
all regulations of this section will be met. Avoiding a delineated wetland area
and minimizing the impact of development on a wetland is strongly encouraged,
and must be investigated before compensatory mitigation will be considered.
      2.   A wetland mitigation plan shall include the following information:
         a.   The boundaries of the delineated wetland and the required natural
buffer area.
         b.   Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of
associated restrictions thereof.
         c.   The type and location of erosion control measures to be placed on
the property prior to any other development activity occurring on the site.
         d.   Certification by a wetland specialist or the U.S. army corps of
engineers, or its successor, regarding the wetland delineation, if required.
         e.   Information regarding the characteristics of the wetland
necessary to determine the allowable buffer reduction as provided in subsection
E, "Wetland Buffer Requirements", of this section if a reduction is requested.
         f.   A storm water management plan demonstrating compliance with the
requirements of the Iowa City storm water regulations and related municipal
design standards.
   D.   Wetland Delineation:
      1.   Prior to any development activity occurring on a site containing a
potential regulated wetland, the property owner must provide a delineation of
the wetland area. Determination of jurisdictional wetlands must be made either
by the U.S. army corps of engineers, or its successor, or by a wetland
specialist. If completed by a wetland specialist, the wetland delineation must
be reviewed and accepted by the U.S. army corps, or its successor. Delineation
of wetland areas must be completed prior to the submittal of a sensitive areas
development plan for review.
      2.   If the property owner certifies that no development activity will
occur within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the apparent edge of a suspected
or potential wetland area on the site, the requirement for delineation by a
wetland specialist or the corps may be waived by the city. In the case of a
waiver, the property owner shall grant an easement running in favor of the
city, an approved conservation group, or other approved organization for the
purpose of retaining the wetland and the surrounding one hundred fifty foot
(150') protection area as undeveloped natural open space.
   E.   Wetland Buffer Requirements:
      1.   An undisturbed, one hundred foot (100') natural buffer shall be
maintained between any development activity and a regulated wetland unless said
development activity is exempted pursuant to subsection
14-5I-2C, "Exemptions", of this article. The required setbacks established for
the base zone shall be measured from the buffer edge, and are in addition to
the required buffer. This setback requirement applies to parking lots as well.
(For example, the RS-5 district requires a 20 foot rear setback, which would be
measured from the outside edge of the required 100 foot buffer. As a result, no
building or parking lot could be located within 120 feet of the wetland.)
      2.   Buffer averaging may be permitted or required where an increased
buffer is deemed necessary or desirable to provide additional protection to one
area of a wetland for aesthetic or environmental reasons. In this situation,
the width of the required buffer around other areas of the wetland may be
reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), but the area of the provided buffer must
be equal to or greater than the total area of the required buffer. Any request
for buffer averaging requires a level II sensitive areas review. Buffers that
have been reduced according to the provisions of subsection E3 of this section
may not be averaged.
      3.   The applicant may request a reduction of the required natural buffer
in certain instances enumerated below. Any request for a reduction in the
natural wetlands buffer requires a level II sensitive areas review. Buffers
that have been averaged according to the provisions of subsection E2 of this
section may not be reduced.
         a.   The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to fifty feet
(50') if it can be demonstrated by a wetland specialist that the wetland:
            (1)   Is less than five (5) acres in area; and
            (2)   Does not contain species listed by the federal or state
government as endangered or threatened, or critical or outstanding natural
habitat for those species; and
            (3)   Does not contain diverse plant associations of infrequent
occurrence or of regional significance; and
            (4)   Is not located within a regulated stream corridor.
         b.   The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to seventy five
feet (75') if it can be demonstrated by a wetland specialist that the wetland:
            (1)   Satisfies the criteria for natural buffer reduction in
subsection E3a of this section; and
            (2)   Does not, in a year of average precipitation, contain
standing water at any time during the calendar year; and
            (3)   Is not a forested wetland; and
            (4)   Does not provide a known habitat for migratory birds of local
or regional significance.
         c.   In addition to the qualifying criteria listed above, the city
shall consider the following factors in determining whether or not to reduce
the required buffer:
            (1)   The proposed land use of the property and its potential
impact on the wetland; and
            (2)   The design and layout of the proposed development in relation
to the wetland; and
            (3)   The physical characteristics of the site and the wetland; and
            (4)   Any other factor related to the short or long term
environmental stability and health of the wetland.
   F.   Design Standards:
      1.   No grading, dredging, clearing, filling, draining, or other
development activity is allowed within a regulated wetland or required buffer
area, unless said activity is part of an approved wetland mitigation plan or is
a use, activity or structure allowed according to subsection
14-5I-2D, "Uses, Activities And Structures Allowed Within Protected Sensitive
Areas", of this article.
      2.   For property not served by a city sanitary sewer system, the
location of septic tanks, soil absorption systems, holding tanks, or any other
element of an on site sewage disposal system must meet the required setbacks
specified in the base zone, as measured from the buffer edge.
      3.   To mitigate negative impacts of development and limit sedimentation,
the direct discharge of untreated surface water from a development site or a
developed area into a wetland may be prohibited. The partial treatment of storm
water runoff through the use or combined use of constructed wetlands, detention
basins, vegetative filter strips, sediment traps or other means before the
storm water runoff reaches a wetland may be considered as part of a wetland
mitigation plan. In such case, the discharge should not increase the rate of
flow or decrease the water quality of the wetlands unless it can be shown by a
wetland specialist that an increase in the rate of flow will enhance rather
than adversely impact the wetland.
      4.   On any lot containing a regulated wetland, erosion control measures,
whether required under title 17, chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code,
or as part of a wetland mitigation plan approved under the provisions of this
article, must be installed prior to any development activity occurring on the
site.
      5.   The planting of foreign or invasive species, including intrusive
native varieties, in regulated wetland or buffer areas is prohibited. Only
nonintrusive native species shall be used to supplement existing vegetation.
      6.   The removal of foreign or invasive species, including intrusive
native varieties, within a regulated wetland or buffer area may be permitted
when approved as part of an approved wetland mitigation plan.
      7.   Where it is determined that the area occupied by the required buffer
provides little natural protection to the wetland due to previous land
disturbance, enhanced vegetative cover must be provided within the buffer area
to help filter and slow the flow of surface water. The enhanced vegetation
shall consist of species that are known to be noninvasive to wetland areas.
   G.   Compensatory Mitigation: Compensatory mitigation may be permitted only
if it is clearly demonstrated that avoiding and minimizing the impact on a
wetland is unreasonable. A permit for any development activity within a wetland
area is required by the U.S. army corps of engineers or its successor. If a
permit is granted for development activity within a wetland, compensatory
mitigation shall be required based on the following criteria, unless a greater
degree of compensation is required by the corps or its successor:
      1.   Wetlands containing the following characteristics shall be
considered protected, "no build" wetland areas. Compensatory mitigation will be
considered only if the wetland disturbance is relatively small in relation to
the overall wetland and if it can be shown that the disturbance will not have
an adverse impact on the overall wetland. In wetlands with the following
characteristics, if compensatory mitigation is permitted, the required
replacement ratio of comparable habitat replaced to habitat lost shall be at
least three to one (3:1):
         a.   Wetlands containing species listed by the federal or state
government as endangered or threatened, or containing critical or outstanding
natural habitat for those species; or
         b.   Wetlands containing the presence of diverse plant associations of
infrequent occurrence or of regional importance; or
         c.   Wetlands located within regulated stream corridors as defined in
this article.
      2.   The replacement ratio of comparable habitat replaced to habitat lost
shall be at least two to one (2:1) for wetlands not containing the
characteristics listed in subsection G1 of this section, but which do contain
the following characteristics:
         a.   Standing water throughout the calendar year under average
precipitation;
         b.   Forested wetlands; or
         c.   Wetlands providing a known habitat for migratory birds of
regional or local significance.
      3.   Compensatory mitigation for all other regulated wetlands shall be at
a ratio of at least one to one (1:1). If said wetland or the replacement
habitat is enhanced so that it contains one or more of the defining
characteristics listed in subsection G1 or G2 of this section, the required
replacement ratio may be reduced to 0.5:1.
      4.   When compensatory mitigation is proposed, the wetland mitigation
plan described in this section must be prepared by a wetland specialist. A
wetland mitigation plan that includes compensatory mitigation must include the
following components:
         a.   An assessment of the value of the wetland being replaced to
determine the appropriate replacement ratio;
         b.   A clear statement of the goals of the mitigation plan, including
specific statements regarding the expected rate of establishment of a
vegetative cover over specified periods of time;
         c.   Analysis of the soils, substrate and hydrology of the proposed
site of the constructed or expanded wetland in terms of their suitability to
provide a proper growing medium for the proposed vegetation;
         d.   A list of the plant species to be used, which should include only
native, noninvasive species, and their proposed locations. Transplanting as
much of the native vegetation from the original wetland as possible, as well as
the upper six (6) to twelve inches (12") of the soil is encouraged; and
         e.   Provisions for monitoring the condition of the new or enhanced
wetland area for a period of five (5) years, and identification of the party
responsible for replanting in the event of poor initial growth or predation
resulting in a failure of over thirty percent (30%) of the planted stock.
Information collected during the monitoring process must be submitted to the
city annually and include the following:
            (1)   Data on plant species diversity and the extent of plant cover
established in the new or enhanced wetland;
            (2)   Wildlife presence;
            (3)   Data on water regimes, water chemistry, soil conditions and
ground and surface water interactions; and
            (4)   Proposed alterations or corrective measures to address
deficiencies identified in the created or enhanced wetland, such as a failure
to establish a vegetative cover or the presence of invasive or foreign species.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-7: STREAM CORRIDORS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around stream
corridors is to:
      1.   Preserve the value of stream corridors in providing floodwater
conveyance and storage;
      2.   Promote filtration of storm water runoff;
      3.   Reduce stream bank erosion; and
      4.   Protect and enhance wildlife habitat.
   B.   Stream Corridor Regulation By Other Agencies: The approval of a
sensitive areas development plan shall be in addition to the applicant's need
to obtain permits required by other local, state or federal agencies, and does
not alter the applicant's obligation to satisfy and obtain all other applicable
local, state or federal regulations and permits.
   C.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing a regulated stream corridor must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must
include the following information: (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
      1.   A delineation of the stream corridor and the required natural buffer
area is required. If, in the course of delineating a blue line stream, it is
determined through field verification by a qualified professional, such as a
geologist, hydrologist, or wetland specialist, that the blue line or a portion
of a blue line on the current U.S. geological survey quadrangle maps does not
represent a watercourse with a bed and bank defined by an "ordinary high water
mark", as defined herein, and a definite direction of flow, either continuously
or intermittently, then said watercourse or portion of a watercourse will not
be considered a regulated stream corridor for purposes of this title. In such
an event, a report prepared by said qualified professional must be submitted to
the city that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the subject
watercourse does not have the aforementioned defining characteristics of a
stream corridor. (Ord. 10-4398, 7-12-2010)
      2.   Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of
associated restrictions thereof.
      3.   Information regarding the characteristics of the stream corridor
necessary to determine the allowable buffer reduction as provided in subsection
D, "Stream Corridor Buffer Requirements", of this section if a reduction is
requested.
   D.   Stream Corridor Buffer Requirements:
      1.   Unless exempt pursuant to subsection
14-5I-2C, "Exemptions", of this article, the following natural buffers must be
maintained along regulated stream corridors. When other regulated sensitive
features are located within a stream corridor, a fifty foot (50') buffer is
required.
         a.   Along the Iowa River, a fifty foot (50') natural buffer must be
maintained between any development activity and the stream corridor, which
includes the floodway.
         b.   Along tributaries to the Iowa River that have a delineated
floodway, a thirty foot (30') natural buffer must be maintained between any
development activity and the stream corridor, which includes the floodway.
These tributaries include, but are not limited to, Ralston Creek, Willow Creek,
Snyder Creek, Clear Creek and Rapid Creek.
         c.   Along tributaries or drainageways that do not have a delineated
floodway, a fifteen foot (15') natural buffer must be maintained between any
development activity and the stream corridor limits.
      2.   The applicant may request a reduction of the required natural buffer
in certain circumstances enumerated below:
         a.   The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to fifty percent
(50%) if the applicant demonstrates that the portion of the buffer being
reduced:
            (1)   Does not contain significant existing vegetative cover, such
as native trees or prairie remnants; and
            (2)   Does not contain other sensitive areas subject to the
requirements of this article; and
            (3)   Enhanced vegetative cover will be provided in the remaining
buffer area.
         b.   The required natural buffer may be reduced by up to one hundred
percent (100%) if the applicant demonstrates that:
            (1)   The property is adjacent to or contains a stream corridor
located in a "developed area of the city"; and
            (2)   The portion of the buffer being reduced does not contain
other sensitive areas subject to the requirements of this article; and
            (3)   Requiring the full stream corridor buffer would preclude
reasonable use of the property; and
            (4)   Enhanced vegetative cover will be provided in any remaining
buffer area, to the extent possible.
         c.   In addition to the qualifying criteria listed above, the city
will consider the following factors in determining whether to reduce the
required buffer:
            (1)   The proposed land use of the property and its potential
impact on the stream corridor;
            (2)   The design and layout of the proposed development in relation
to the stream corridor;
            (3)   The characteristics of the site and the stream corridor; and
            (4)   Any other factors related to the short or long term
environmental stability and health of the stream corridor. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
14-5I-8: REGULATED SLOPES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating development on and near steep slopes
is to:
      1.   Promote safety in the design and construction of developments;
      2.   Minimize flooding, landslides and mudslides;
      3.   Minimize soil instability, erosion and downstream siltation; and
      4.   Preserve the scenic character of hillside areas, particularly wooded
hillsides.
   B.   Regulated Slopes Defined:
   ALTERED PROTECTED SLOPES: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper
created by human activity such as cutting or filling, which activity occurred
prior to December 13, 1995, and which slope is not otherwise approved by the
city.
   CRITICAL SLOPES: A slope of twenty five percent (25%), but less than forty
percent (40%).
   PERCENT OF SLOPE: The slope of a designated area determined by dividing the
horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope and
converting the resulting figure into a percentage value.
   PROTECTED SLOPES: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper.
   STEEP SLOPES: A slope of eighteen percent (18%), but less than twenty five
percent (25%).
   C.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing regulated slopes must include evidence demonstrating that
all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the
following information:
      1.   Delineation of all steep, critical, and protected slopes and any
required buffer area.
      2.   Submission of a grading plan that is in conformance with title 17,
chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code.
      3.   Delineation of construction area limits and specification of
associated restrictions thereof.
   D.   Buffer Requirements:
      1.   A buffer will be required around all protected slopes. Two feet (2')
of buffer must be provided for each foot of vertical rise of the protected
slope, up to a maximum buffer of fifty feet (50'). The buffer area is to be
measured from the top, toe and sides of the protected slope. No development
activity, including removal of trees and other vegetation, will be allowed
within the buffer.
      2.   The buffer requirements may be reduced under certain circumstances.
If a buffer reduction is requested, a level II sensitive areas review is
required. A reduction of a protected slope buffer may only be approved if a
geologist or professional engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city
that the proposed development activity can and will be designed to eliminate
hazards and will not undermine the stability of the slope or the buffer area.
   E.   Design Standards For Regulated Slopes:
      1.   Construction areas must be delineated on the sensitive areas
development plan and must indicate the boundaries of all intended development
activities, including grading, excavation, and storage of construction
materials. Accordingly, construction areas must be in concert with required
grading plans. Except for driveways and utilities installation, no grading or
excavation is allowed outside the construction area.
      2.   Except for commercially or industrially zoned properties,
construction areas on lots containing protected slopes must be of a size equal
to at least forty percent (40%) of the minimum lot size required by the zone in
which it is located. (For example, the construction area for a lot in an RS-
5 zone must be at least 3,200 square feet, which is 40 percent of the 8,000
square foot minimum lot size.)
      3.   Designated construction areas must not extend into protected slopes
or protected slope buffers unless expressly permitted according to the
provisions of this section.
      4.   Encroachment of construction areas into steep and critical slopes
must be minimized. If disturbance of more than thirty five percent (35%) of
critical slopes is proposed a level II sensitive areas review is required.
      5.   Any area designated as a natural protected slope (40+ percent) must
not be graded and must remain in its existing state, except natural vegetation
may be supplemented by other plant material.
      6.   Development activities may be allowed within areas containing
"altered protected slopes", as defined in this section. In such cases, a level
II sensitive areas review is required. Approval will be based on the following
criteria:
         a.   A geologist or professional engineer must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that development activity will not undermine the
stability of the slope; and
         b.   The city further determines that the proposed development
activities are consistent with the intent of this article.
      7.   Cut slopes must be constructed to eliminate sharp angles of
intersection with the existing terrain and must be rounded and contoured as
necessary to blend with existing topography to the maximum extent possible. The
city will not accept the dedication and maintenance of cut and fill slopes,
except those within the required street right of way.
      8.   Street rights of way and public utility corridors must be located so
as to minimize cutting and filling.
      9.   To maintain the stability of ungraded areas, existing vegetation
must be retained to the maximum extent possible, and additional plantings to
stabilize the slope may be allowed. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-9: WOODED AREAS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating development in and around wooded
areas is to:
      1.   Reduce damage to wooded areas, particularly wetlands, steep slopes
and stream corridors;
      2.   Reduce erosion and siltation;
      3.   Minimize destruction of wildlife habitat; and
      4.   Encourage subdivision and site plan design which incorporate groves
and woodlands as amenities within a development.
   B.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing regulated wooded areas must include evidence demonstrating
that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the
following information:
      1.   All "groves of trees" and all "woodlands", as these terms are
defined in this title, must be delineated on the plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
      2.   The plan must also delineate all woodlands that are to be protected
according to the woodland retention and replacement requirements in subsection
C of this section and all groves that are to be protected. The delineated
woodlands must include the required buffer area or, alternatively, must
delineate the drip line of trees to be retained as specified in subsection C of
this section.
      3.   The total acreage of woodlands must be listed on the plan, along
with the percentage of woodlands to be disturbed and the percentage that will
be retained. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
      4.   Woodland and tree protection methods for proposed development
activity shall be shown on any plan or plat required to be submitted prior to
commencement of development activity. Protection methods should comply with
generally accepted tree protection guidelines and be approved by the city.
      5.   The plan must indicate the location of the planting area for any
replacement trees required under this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd.
Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
   C.   Woodland Retention And Replacement Requirements: Regulated woodlands
must be retained according to the following provisions. The percentage of the
regulated woodland that must be retained is specified in
table 5I-1 of this section according to the underlying base zone.
Table 5I-1: Woodland Retention Requirements
 
Base Zone                                         Retention Requirement
ID, RR-1                                          70 percent
RS-5, RS-8, RS-12, RNS-12, T3NE, T3NG, T4NS, T4NM 50 percent
RM-12, RM-20, RM-44, RNS-20, T4MS                 20 percent
RDP, ORP                                          20 percent
C and I                                           10 percent
 
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
      1.   The required woodland area to be retained must include a buffer area
that extends fifty feet (50') outward from the trunks of the trees to be
preserved, unless otherwise allowed by subsection C2 of this section. This
buffer area is intended to protect the trees within the specified retention
area. Since trees within this buffer area may be prone to damage during
construction, they may not be included when calculating the required retention
area.
      2.   Alternatively, a fifty foot (50') buffer area need not be provided
if an on site tree survey is completed and the construction limit line is
established at least five feet (5') beyond the drip line of trees to be
preserved. The tree survey must identify the species, size and location of
trees at the perimeter of the woodland to be protected. Said on site tree
survey and a map delineating the drip line of the trees located near the
construction limit line must be submitted to the city for verification by the
city forester or designee. Additional spacing from the drip line (beyond the
minimum 5 feet) may be required if needed to protect the health of trees
specified for protection, as determined by the city forester or designee.
      3.   All efforts shall be made during construction to protect the
woodlands and groves designated for retention, including placement of durable
fencing or other sturdy barrier along the designated construction limit line.
      4.   If the city determines that the required woodland area cannot be
retained due to site constraints or infrastructure requirements, replacement
trees must be planted. At the discretion of the city, replacement trees may
also be allowed in cases where woodlands are determined to be of low quality,
such that planting replacement trees would improve the health of a wooded area
or create a new grove or wooded area of higher quality. One tree must be
planted for every two hundred (200) square feet of woodland removed from the
otherwise required retention area. Existing healthy trees (not located within
the woodland) may be counted as replacement trees, at the discretion of the
city, based on the health, species, maturity, location, and likelihood of
survival during and after construction. Existing trees approved for
preservation will count toward the required replacement trees at the ratio of
substitution stated in
table 5E-2 within article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
      5.   Where it is not feasible to replace trees on site, replacement trees
may be planted to supplement reforestation of an off site woodland approved by
the city. Any designated off site woodland must be either publicly owned
property or property subject to a conservation easement. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005; amd. Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
      6.   Replacement trees must be approved by the city, and to the extent
possible, should be of the same or equivalent species as the trees being
removed, unless it is determined that the trees being removed are of a species
that is considered low quality. In such a case, alternative tree species will
be considered by the city. (Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
      7.   Replacement trees must meet the specifications set forth in general
tree planting requirements contained in article E, "Landscaping And Tree
Standards", of this chapter, and must be secured by a performance guarantee for
a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4530,
5-14-2013)
   D.   Design Standards For Wooded Areas:
      1.   Woodlands, groves, and existing trees designated for protection
according to the approved sensitive areas site development plan, shall be
protected from construction activity with durable fencing or other sturdy
barrier approved by the city. Said protective fencing shall be placed a minimum
of five feet (5') beyond the drip line of the tree or trees to be preserved.
Additional spacing of protective fencing from the drip line (beyond the minimum
5 feet) may be required if needed to protect the health of trees specified for
protection, as determined by the city forester or designee. The drip line is an
imaginary circle that could be drawn on the soil around a tree directly under
the tips of its outermost branches. The drip line encompasses the ground area
under the entire spread of the tree canopy.
      2.   Measures must be taken to protect and retain groves of trees, as
defined in this title, to the extent practicable.
      3.   Trees preserved within groves may be counted as replacement trees,
if it is determined that the required woodland retention ratio on a site cannot
be met as allowed in subsection C4 of this section. Preserved trees within
groves may count toward replacement trees at the ratio of substitution stated
in
table 5E-2 within article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
      4.   When other environmentally regulated sensitive features are present
in combination with a regulated woodland, the regulations related to all the
sensitive areas contained on the property will be considered, with the most
stringent regulations applying.
      5.   To the extent possible, woodlands located on steep or critical
slopes or within 100-year floodplains must be given the highest retention
priority when meeting the woodland retention and replacement requirements.
      6.   Street right of way, public utility corridors and building sites
should be located so as to minimize their impact on woodlands and groves.
      7.   Where possible, woodlands and groves to be protected should be
located within designated public or private open space, either through
dedication, a conservation easement, or control by a homeowners' association.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 13-4530, 5-14-2013)
14-5I-10: FULLY HYDRIC SOILS:
   A.   Purpose: Fully hydric soils may indicate the potential existence of
jurisdictional wetlands and the probable existence of a high water table. The
purpose of regulating lands that contain fully hydric soils is to recognize the
constraints imposed on urban development projects by potential wetlands or high
water tables. That is:
      1.   Wetlands are protected under state and federal law, and as such, are
considered no build areas unless appropriate and approved mitigation measures
are undertaken.
      2.   High water tables on a property require special construction
practices both for infrastructure such as streets, and for structural
development such as residences.
   B.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing regulated hydric soils must include evidence demonstrating
that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must include the
following information:
      1.   Delineation of areas on the property where hydric soils exist.
      2.   Report from a wetland specialist regarding whether wetlands exist on
the property.
      3.   Delineation of a construction area limit, if applicable, and
specification of associated restrictions thereof.
   C.   Regulations:
      1.   If fully hydric soils exist on a property where development activity
is proposed, the property owner shall have a wetlands specialist verify whether
wetlands exist on the site. If wetlands are found to exist on the site,
compliance with the wetlands provisions of this article will be required.
      2.   More stringent construction safeguards, as specified by the city,
will be required for streets and storm water management facilities located in
fully hydric soils. Sump pump discharge tiles and elevations of window openings
may also be regulated, as specified by the city.
   D.   Design Standards: To the extent possible, urban development projects
will be designed so that areas of fully hydric soils will be treated as an
environmental asset; used for storm water detention, wetland enhancement or
buffers, protective greenbelts along stream corridors and neighborhood open
space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-11: PRAIRIE REMNANTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of protecting prairie remnants is to:
      1.   Preserve the value of prairie remnants for holding soil in place,
absorbing pollutants and taking up large amounts of moisture. These functions
are particularly important when prairie remnants are located along streambanks,
adjacent to wetlands or on areas of highly erodible soil.
      2.   Protect and enhance the function of prairie remnants to provide
wildlife habitat, ecological diversity and environmental education
opportunities in an urban setting.
   B.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing regulated prairie remnants must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must
include the following:
      1.   Delineation of all regulated prairie remnants on the property; and
      2.   Delineation of a construction area limit and specification of
associated restrictions.
   C.   Prairie Remnant Regulations:
      1.   Development of properties containing prairie remnants one acre in
size or larger that are not associated with other sensitive features will be
designed to retain the maximum amount of prairie remnant possible, while not
precluding reasonable, beneficial use of the property.
      2.   Prairie remnants associated with other sensitive features, such as
stream corridors, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands or a stand of significant
trees will be treated as environmental assets, and will be considered no build
areas to the extent possible, and used for buffers, filter strips along
waterways, or neighborhood open space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-5I-12: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating development of lands that contain
archaeological sites is to:
      1.   Assure that sites that contain important information regarding the
prehistory and history of the area are identified, studied, protected, or
properly excavated when appropriate.
      2.   Allow the opportunity for documentation and study of important
prehistoric and historic sites.
      3.   Allow for the consideration of prehistoric and historic sites in the
planning and development of a property to minimize delays when it is determined
that study or excavation of such sites is necessary.
      4.   Provide for the early identification of human burial sites to ensure
that the code of Iowa, as amended, regarding such burial sites is not violated
and to avoid unnecessary delays in subdivision development and subdivision
redesign if such sites are discovered after commencement of development.
   B.   Regulation Of Archaeological Sites By Other Agencies: The approval of a
sensitive areas development plan under the provisions of this section is in
addition to the applicant's obligation to obtain permits required by other
local, state or federal agencies, and does not alter the applicant's obligation
to satisfy and obtain all other applicable local, state or federal regulations
and permits.
   C.   Environmental Review Required: A sensitive areas development plan for
property containing regulated archaeological sites must include evidence
demonstrating that all regulations of this section will be met. Such plan must
delineate any archaeological sites and any required buffer on the property and
must document efforts to retain or preserve significant archaeological sites
and burial grounds. The plan must also delineate a construction area limit, if
applicable, and specify any associated restrictions thereof.
   D.   Notification: When the sensitive areas inventory map - phase I
indicates that an archaeological site is located in the quarter section within
which a site plan, planned development or a subdivision is proposed, the city
will forward the site plan or subdivision plan to the state archaeologist and
the state historic preservation officer for an opportunity to comment. The
state may notify the city if a recorded archaeological site exists within the
area of the site plan, planned development or subdivision. The state will also
notify the city if the site is of such archaeological importance that it
requires further study by the state or a state approved archaeologist. If the
state identifies such site, the Iowa City historic preservation commission or
its successor shall be notified and may proceed toward historic designation of
the site as set forth in
chapter 8, article E, "Historic Preservation Commission Approval Procedures",
of this title.
   E.   Archaeological Study:
      1.   If it is determined by the state that further study of an
archaeological site is necessary, the city may approve a site plan, planned
development or a subdivision, subject to a requirement that the state or a
state approved archaeologist be allowed to study the site and, if appropriate,
complete an excavation of the site for the purpose of documenting the
significance of the site. The state shall have a period of up to thirty (30)
calendar days in which the site is frost free to study and, where appropriate,
excavate the site. This requirement shall not prevent or delay activities which
are approved under the grading ordinance, site plan review, planned development
or subdivision regulations for portions of the property which do not contain
archaeological materials.
      2.   The applicant may choose to hire an archaeologist approved by the
state to complete a study or excavation plan approved by the state. In this
way, the study or excavation work may be completed in a more timely manner.
   F.   Significant Archaeological Sites:
      1.   If the state determines that the property includes a significant
prehistoric or historic site that cannot be studied and excavated within a
thirty (30) calendar day period, the site plan, planned development or a
subdivision plan may be approved subject to an archaeological assessment plan,
which specifies a period of time in which the state or a state approved
archaeologist may document or excavate a site.
      2.   If the site is determined to be of such state or national
significance that it should not be disturbed, an attempt must be made to design
the site plan, planned development or subdivision plan to allow retention of
the site as private or public open space.
   G.   Burial Grounds: When a site contains a human burial ground, the state
archaeologist shall determine the significance of the burial ground and whether
or not the human remains may be disinterred. If the state archaeologist
determines that the human remains should not be disturbed, the portion of the
property containing the burial grounds, plus a twenty foot (20') buffer around
the burial grounds, shall be set aside as permanent, private or public open
space.
   H.   Discovery Of Unrecorded Archaeological Sites: If, during the course of
grading or construction, prehistoric artifacts, historic objects or significant
archaeological materials, such as human remains or a prehistoric human
settlement, are encountered, the city must be notified. The city must notify
the state, which may take steps to excavate and preserve the objects, if
practical, or in the case of human burial grounds, the state archaeologist
shall determine whether or not the human remains can be disinterred. If it is
determined that the human remains cannot be disinterred, the portion of the
property containing the burial ground shall be returned to its preconstruction
condition by those persons responsible for the disturbance. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
ARTICLE J. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-5J-1: Purpose
14-5J-2: Applicability And Interpretation
14-5J-3: Legal Authority And Findings Of Fact
14-5J-4: Compliance With Provisions; Nonconforming Situations
14-5J-5: Enforcement
14-5J-6: Floodplain Development Permit
14-5J-7: General Floodplain Management Standards
14-5J-8: Special Floodway Provisions
14-5J-9: Variances
14-5J-10: Amendments
14-5J-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
14-5J-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect and preserve the rights and
privileges and property of Iowa City and its residents and to protect, preserve
and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing flood losses. The provisions of this article are
designed to:
   A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so
that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
   B.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
   C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage.
   D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners to purchase
flood insurance through the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 10-4414,
11-16-2010)
14-5J-2: APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The regulations within this article apply to
all lands identified in the "Johnson County, Iowa, and incorporated areas flood
insurance rate map", dated February 16, 2007. The "Johnson County, Iowa and
incorporated areas flood insurance study", as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference and is made a part of this article for the purpose of administering
floodplain management regulations.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this article are considered
minimum requirements and will be liberally construed in favor of the governing
body and will not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted
by state statutes.
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this article
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this article shall prevail. Where more specific provisions herein
conflict with other provisions of this title, this article shall prevail. (Ord.
10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-3: LEGAL AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   Legal Authority: Chapter 455B, code of Iowa, as amended, gives cities
authority to adopt regulations governing development and redevelopment within
flood hazard areas, including designation of flood hazard maps.
   B.   Legislative Findings:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of Iowa City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of its residents.
      2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages.
Such uses create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
      3.   This article relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards, which is consistent with the standards established by the Iowa
department of natural resources or its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no structure or
land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this article.
   B.   If a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this
article lawfully existed prior to May 2, 1977, and has existed continuously
without abandonment since that time, then improvements may be made to the
structure, notwithstanding the provisions of this article, provided such
improvements do not constitute a substantial improvement as defined in
chapter 9, article F, "Floodplain Management Definitions", of this title.
However, structures, uses, or development that are nonconforming with regard to
other provisions of this title must comply with the applicable regulations
contained in
chapter 4, article E, "Nonconforming Situations", of this title. (Ord. 10-4414,
11-16-2010)
14-5J-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Official Designated: The building official shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this article.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
building official include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
      1.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor of all new or
substantially improved buildings or the elevation to which new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.
      2.   Notify adjacent communities or counties and the Iowa department of
natural resources, or its assignee, prior to any proposed alteration or
relocation of a watercourse.
      3.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and other such
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
article. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-6: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit, issued by the
building official, must be obtained prior to initiation of any development on a
parcel of land within a flood hazard area according to the applicable review
and approval procedures contained in
chapter 8, article B, "Administrative Approval Procedures", of this title.
Issuance of a floodplain development permit does not relieve the property owner
from complying with federal, state, or other agency regulations, including
approval when required from the Iowa department of natural resources.
   B.   Compliance: Floodplain development permits based on approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications. Prior to use or occupancy of any
structure, the applicant will be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, registered in the state, that the
finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood
protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this
article. Any use, arrangement or construction not in compliance with the uses
authorized will be deemed a violation of this article. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-
2010)
14-5J-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
All properties subject to the regulations of this article must comply with the
following applicable performance standards:
   A.   General Construction Requirements: All structures shall be:
      1.   Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure; and
      2.   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage; and
      3.   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   B.   Class 1 Critical Facilities:
      1.   Class 1 critical facilities may not be located within a flood hazard
area.
      2.   Class 1 critical facilities must be located with a means of
vehicular access that will remain passable during occurrence of the 0.2% flood
event.
   C.   Residential Buildings:
      1.   All new or substantially improved residential structures must have
the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
      2.   Where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude
elevating by fill, alternate methods of elevating, such as piers, may be
allowed, subject to approval by the building official. In such a case, a
licensed professional shall certify that the methods used will be adequate to
support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding.
   D.   Nonresidential Buildings:
      1.   All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings must have
the lowest floor of the original structure and any lateral addition elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
      2.   When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered
in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the flood hazard, and that the structure below
the flood hazard elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water. Such certification must also indicate the specific
elevation, in relation to national geodetic vertical datum, to which any
structures are floodproofed. A record of this certification will be retained in
the office of the building official.
   E.   All New And Substantially Improved Structures:
      1.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer to meet or exceed the following minimum approval
criteria:
         a.   There must be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. The openings shall not be located on the same wall.
         b.   The openings shall be located on exterior walls such that the 1%
flood elevation, or shallow flood elevation, is above the bottom of the
opening, and in all cases the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above grade.
         c.   Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      2.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      3.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities elevated or floodproofed to one foot (1') above the
flood hazard elevation.
   F.   Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing, including those placed in
existing manufactured housing parks, planned developments, or subdivisions,
must be:
      1.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
      2.   Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation.
   G.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
      1.   All new or replacement on site sewage waste disposal systems must be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
      2.   New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems
must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system. Water supply facilities and sanitary sewage systems must be provided
with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the
flood hazard elevation.
      3.   Utilities, such as gas or electrical systems, must be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damage or impaired systems.
   H.   Storage Of Flammable, Explosive Or Injurious Materials: Storage of
materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1')
above the flood hazard elevation. Other material and equipment must either be
similarly elevated or:
      1.   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to floodwaters; or
      2.   Be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
   I.   Flood Control Structural Works: Flood control structural works,
including, but not limited to, levees and flood walls, must provide, at a
minimum, protection from a 0.2% flood event with a minimum of three feet (3')
of design freeboard and must provide for adequate interior drainage. In
addition, flood control structural works must be approved by the Iowa
department of natural resources or its assignee.
   J.   Inhibiting Floodways And Drainage Facilities: No use shall affect the
capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main
stream, drainage ditch or other drainage facility or system.
   K.   Subdivisions:
      1.   Subdivisions and planned developments, including manufactured
housing parks, must be designed to minimize flood damage and must have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage, and must meet the
applicable performance standards established by the city engineer. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public
utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this article. Any
subdivision, planned development, or manufactured housing park intended for
residential development must provide all lots with a means of vehicular access
that will remain passable during occurrence of the 1% flood event.
      2.   Proposals for subdivisions shall include the flood hazard elevation
data for those areas located within flood hazard areas.
   L.   Residential Accessory Structures: The exemption of detached garages,
sheds and similar structures from the general floodplain management for
residential buildings may result in increased premium rates for insurance
coverage of the structure and contents; however, said detached garages, sheds
and similar accessory type structures are exempt from the general floodplain
management for residential buildings when all of the following conditions
exist:
      1.   The structure is not used for human habitation.
      2.   The structure is designed so as to have low flood damage potential.
      3.   The structure is constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      4.   The structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, which may
result in damage to other structures.
      5.   The service facilities for the structure, such as electrical and
heating equipment, are elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above
the flood hazard elevation.
      6.   There shall be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding. The openings shall not be located on the same wall.
      7.   The openings shall be located on exterior walls such that the 1%
flood elevation, or shallow flood elevation, is above the bottom of the
opening, and in all cases the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above grade.
      8.   Openings shall permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   M.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection
F of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of manufactured homes when
the following criteria are satisfied:
         a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
         b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      2.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection F of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of manufactured homes. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-8: SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS:
In addition to the general floodplain standards listed above, uses within the
floodway must meet the following applicable standards:
   A.   No use is permitted in the floodway that would increase the 1% flood
hazard elevation, unless approved by the Iowa department of natural resources
or its assignee.
   B.   All uses within the floodway must:
      1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and
      2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
      3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   C.   No use is permitted that would affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system.
   D.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted,
must meet the applicable general floodplain management standards and must be
constructed and aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood
flows.
   E.   Buildings, if permitted, must have low flood damage potential and must
not be used for human habitation.
   F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the
time available after flood warning.
   G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations, including channel changes and
modifications, must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
   H.   Any fill or stream bank erosion control projects allowed in the
floodway must have some beneficial purpose and will be limited to the minimum
amount necessary.
   I.   Pipelines that cross rivers or streams must be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to action of flood flows. Where floodway data
has been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to
define the floodway limits.
   J.   Where no floodway data has been provided, the Iowa department of
natural resources or its assignee shall be contacted to provide a floodway
delineation. Where floodway data is not available, it shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to produce engineered data delineating the
floodway. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-9: VARIANCES:
The board of adjustment may authorize, upon request, in specific cases, such
variances from the terms of this article that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
To ensure that the spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice
done, no variance to the strict application of any provision of this article
shall be granted by the board unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following approval criteria are met. In addition, the applicant must meet all
the provisions and general approval criteria for variances as stated in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title, except subsection
14-4B-2A4 of this title.
   A.   Approval Criteria:
      1.   No variance shall be granted for any development within the floodway
that would result in any increase in flood elevation unless approved by the
Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
      2.   Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, and a determination that the granting of the variance will
not result in increased flood elevation, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances or cause fraud on or
victimization of the public.
      3.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this article, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, over the signature of the building
official, that the issuance of a variance will likely result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
      5.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Iowa department of natural resources or its assignee.
   B.   Factors For Consideration: When considering applications for variances,
the board of adjustment will consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this article in addition to the following factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood elevation or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      3.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community, and the risk of losing said services during a flood event.
      4.   The risk assumed by emergency personnel if it is necessary to
evacuate the use/structure during a flood event.
      5.   After consultation with the historic preservation commission, a
determination of whether compliance with the floodplain regulations would
result in a substantial alteration or destruction of defining architectural
characteristics of landmark properties and properties located within historic
or conservation districts.
      6.   Such other factors that are relevant to the purposes of this
article.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: Upon consideration of the factors and approval
criteria listed in this section, the board of adjustment may attach such
conditions and safeguards to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary
to fulfill the purposes and intent of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 10-
4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-10: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this article may, from time to time,
be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment, supplement, change
or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Iowa
department of natural resources or its assignee. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-5J-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by humanmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside
the regulated areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
does not imply that uses permitted within the regulated areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part
of Iowa City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
ARTICLE K. NEIGHBORHOOD OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
14-5K-1: Purpose
14-5K-2: Applicability
14-5K-3: Dedication Of Land
14-5K-4: Payment Of Fees In Lieu Of Land Dedication
14-5K-5: Requiring Both Dedication Of Land And Payment Of Fee
14-5K-6: Use Of Funds
14-5K-1: PURPOSE:
The neighborhood open space requirements ensure that adequate usable
neighborhood open space, parks and recreation facilities are provided in a
manner that is consistent with the parks master plan, as amended, by using a
calculable method to equitably apportion the costs of acquiring and developing
land for those purposes. The provisions of this article require development,
which creates increased needs for neighborhood open space ("open space
impact"), to pay a proportionate share of the city's capital improvements to
fulfill said open space impact. Usable neighborhood open space includes
pedestrian/bicycle trails, preferably located within natural greenway systems,
private open space that is publicly accessible, and neighborhood parks that
serve nearby residents. This article is also intended to encourage, wherever
reasonably feasible, the dedication of sensitive areas in conjunction with
usable open space. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
14-5K-2: APPLICABILITY:
As a condition of approval for preliminary plats containing residential uses,
the applicant shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu of land, or a combination
thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and open space purposes, as
determined by the city and in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
14-5K-3: DEDICATION OF LAND:
   A.   Amount Of Land To Be Dedicated: The amount of land dedication shall be
determined by the following formula. This formula is deemed a reasonable
calculation of the additional need for neighborhood open space created by the
subject subdivision.
 
   # of units x PUD x 3/1,000, where
   # of units = Number of new units is determined as noted in the Table 5K- 1;
   PDU = Persons per dwelling unit based on the most recent census; and
   3/1,000 = Acres of active neighborhood open space required per 1,000
persons.
   Table 5K-1: Determining Unit Number
 
Zone                                    Unit Number Determined by
                                        Allowable units based on the following
Single-Family Residential               dimensional requirements: Lot size, Lot
                                        frontage, and Lot width
                                        For every platted lot: Maximum dwelling
                                        units per undeveloped acre (43,560
Multi-Family Residential and Commercial divided by the minimum lot area
Zones (with residential uses)           requirement for the highest density
                                        residential use allowed in the subject
                                        base zone) x 0.65
River Front Crossings and Eastside      Unit number to be provided by developer
Mixed Use Districts                     at submittal of preliminary plat
                                        application
Form-Based                              Total unit number on Neighborhood Plan
Planned Development Overlays (OPDs)     Total unit number on Preliminary OPD
                                        Plan
 
   B.   Dedication Cap: The maximum land dedication requirement is ten percent
(10%) of the total acres of land being developed.
   C.   Nature Of Land To Be Dedicated: Except as otherwise required by the
city, all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   Usability: At least ninety percent (90%) of the land required to be
dedicated shall be located outside of floodways, lakes or other water bodies,
areas with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), wetlands subject to
federal or state regulatory jurisdiction and other areas the city reasonably
deems unsuitable for neighborhood open space due to topography, flooding or
other appropriate considerations. Dry bottom storm water detention facilities
and dry creek areas may be credited toward reaching a portion of the required
land dedication when the city determines that such areas are suitable for use
as neighborhood open space. Pedestrian/bicycle trails and private open space
that is publicly accessible may be credited toward reaching the required land
dedication when the city determines that such areas are suitable for use as
neighborhood open space. The city encourages the dedication of lakes, ponds,
creeks, other water bodies, wetlands falling under the jurisdiction of state or
federal agencies and other sensitive areas including woodland areas, both as
ten percent (10%) of and in addition to the dedicated land required by this
article, if sufficient abutting land is dedicated as a usable, public
recreation area or park.
      2.   Unity: The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land, except
where the city determines that two (2) or more parcels or greenways/trails
would best serve the public interest, given the type and distribution of
neighborhood open space needed to adequately serve the proposed development. If
the city determines that two (2) or more parcels would best serve the public
interest, the city may require that such parcels be connected by a dedicated
strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide in order to provide access and
continuity between said parcels.
      3.   Location: The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably
serve the recreation and open space needs of the residents of the subdivision.
      4.   Shape: If a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate
recreational facilities and activities, such as fields, courts or playground
equipment, the shape of the dedicated land shall be suitable for such
facilities and activities. Linear open space should be of sufficient width to
accommodate trails and adjacent greenways.
      5.   Access:
         a.   Greenways/Trails: Public access to greenways/trails shall be
provided by a public access easement at least twenty feet (20') in width. In
addition, greenways/trails shall be connected to existing or proposed
greenways/trails on adjacent property.
         b.   Parks: Public access to the dedicated land to be used for parks
shall be provided either by adjoining public street frontage or by a dedicated
public access easement at least fifty feet (50') in width, which connects the
dedicated land to a public street or right of way. The grades adjacent to
existing and proposed streets shall permit reasonable access to the dedicated
land. The parcel shall be safely accessible to pedestrian traffic.
      6.   Responsibility For Site Preparation:
         a.   The city may require the subdivider or developer to grade and
seed those portions of the dedicated land to be improved prior to dedication of
the property and prior to the city's acceptance of the dedication.
         b.   Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a street, the
subdivider or developer shall remain responsible for the installation of
utilities, sidewalks and other improvements required along that street segment.
         c.   Prior to dedication, the subdivider or developer shall be
responsible for restoring satisfactory ground cover and controlling erosion on
land to be dedicated that has been disrupted as a result of development
activities by the subdivider or developer.
   D.   Procedure For Dedication Of Land:
      1.   The dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the preliminary
subdivision plat. The subdivider or developer shall designate the area or areas
of land to be dedicated pursuant to this article on the preliminary subdivision
plat. Where wetlands have been delineated on the property, the preliminary
subdivision plat shall also identify the boundaries of such wetlands.
      2.   Upon receipt of the preliminary subdivision plat, the director of
neighborhood and development services (NDS) shall submit a copy to the director
of parks and recreation for review by the parks and recreation commission. The
parks and recreation commission shall submit recommendations concerning the
land to be dedicated to the planning and zoning commission within twenty one
(21) business days of the receipt of a complete application for preliminary
subdivision plat.
      3.   Once the final subdivision plat is approved, and any public
improvements required to be installed by the subdivider or developer within the
land to be dedicated have been installed, approved, and accepted by the city,
and the subdivider or developer has completed site preparation pursuant to
subsection B6 of this section, the subdivider or developer shall provide a
properly executed warranty deed conveying the dedicated land to the city within
two (2) years of final plat approval or by the time the city issues fifty
percent (50%) of the certificates of occupancy for the subdivision, at the
discretion of the city, or as otherwise specified in the subdivider's or
developer agreement.
      4.   The city shall formally accept the dedication of land for open
space, parkland or greenways/trails by resolution. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
14-5K-4: PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION:
   A.   General: The payment of fees in lieu of dedication of land may occur at
the request of the subdivider or developer with approval by the city, or may be
required by the city. The payment of fees in lieu of land dedication shall be
reviewed and approved as part of the preliminary subdivision plat.
   B.   Request By Subdivider Or Developer:
      1.   If a payment in lieu of open space is requested, the subdivider or
developer must include such request in a letter submitted with the application
for a preliminary subdivision, whichever is applicable.
      2.   The director of neighborhood and development services (NDS) will
forward a copy of the preliminary subdivision plat, along with a copy of the
letter requesting payment of fees in lieu of land dedication to the director of
parks and recreation for review by the parks and recreation commission. The
commission shall submit any and all recommendations concerning the payment of
fees in lieu of dedication to the planning and zoning commission within twenty
one (21) business days of the date a complete application for preliminary
subdivision plat is submitted.
      3.   The planning and zoning commission will consider the request for
payment of fees in lieu of land dedication during the subdivision review
process and forward its recommendations to the city council.
   C.   Determination Of Fees In Lieu Of Dedication Criteria: The city may, at
its discretion, require the payment of fees in lieu of the subdivider
dedicating land, if the city finds that all or part of the land required for
dedication is not suitable for public recreation and open space purposes, or
upon a finding that the recreational needs of the proposed subdivision can be
met by other park, greenway, or recreational facilities planned or constructed
by the city within reasonable proximity to the subdivision. The city shall
consider the following factors in making its determination:
      1.   Recreational and open space elements of the city comprehensive plan,
as amended, and the relation of the subdivision to the proposed open space and
recreational areas;
      2.   Topographic and geologic conditions of the land available for
dedication;
      3.   Size, shape, location of and access to the land available for
dedication;
      4.   The character and recreational needs of the neighborhood where the
subdivision is located;
      5.   The costs of developing open space and recreational areas in the
subdivision;
      6.   The actual or potential development of open space and recreational
areas on land adjacent to the subdivision which will serve the needs of the
subdivision;
      7.   Recommendations of staff, the parks and recreation commission and
the planning and zoning commission; and
      8.   Any other relevant information.
   D.   Time Of Payment: Fees in lieu of dedication must be paid in full by the
subdivider/developer prior to the issuance of the first building permit for a
lot in the subdivision.
   E.   Amount Of Payment: The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of
the land that otherwise would have been required for dedication. The fair
market value of the undeveloped land shall be determined by a qualified real
estate appraiser or by other means acceptable to both the city and the
subdivider or developer. The city and subdivider/developer will equally share
the appraisal costs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
14-5K-5: REQUIRING BOTH DEDICATION OF LAND AND PAYMENT OF FEE:
The city may, at its discretion, require a subdivider to dedicate a portion of
the land required under the formula set forth in this article, and also to pay
a fee in lieu of dedication for the remaining portion of the land by said
formula. The fee for the remaining portion shall be determined by a qualified
real estate appraiser or by other means acceptable to both the city and
subdivider or developer. The city and subdivider/developer will equally share
the appraisal costs. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
14-5K-6: USE OF FUNDS:
   A.   The neighborhood open space district boundary map (see figure 5K-1 of
this section), divides the city into neighborhood open space districts. All
payments in lieu of dedication shall be deposited in a special neighborhood
open space account designated by the name of the contributing development. All
payments will be used to acquire or develop open spaces, parks, recreation
facilities and greenways/trails that are located within the neighborhood open
space district containing the subject subdivision and will benefit the
residents of the subdivision for which payment has been made.
   FIGURE 5K-1
Neighborhood Open Space District Boundary Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5519.png]
 
   B.   The city must use the payment in lieu of dedication within five (5)
years from the date received. This period will be automatically extended an
additional five (5) years if the subdivider/developer has not constructed at
least fifty percent (50%) of the units within the subdivision for which payment
in lieu of dedication has been made.
   C.   If the city has not spent the funds by the last day of the five (5)
year period or, if extended, by the last day of an additional five (5) years,
the city shall, within ninety (90) days thereafter, mail to the property owner,
at the address on file with the Johnson County treasurer's office, a
proportional refund based on the percentage of the platted lots they own of the
total platted lots in the subdivision. The subdivider's agreement/development
agreement for each subdivision for which the subdivider/developer has made
payments in lieu of dedication shall inform all property owners and successors
in interest to properties in the subdivision of the right to a refund as
provided for herein. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
CHAPTER 6
AIRPORT ZONING 1
SECTION:
14-6-1: Short Title
14-6-2: Purpose
14-6-3: Definitions
14-6-4: Airport Zones
14-6-5: General Zoning Regulations
14-6-6: Lighting And Marking
14-6-7: Administrative Procedure
14-6-8: Exceptions
14-6-9: Nonconformities
14-6-10: Airport Zoning Commission
14-6-11: Airport Zoning Board Of Adjustment
14-6-12: Special Exceptions
14-6-13: Variances
14-6-14: Enforcement
14-6-15: Equitable Remedies
14-6-16: Prohibited Acts
14-6-17: Penalties
14-6-18: Conflicting Regulations
14-6-19: Appendices
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13 of the city code for airport regulations.
14-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the IOWA CITY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
ZONING ORDINANCE or the AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to:
   A.   Exercise, to the fullest extent possible, the powers granted to
municipalities under the code of Iowa, as amended, and to codify existing
regulations of the federal aviation administration relating to land uses
incompatible with or constituting a hazard to aviation at the Iowa City
municipal airport.
   B.   Promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare through the prevention of obstructions and noncompatible land
uses, to the extent legally possible, by proper exercise of the police power,
without compensation.
   C.   Achieve the mitigation of noncompatible uses and hazards to safe air
navigation through prevention, removal, or alteration, through the marking and
lighting of obstructions, which are public purposes for which the city of Iowa
City and Johnson County may raise and expend public funds, or through the
acquisition of land or interests in land; to that end, the city council of Iowa
City and the board of supervisors of Johnson County hereby declare that:
      1.   A hazard created by failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter may be abated in the manner prescribed by law for the abatement of
public nuisances; and
      2.   Neither political subdivision shall become liable for the
expenditure of its public funds unless such expenditure shall have been
approved in advance by its governing body. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context requires otherwise. In each case, the singular shall include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular.
   AERIAL NAVIGATION: The movement of an aircraft through the air.
   AIRCRAFT: Any human controlled contrivance used or designed for carrying
humans in flight through the air, but not including parachutes.
   AIRPORT: The Iowa City municipal airport.
   AIRPORT COMMISSION: The Iowa City municipal airport commission or its duly
appointed representative.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION: Six hundred eighty four feet (684') (MSL).
   AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, or tree, or use of land, which would exceed
the federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR FAR, part 77, and
which obstructs or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or departure of any
aircraft at the airport, or hazardous to persons or property on the ground. Any
structure or tree that the federal aviation administration has found, or
determined, to be a hazard.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided by this chapter.
   AIRPORT ZONING MAP: The Iowa City municipal airport zoning maps, dated
January 15, 2019, and as thereafter amended by ordinance, which maps are
adopted by this chapter and which maps are on file in the office of the city
clerk, Iowa City, Iowa.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official of Iowa City, Iowa, or a duly
authorized designee thereof.
   CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
   COUNTY: Johnson County, Iowa.
   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA): An agency of the United States
government that administers the federal regulations that relate to the use and
flight of aircraft, and related regulations. The location of the controlling
FAA office may be found in subsection
14-6-19A, "Appendix I", of this chapter.
   INNER EDGE: That edge of any zone that is closest to the runway end to which
the zone applies. The inner edge is perpendicular to the runway centerline. The
elevation of each inner edge is the same as the elevation of the runway
threshold to which it applies, and which is depicted on the airport zoning
maps, dated January 15, 2019, and as thereafter amended by ordinance, which
maps are adopted by this chapter and which maps are on file in the office of
the city clerk, Iowa City, Iowa.
   MSL: Altitude above mean sea level.
   NONCOMPATIBLE USE: Any activity that would degrade the safety of people on
the ground, or occupants of aircraft in flight, including, but not limited to,
storage of hazardous materials, aboveground storage of flammable liquids in
excess of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, and those that lead to an assembly
of people, including, but not limited to, residences, theaters, churches,
schools, athletic fields, campgrounds, hospitals, office buildings, shopping
centers, hotels and motels, and other uses with similar concentrations of
persons.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure or portion of any structure that is
located within or underlying any of the zones created by this chapter and that
does not conform to the height and/or use provisions of this chapter.
   NOTICE OF PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION: A requirement of 14 CFR
chapter 1, part 77, providing for persons who propose any kind of construction
or alteration of the type described in the section to provide notice to the FAA
of such action. A copy of part 77 may be found in subsection
14-6-19C, "Appendix III", of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCTION: Any structure or tree, the height of which exceeds that which
is allowed by this chapter.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any
trustee, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
   RUNWAY THRESHOLD: A designated point on any airport runway that establishes
the end of the runway. The runway threshold may or may not correspond with the
end of the paved portion of the runway.
   STRUCTURE: Any object, whether permanent or temporary, stationary or mobile,
constructed or installed by humans, including, but not limited to: buildings,
towers, smokestacks, scaffolds, lighting fixtures, public and private roads,
railways, and overhead transmission lines, including poles or other structures
supporting the same.
   TREE: Any object of natural growth.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator of Johnson County, Iowa, or a
duly authorized designee thereof. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810,
11-4-2019)
14-6-4: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this section there are hereby created
and established certain zones which are adopted and described herein, and which
are depicted on the Iowa City airport zoning maps, dated January 15, 2019, and
as thereafter amended by ordinance, which map is adopted by this chapter and
which map is on file in the office of the city clerk, Iowa City, Iowa. Any
structure or tree located in more than one zone is considered to be only in the
zone with the more restrictive height and use limitation. The various zones
hereby established and defined are as follows:
   A.   Approach Overlay Zone (AO) Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane
extending outward from each end of each runway, rising uniformly at a fixed
ratio, and of fixed size, through which aircraft commonly operate when arriving
at, and departing from, the airport. AO zones vary in size and slope based upon
the present or future use that can be expected for each airport runway.
      1.   AO Zones Designated: The AO zones at the airport are as follows:
         a.   Runway 25 (AO25): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
runway threshold to the northeast, and centered on the extended centerline of
the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide,
expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand five hundred feet
(3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the
runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the airport zoning maps. For
each thirty-four feet (34') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises
from the inner edge one foot (1') (34:1) for a horizontal distance of ten
thousand feet (10,000').
         b.   Runway 7 (AO7): Beginning four hundred thirteen feet (413')
beyond the paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet
(500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the
altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the airport
zoning maps. For each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance, the floor of
the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (20:1), continuing for a total
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000').
         c.   Runway 30 (AO30): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
threshold at the southeast end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet
(500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand five
hundred feet (3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the
altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the airport
zoning maps. For each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance, the floor
of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (34:1), for a total
horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000').
         d.   Runway 12 (AO12): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
threshold to the northwest, and centered on the extended centerline of the
runway, the inner edge of the zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding
uniformly to an outer edge width of one thousand five hundred feet (1,500').
The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway
threshold at the centerline, as depicted on the airport zoning maps. For each
twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance, the floor of the zone rises from the
inner edge one foot (1') (20:1), continuing for a total horizontal distance of
five thousand feet (5,000').
      2.   Height Limitations:
         a.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, nor plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any
approach overlay zone created herein.
         b.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any AO zone by any portion of any
vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
   B.   Controlled Activity Runway Protection Zone (CA-RPZ) Defined: An area of
fixed size, underlying the innermost portion (closest to the runway end) of the
AO zone for that runway, descending from the floor of the AO zone to the
ground. The width and length of CA-RPZ may vary, and may be different on each
runway end.
      1.   CA-RPZ Designated: The CA-RPZ for the airport are as follows:
         a.   Runway 25 (CA-RPZ25): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet
(1,000') of the AO zone at the northeast end of the runway, the width of the
CA-RPZ is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a
width of seven hundred feet (700').
         b.   Runway 7 (CA-RPZ7): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet
(1,000') of the AO zone at the southwest end of the runway, the width of the
CA-RPZ is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a
width of seven hundred feet (700').
         c.   Runway 30 (CA-RPZ30): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet
(1,000') of the AO zone at the southeast end of the runway, the width of the
CA-RPZ is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a
width of seven hundred feet (700').
         d.   Runway 12 (CA-RPZ12): Underlying the innermost one thousand feet
(1,000') of the AO zone at the northwest end of the runway, the width of the
CA-RPZ is five hundred feet (500') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a
width of seven hundred feet (700').
      2.   Use Limitations:
         a.   No person shall establish or maintain any noncompatible use in
any controlled activity-Runway Protection Zone zone.
         b.   No structures, other than airport structures, the location of
which is dictated by function, either permanent or temporary, shall be
permitted in any portion of any controlled activity-Runway Protection Zone zone
on land that is the property of the city of Iowa City, Johnson County, or the
state of Iowa.
   C.   Horizontal Overlay Zone (HO) Defined:
      1.   The airspace above a horizontal plane, the perimeter of which is
established by swinging arcs of ten thousand foot (10,000') radii from the
center of the inner edge of the AO zones of runways 25 and 30, and an arc of
five thousand foot (5,000') radius from the center of the inner edge of the AO
zone of runways 12 and 7, and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs. The floor of the HO zone is one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
airport elevation, or eight hundred thirty four feet (834') above mean sea
level.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate the
horizontal overlay zone created herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
      3.   The proposed structure may penetrate the HO if the airport
operations specialist determines that:
         a.   The FAA has issued a "determination of no hazard to navigation";
         b.   The proposed structure does not exceed any TERPS zone or any
other 14 CFR part 77 zone; and
         c.   The proposed structure does not require a change to instrument
approaches, minimum safe altitude, traffic patterns altitude, takeoff/departure
procedures or weather minimums or a change similar in nature either to the
approach or departure of an aircraft. (Ord. 14-4589, 6-17-2014)
   D.   Transitional Overlay Zone (TO) Defined: The airspace above a sloping
plane along each side of each runway, and from the sides of each AO zone. For
each seven feet (7') horizontally the floor of the zone rises at the rate of
one foot (1') of elevation (7:1).
      1.   TO Zones Designated: The TO zones for the airport are as follows:
         a.   Runway 25 (TO25): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a
point two hundred fifty feet (250') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at the
northeast end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway centerline.
The TO zone is interrupted at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
         b.   Runway 7 (TO7): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a
point two hundred fifty feet (250') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at the
northwest end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway centerline.
The TO zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
         c.   Runway 30/12 (TO30/12): Along each side of the runway, beginning
at a point two hundred fifty feet (250') from the centerline of the runway and
at right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO zone at
each end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway centerline. The
TO zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO zone.
      2.   Height Limitations:
         a.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any
transitional overlay zone created herein.
         b.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any transitional overlay zone by
any portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such
roadway.
   E.   Conical Overlay Zone (CO) Defined:
      1.   The airspace above a sloped horizontal plane beginning at the
periphery of the HO zone. For each twenty feet (20') horizontally, the floor of
the zone rises one foot (1') in height (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four
thousand feet (4,000').
      2.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate the conical
overlay zone created herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810, 11-
4-2019)
14-6-5: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter
any structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained a
building permit from the building official, or a zoning permit from the zoning
administrator. No person shall be issued a permit for any construction or
alteration in any AO, CA-RPZ, or TO zone, without a determination or finding
from the FAA, pursuant to the submission of an applicable notice of proposed
construction or alteration. Such finding or determination must not find or
determine that the proposed construction or alteration:
      1.   Would create a hazard.
      2.   Would endanger the general safety, health and welfare of persons in
the vicinity of the airport, or occupants of aircraft in flight.
      3.   Would result in the raising of the minimum instrument flight
altitude of any federal airway, approved off-airway route, or instrument
approach procedure to the airport.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no change in the use or occupancy
of land, or change of use or occupancy in an existing building or in any zone
created herein shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until an
occupancy permit has been issued by the building official or zoning
administrator.
   C.   No occupancy permit obtained for a specific use shall apply to any
other use.
   D.   No person shall be issued an occupancy permit for any noncompatible use
in any CA-RPZ.
   E.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any zone created herein by any
portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
   F.   Within five thousand feet (5,000') of the nearest point of the nearest
airport runway, no person shall establish or maintain any structure or use that
would create a bird strike hazard.
   G.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall,
in any zone created by this chapter, or upon any land or water underlying such
zones:
      1.   Establish any putrescible waste landfill.
      2.   Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use in such a manner as
to create electrical or radio interference with aviation navigational signals
or aircraft communications.
      3.   Install, align or use any lighting devices that make it difficult
for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, create glare in
the eyes of pilots, or otherwise impair visibility.
      4.   Produce steam, smoke, or other visual hazard that would impair
visibility.
      5.   Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would endanger
or interfere with landing, takeoff or maneuvering of any aircraft.
      6.   Plant, or allow the growth of, any tree, which, during the normal
life cycle of such tree, can be expected to grow into any zone created herein.
(Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810, 11-4-2019)
14-6-6: LIGHTING AND MARKING:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person
constructing or altering any structure located in any zone created by this
chapter shall install all lighting or markings upon said structure as shall be
recommended by the FAA as a part of its review of the applicant's notice of
proposed construction or alteration. Such lighting or markings shall be made in
a manner consistent with FAA regulations and advisories.
   B.   Any permit or variance granted under the provisions of this chapter may
be so conditioned so as to require the owner of the land, structure, or tree in
question to permit the city or county to install, and/or operate and maintain
such lighting and/or markings as the city or county deems necessary to indicate
to operators of aircraft the presence of an airport obstruction. (Ord. 02-4055,
12-10-2002)
14-6-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
   A.   The building official or zoning administrator shall perform the
administration of these zoning regulations.
   B.   Any person who proposes to construct or alter any structure in or
underlying any AO, CA-RPZ, or TO zone created herein, and who is required to
provide notice of proposed construction or alteration to the administrator of
the FAA by requirements of part 77, shall furnish to the building official or
zoning administrator, a copy of said notice.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the building official or zoning
administrator shall not issue any building permit or occupancy permit without
first:
      1.   In any AO, CA -RPZ , or TO zone created herein, having received from
the applicant a copy of the applicable notice of proposed construction or
alteration as provided to the FAA, and the corresponding finding or
determination from the FAA that the proposed construction or alteration
complies with section
14-6-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Having determined that the proposed use is consistent with the
zoning provisions contained herein. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-
4810, 11-4-2019)
14-6-8: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No notice of proposed construction or alteration is required to be
submitted to the FAA or to the building official or zoning administrator for a
building permit for construction or alteration of any structure when the
building official or zoning administrator has determined that:
      1.   The proposed structure meets the requirements for shielding. Each
and all of the following requirements are required for a determination of
shielding:
         a.   The property upon which the construction or alteration is
proposed is located within the congested area of a city.
         b.   The proposed structure does not lie within any CA- RPZ.
         c.   There exists a structure or structures of a permanent and
substantial nature at least as tall and at least as wide as the proposed
structure, and which lie(s) between the location of the proposed construction
or alteration, and a point on the runway centerline at the threshold of the
closest end of the closest runway of the airport.
         d.   The shielding structure is within five hundred feet (500') of the
structure that is proposed for construction or alteration.
         e.   It is evident beyond a reasonable doubt that the shielded
structure will not adversely affect aerial navigation.
      2.   The proposed structure is an antenna that is no greater than twenty
feet (20') in height, and does not increase the height of an existing antenna
structure.
      3.   The proposed structure is an airport, aerial navigation, or
meteorological device, of a type approved by the FAA, the location and height
of which is fixed by function.
   B.   A notice of proposed construction or alteration is not required for
structures more than twenty thousand feet (20,000') of the nearest point of the
nearest runway. A notice of Alteration is not required for a structure that
does not penetrate an imaginary surface, beginning at the nearest point of the
nearest runway and at the elevation of the runway threshold, rising one foot
(1') in elevation for each one hundred feet (100') of horizontal distance (100:
1). This exception does not apply to structures located in any CA-RPZ.
   C.   There exists an emergency, involving essential public services, public
health, or public safety, that requires immediate construction or alteration,
providing that the applicant complies with the requirements of 14 CFR FAR, part
77.17 (d) 1 . (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810, 11-4-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  14-6-19C, "Appendix III", of this chapter.
14-6-9: NONCONFORMITIES:
   A.   The regulations prescribed herein are not retroactive and shall not be
construed to require the removal of any tree, or the reconstruction or
alteration, or the discontinuation of any use of any structure made
nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter.
   B.   Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction
or alteration, or the intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and which was
conforming prior to the adoption of this chapter, and is completed within one
year thereafter.
   C.   No preexisting nonconforming structure, use, or tree shall be rebuilt,
altered, allowed to grow higher, or be replanted, so as to constitute a greater
airport hazard than it was at the time that these regulations were adopted.
   D.   Whenever the building official or zoning administrator determines that
a nonconforming structure has been abandoned, torn down, physically
deteriorated, damaged, or decayed, to such an extent that its value is no
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the average value of the structure and the
land over the preceding ten (10) years, no building permit or occupancy permit
shall be issued that would allow such structure to exceed the applicable height
and use provisions of this chapter. Any tree so damaged or destroyed shall be
subject to the provisions of subsection
14-6-5G6 of this chapter.
   E.   Not withstanding the previous provisions of this section the owner of
any preexisting nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to permit the
installation, operation, or maintenance thereon of any markers and/or lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the city or county to indicate to the operators of
aircraft, the presence of such structure or tree. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-10: AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.9 of the Iowa Code, there shall be an
Iowa City municipal airport zoning commission, consisting of five (5) members,
two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the city of Iowa City, two (2) of whom
shall be appointed by the board of supervisors of Johnson County, and one
additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the city and
county appointed members, and who shall serve as chairperson of said
commission. The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.9 of
the Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-11: AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.12 of the Iowa Code, there shall be
an Iowa City municipal airport zoning board of adjustment, consisting of five
(5) members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the city of Iowa City, two
(2) of who shall be appointed by the board of supervisors of Johnson County,
and one additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the city
and county appointed members, and who shall serve as chairperson of said board.
The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.12 of the Iowa
Code. The airport zoning board of adjustment shall have the duties and powers
established by the Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-12: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
With the concurrence of a majority vote, the airport zoning board of adjustment
(the board) may, based upon a written determination from the FAA, reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official
and may modify the provisions of this chapter in favor of an applicant,
providing:
   A.   Any height or use limitations contained in this chapter that is
modified by the board shall not result in a hazard to any aircraft in flight.
   B.   No use of land shall be permitted that would not be compatible with
airport operations.
   C.   Any application for a special exception to the provisions of this
chapter shall include as a part thereof, the written determination of the FAA
pertaining to the application, and no application shall be set for hearing by
the board in the absence of such FAA determination. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-13: VARIANCES:
   A.   Any person desiring to construct or alter any structure, or permit the
growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in a manner that would constitute
a violation of this chapter, may apply to the board for a variance from these
regulations. The board shall consider no application for a variance to the
requirements of this chapter unless a copy of the application has been
submitted to the airport commission for their opinion as to the aeronautical
effects of such a variance. If the airport commission fails to respond to the
board within forty five (45) days from its receipt of the copy of the
application, the board may make its decision in the absence of the airport
commission opinion. Such variances may be granted by the board only where the
literal application of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship,
and are subject to the following:
      1.   Such variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
      2.   Such variance would be in the spirit of this chapter and of chapter
329 of the Iowa Code.
      3.   Such variance shall be granted subject to any reasonable conditions
that the board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
      4.   Such variance be subject to the requirement that the applicant shall
install, operate, and maintain such markings and lighting, at the applicant's
own expense, as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft operators the
existence of an airport obstruction as determined by the board.
      5.   Such variance shall be subject to the reservation of the right of
the city and the airport, to go onto applicant's property to install, operate,
and maintain thereon such FAA approved markers and lights as may be necessary
to indicate to operators of aircraft the existence of an airport obstruction.
   B.   Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the airport zoning
board of adjustment may appeal such decision, pursuant to the provisions of the
Iowa Code. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-14: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of
the city manager or such persons as the city manager shall, from time to time,
direct. However such duties of enforcement and administration shall not include
any of the powers herein delegated to the airport zoning board of adjustment.
(Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-15: EQUITABLE REMEDIES:
The city or the airport may, pursuant to section 329.5 of the Iowa Code,
maintain an action in equity to restrain and abate as a nuisance the creation,
establishment or maintenance of an airport hazard, in violation of any
provision established by this chapter, on any property, whether within or
without the territorial limits of the city. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-16: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
alter any structure, use any land, or grow any tree in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-17: PENALTIES:
Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor or a
municipal infraction as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. Each
day a violation occurs or continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810, 11-4-2019)
14-6-18: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In the event of any conflict between regulations contained in this chapter and
any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with
respect to height of structures or trees, use of structures or land, or any
other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall prevail. (Ord.
02-4055, 12-10-2002)
14-6-19: APPENDICES:
   A.   Appendix I: The controlling federal authority for the Iowa City
municipal airport is:
      Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region
      Office of the Manager, Airports Division
      901 Locust
      Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
   B.   Appendix II: Notice of proposed construction or alteration, FAA form
7460-1 shall be sent to:
      Federal Aviation Administration
      Manager, Air Traffic Division
      901 Locust
      Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
   C.   Appendix III: Code of Federal Regulations Title 14-Aeronautics and
Space Chapter 1-Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation,
Subchapter E-Airspace Part 77-Safe, Efficient Use, and Preservation of the
Navigable Airspace, Subpart B-Notice Requirements (Current through December 3,
2002; 67 FR 71903):
      §77.7 Form and time of notice.
      (a) If you are required to file notice under §77.9, you must submit to
the FAA a completed FAA Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction or
Alteration. FAA Form 7460-1 is available at FAA regional offices and on the
Internet.
      (b) You must submit this form at least 45 days before the start date of
the proposed construction or alteration or the date an application for
construction permit is filed, whichever is earliest.
      (c) If you propose construction or alternation that is also submit to the
licensing requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), you must
submit notice to the FAA on or before the date that the application is filed
with the FCC.
      (d) If you propose construction or alteration to an existing structure
that exceeds 2,000 feet in height above ground level (AGL), the FAA presumes it
to be a hazard to air navigation that results in an inefficient use of
airspace. You must include details explaining both why the proposal would not
constitute a hazard to air navigation and why it would not cause an inefficient
use of airspace.
      (e) The 45-day advance notice requirement is waived if immediate
construction or alternation is required because of an emergency involving
essential public services, public health, or public safety. You may provide
notice to the FAA by any available, expeditious means. You must file a
completed FAA Form 7460-1 within 5 days of the initial notice to the FAA.
Outside normal business hours, the nearest flight service station will accept
emergency notices.
(Ord. 02-4055, 12-10-2002; amd. Ord. 19-4810, 11-4-2019)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE A. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
14-7A-1: Planning And Zoning Commission
14-7A-2: Board Of Adjustment
14-7A-3: Historic Preservation Commission
14-7A-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Commission Established; Membership; Compensation: The planning and
zoning commission consists of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to the provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended, and the
approval of the city council. All members of the commission shall be qualified
electors of the city of Iowa City. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
   B.   Purpose: In order to provide for the general welfare of the citizens of
Iowa City, a planning and zoning commission is established to advise the city
council on all matters pertaining to the physical development of Iowa City,
including the comprehensive plan and any laws pertaining to land development
necessary to implement the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Powers: The planning and zoning commission shall have the following
powers, in addition to any other conferred by law:
      1.   Make such surveys, studies, maps, plans or plats of the whole or any
portion of the city and of any land outside the city which, in the opinion of
the commission, bears relation to the city's comprehensive plan. The commission
shall submit such surveys, studies and plans to the city council along with its
recommendations, and it may publish the same.
      2.   Make recommendations to the city council regarding planned
developments and plats or replats of subdivisions in the city which show
streets, alleys or other areas intended to be dedicated for public use.
      3.   Make recommendations for streets, parks, rights of way, boulevards,
trafficways, or other public improvements or for the vacation thereof.
      4.   Carry on comprehensive studies of present conditions and future
growth of the city in order to guide and achieve a coordinated and harmonious
development of the city in accordance with the city's present and future needs
to the end that the health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare of the community may be best promoted.
      5.   Prepare a zoning ordinance regarding the height, number of stories
and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of ground that may
be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of
population, and the location, design, and use of buildings, structures and land
for commercial, industrial, residential or other purposes. To this end, the
commission shall prepare a preliminary report regarding any proposed amendments
to the zoning ordinance and hold public meetings thereon. After such meetings
have been held, the commission shall also submit a final report and
recommendations to the city council. The commission shall hold public meetings
on and make recommendations to city council regarding repealing amendments to
this title.
      6.   Conduct public hearings on and adopt a comprehensive plan and
recommend to the city council, from time to time, as conditions require,
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications to the comprehensive plan.
      7.   Do all things necessary or advisable in order to carry out the
intent and purpose of this article and state law.
   D.   Commission Bylaws: The commission shall adopt bylaws to establish the
time and place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a chairperson and vice
chairperson, who shall act as chairperson when the chairperson is absent or
abstaining, and a secretary and such other bylaws as are necessary to implement
the provisions of this article. Copies of all bylaws shall be kept on file in
the department of planning and community development and in the office of the
city clerk. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7A-2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Board Established; Membership; Compensation: The Board of Adjustment
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the City Council for a term of five (5) years. Members shall be qualified
electors of Iowa City. A majority of the members of the board shall be persons
representing the public at large; a majority of the board shall not be involved
in the business of purchasing or selling real estate. Board members shall serve
without compensation.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the board is to provide relief from the
requirements of this title when a variance is warranted, provide extra scrutiny
in cases where special exceptions allowed by this title are requested, and
provide an avenue for appeal of administrative decisions regarding the
enforcement and implementation of this title. The decisions of the board should
serve the public interest, meet the intent of this title, and be consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, as amended.
   C.   Powers: The board shall have the following powers:
      1.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City
Manager or designee in the enforcement of this title or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto.
      2.   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide applications for special
exceptions to the terms of this title in accordance with the general and
specific approval criteria set forth in this title and specifically in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title.
      3.   Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances
from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest,
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this title will result in unnecessary hardship and so the spirit of this title
shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance to the strict
application of any provision of this title shall be granted by the board unless
the applicant demonstrates that all of the approval criteria for variances set
forth in
chapter 4, article B, "Minor Modifications, Variances, Special Exceptions, And
Provisional Uses", of this title have been met.
   D.   Procedural Rules: The board shall adopt rules to establish the time and
place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson, who shall act as Chairperson when the Chairperson is absent or
abstaining, and such other procedural rules as are necessary to implement the
provisions of this article. Copies of all rules shall be kept on file in the
Office of the board's Secretary and in the Office of the City Clerk. The
Chairperson or, in the Chairperson's absence, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths or compel the attendance of witnesses. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
   E.   Alternate Member: An alternate member, if available, shall be appointed
as provided herein, to replace a member who is unable to participate in an
appeal of an administrative decision due to a conflict of interest. Any person
who has served as a member of the board within the five (5) years preceding the
filing of the appeal, and who represents the public at large and is not
involved in the business of purchasing or selling real estate, shall be
qualified to serve as an alternate. When the member has recused himself/herself
due to a conflict and the date of hearing before the board has been set, the
Secretary of the board shall notify all such persons and the first to agree to
serve as the alternate is hereby appointed to do so. (Ord. 18-4749, 5-1-2018)
14-7A-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Commission Established; Membership: The Historic Preservation
Commission consists of at least seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor for terms of three (3) years, subject to the provisions of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, and the approval of the City Council. All members of the
commission shall be qualified electors of the City of Iowa City. At least one
resident of each designated historic district shall be appointed to the
commission. Other members shall be chosen at large from any part of the City
and shall have some expertise in history, urban planning, architecture,
archaeology, law, sociology or other closely related field, or shall
demonstrate interest in the area of historic preservation. At least four (4) of
the members shall hold appointments at large. Should the number of officially
designated historic districts exceed three (3) in number, a new member shall be
added to the commission for each new district in excess of three (3) districts.
The new member shall be appointed by the City Council as soon as practicable
after the official designation of the historic district triggering the
operation of the preceding clause.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the Historic Preservation Commission is to:
      1.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of historic
districts and historic and cultural landmarks located in the City;
      2.   Safeguard the City's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by
preserving districts, historic landmarks and properties of historical,
architectural and cultural significance;
      3.   Stabilize and improve property values by conserving historic
properties;
      4.   Foster civic pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the
past;
      5.   Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors
and thereby support and stimulate business;
      6.   Strengthen the economy of the City; and
      7.   Promote the use of districts of historic and cultural significance
as sites for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The commission shall be authorized to conduct studies for the
identification and designation of "conservation districts", "historic
districts" and "historic landmarks" meeting the definitions established by this
title. The commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from
any person, group or association.
      2.   The commission shall review and act upon all applications for
certificates of appropriateness.
      3.   The commission shall further the efforts of historic preservation in
the City by making recommendations to the City Council and City commissions and
boards on preservation issues when appropriate, by encouraging the protection
and enhancement of structures with historical, architectural or cultural value,
and by encouraging persons and organizations to become involved in preservation
activities.
   D.   Commission Bylaws: The commission shall adopt bylaws to establish the
time and place of meetings, the procedure for selecting a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson, and such other bylaws as are necessary to implement the provisions
of this article. The commission shall have the authority to adopt rules of
procedure in connection with the approval or disapproval of certificates of
appropriateness subject to approval of the City Council. Copies of all bylaws
shall be kept on file in the Department of Planning and Community Development
and in the Office of the City Clerk.
   E.   Secretary: The City Manager shall designate a person to serve as
Secretary to the commission. The Secretary shall keep a record of all
applications for certificates of appropriateness, resolutions, proceedings, and
actions of the Historic Preservation Commission and may be authorized to make
decisions regarding applications for minor historic reviews.
   F.   Design Review Subcommittee: The commission shall have the authority to
establish a Historic Preservation Design Review Subcommittee to review and make
recommendations to the commission regarding applications for certificates of
appropriateness. Said subcommittee shall consist of three (3) members of the
commission, appointed annually by the commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. DEVELOPMENT FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 14-4586, 6-3-2014)
ARTICLE C. PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
14-7C-1: Enforcement Officials; Appeals
14-7C-2: Permits, Certificates And Approvals
14-7C-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
14-7C-4: Revocation Of Permits
14-7C-5: Violations And Penalties
14-7C-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; APPEALS:
   A.   Enforcement Officials: It is the duty of the city manager or designee
to enforce this title. It is also the duty of all officers and employees of the
city and especially all members of the police department to assist the city
manager or designee by reporting any new construction, reconstruction, land
uses or other seeming violations.
   B.   Appeals: Appeals from a decision of the city manager or designee in
enforcing this title may be made to the board of adjustment as provided in
chapter 8, article C, "Board Of Adjustment Approval Procedures", of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-2: PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND APPROVALS:
   A.   No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for regulated
building activity that would create a violation of this title;
   B.   No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for a regulated
building activity on a lot of record on which there is a violation of this
title, except when the construction described in the permit application will
eliminate the violation;
   C.   No authorization for utility connection shall be issued for premises on
which there is a violation of this title; and
   D.   No permit, certificate, or approval shall be issued for an activity to
occur on any lot of record on which there is a violation of this title or any
other applicable title of this code or on which the conduct of such activity
would constitute a violation of this title or any other applicable title of
this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Required:
      1.   No change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or
occupancy in an existing building, other than for single- family dwelling
purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city manager or designee. If a
building permit has not been issued prior to the effective date hereof, every
certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all
provisions of this title.
      2.   No permit for excavation, or for the installation or alteration of
any building, shall be issued before an application has been made for a
building permit, and no building or premises shall be occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy For Nonconforming Uses: A certificate of
occupancy may be obtained for nonconforming uses. An application for a
certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be accompanied by an
affidavit of proof that such nonconforming use was not established in violation
of this title after July 26, 1962, and before the effective date hereof.
   C.   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: The building official may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy when a delay in the planting of required
trees and landscaping is warranted, as allowed in
chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", and
chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this title; or a
delay in paving of parking and stacking spaces, drives or aisles is warranted,
as provided in
chapter 5, article A, "Off Street Parking And Loading Standards", of this
title.
   D.   Records Kept: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept
on file in the office of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-7C-4: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The city manager or designee may revoke or modify any permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this title if any of the following occurs:
   A.   The grantee has not complied with the conditions of approval under
which the permit was granted.
   B.   The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud or was issued in
error.
   C.   The use or activity authorized pursuant to the permit is subsequently
determined to be a violation of an applicable statute, ordinance, law or
regulation.
   D.   Suspension of work under the subject permit for six (6) months or more.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-7C-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties:
      1.   The owner or manager of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of this title has been committed or exists or the
lessee or tenant of a building or premises in or upon which violation has been
committed or exists or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other
person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any
building or premises in or upon which such violation exists or who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this title may be found guilty of a
simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as
provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code and shall be subject to the
penalties specified in subsection
1-4-2D of this code, except for environmental infractions, which shall be
subject to the penalty for same as specified in subsection
 1-4-2B2 of this code, as amended. Each day that a violation occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense, and civil and/or criminal
penalties shall be computed accordingly. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
      2.   In case any building or structure is installed, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the appropriate
authorities of the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute
injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful installation, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land.
      3.   Any person who constructs, alters, relocates or demolishes any
designated landmark or a building or structure in a historic or conservation
district in violation of this title may be required to restore the subject
building or structure to its appearance or setting prior to the violation as
required and approved by the historic preservation commission. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4253, 2-20-2007)
   B.   Stop Work Order:
      1.   Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this
title being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this
title or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a
stop work order.
      2.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately
cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
      3.   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with
a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
   C.   Remedies Are Cumulative: Nothing in this article shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation of this title including, but not limited to, revocation of any
permit, certificate, or approval, and shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions. Such remedies are deemed cumulative and not
exclusive. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
CHAPTER 8
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-8A-1: General Application Requirements
14-8A-1: GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application Forms And Fees:
      1.   Forms: Applications and submittal materials required under this
title shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the city.
Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the application form.
      2.   Fees:
         a.   The applicable filing fee shall be paid at the time any appeal or
application is filed;
         b.   Filing fees shall be established from time to time by resolution
of the city council to defray the actual cost of processing the application;
and
         c.   All required fees shall be made payable to "The City Of Iowa
City".
         d.   No fee shall be charged for an appeal or application filed by any
officer, department or board of the city or for any other governmental entity.
   B.   Determination Of Completeness:
      1.   The city will not process an incomplete application.
      2.   The start date for any applicable time limitations for the
application under review will be the date when a complete application is
submitted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-8B-1: [Reserved]
14-8B-2: Access Permit
14-8B-3: Design Review
14-8B-4: Fence Permit
14-8B-5: Floodplain Development Permit
14-8B-6: Home Occupation Permit
14-8B-7: Level I Sensitive Areas Review
14-8B-8: Minor Modification
14-8B-9: Sign Permit
14-8B-10: Temporary Use Permit
14-8B-11: Reasonable Accommodations Request
14-8B-1: [RESERVED]:
14-8B-2: ACCESS PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Prior to cutting any curb or establishing any driveway on any street
in the city, an access permit must be obtained from the department of public
works, unless exempted as set forth in
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
      2.   No access permit shall be issued unless all applicable requirements
and standards of
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   The owner of property for which access is being requested shall file
an application for an access permit with the department of public works on
application forms provided by the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form. A traffic study may be required for any request for access to
an arterial street.
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the city engineer and the
building official will jointly review said application for compliance with the
provisions of
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title.
      2.   If access to an arterial street is requested, the city engineer and
the building official will consult with the director of planning and community
development or designee. Joint approval from all three (3) city officials or
their designees is required prior to granting access to an arterial street.
      3.   Joint approval from the city engineer and the building official or
their designees is required prior to granting access to a local or collector
street.
      4.   Once it is determined that the standards of
chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this title will be met,
and the requisite approvals have been obtained, the city engineer or designee
will issue the access permit. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-3: DESIGN REVIEW:
   A.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person or persons intending to
make application for design review may request a meeting with the design review
committee or a representative of the design review committee to discuss basic
intentions and plans before investing time in detailed designs. This step is
optional but recommended for large or complex projects. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to discuss preliminary design plans, review
applicable design guidelines, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with
the review and approval procedures for design review.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   The applicant must file an application for design review with the
department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by
the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the design review committee
will review said application for compliance with the applicable standards and
approval criteria as set forth in
chapter 3, article C, "Design Review", of this title.
      2.   Within thirty (30) working days of the date a complete application
is submitted to the city, the design review committee will approve, approve
with modifications agreed to by the applicant, or disapprove the application.
      3.   If the committee does not act within the thirty (30) day time period
and the applicant does not agree to an extension of time, the application will
be deemed approved.
      4.   For level I design review applications, the committee's findings on
each application shall be set forth in a written decision, which will be filed
in the respective property file in the department of housing and inspection
services. A copy of said decision will be mailed to the applicant at the time
of filing.
      5.   For level II design review applications, the committee's findings on
each application will be set forth in a written recommendation to the city
council. The city council will, after receipt of the recommendation of the
committee, or after the time of any extension thereof has passed for the
committee to file their recommendation, make approval or rejection of the
application. City council approval of the plans shall require a majority of
votes cast at any meeting at which a quorum is present. The city council's
findings on each application shall be set forth in a written resolution, to be
filed in the office of the city clerk. A copy of said resolution will be mailed
to the applicant at the time of filing. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-4: FENCE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Prior to construction of any of the following types of
fences or walls, a building permit must be obtained from the department of
housing and inspection services:
      1.   Electric fences;
      2.   Barbed wire fences;
      3.   Any fence or wall over six feet (6') in height;
      4.   Any retaining wall over four feet (4') in height measured from the
top of the footing to the top of the wall; and
      5.   A retaining wall of any height that supports a surcharge or impounds
flammable liquids.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a building permit must be filed with the
department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by
the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form. (Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the building official or
designee will review said application for compliance with the standards and
requirements for fences, walls, and hedges as set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
      2.   The building official will issue the permit once it has been
determined that all applicable provisions of
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title have been
met. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-5: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the building
official shall be secured prior to initiation of any development on a tract of
land within a flood hazard area.
   B.   Submittal Requirements: The building official may require the following
information:
      1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit.
      2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
      3.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
      4.   Elevation of the flood hazard event. Where flood elevation data is
not provided in the flood insurance study, the applicant shall contact the Iowa
department of natural resources to obtain such data.
      5.   Elevation in relation to national geodetic vertical datum of the
lowest floor, including basement, of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
      6.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
      7.   Such other information as the building official deems reasonably
necessary for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of
chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title.
   C.   Approval Procedure: The building official shall, within a reasonable
time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development
meets the applicable standards of
chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title, and
shall approve or disapprove, in writing, the application. For disapprovals, the
applicant will be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons why the
application was disapproved. The building official shall not issue permits for
variances, except as approved by the board of adjustment according to the
approval criteria for such variances set forth in
chapter 5, article J of this title. (Ord. 10-4414, 11-16-2010)
14-8B-6: HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Prior to establishment of a type B home occupation, as
defined in subsection
14-4C-2M, "Home Occupations", of this title, a home occupation permit must be
obtained from the department of housing and inspection services.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a home occupation permit must be filed with the
department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by
the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the building official or
designee will review said application for compliance with the standards and
requirements for home occupations as set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title, and will
issue the permit once it has been determined that said standards and
requirements have been met.
      2.   The home occupation permit is effective for two (2) years. At the
end of every two (2) years, it is the responsibility of the applicant to
request a renewal of the permit. Renewal of the permit will be granted if the
applicant is in compliance with the standards and requirements for home
occupations as set forth in
chapter 4, article C, "Accessory Uses And Buildings", of this title.
   D.   Revocation Of Permit: A home occupation permit may be revoked at any
time for failure to comply with the provisions of this title. When a home
occupation permit has been revoked, a new permit will not be issued to the
applicant or other persons residing with the applicant for at least two (2)
years. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-7: LEVEL I SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
   A.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a level I sensitive areas review must be filed
with the department of housing and inspection services on application forms
provided by the city.
      2.   All supporting materials, including a sensitive areas development
plan, must be submitted as specified on the application form.
   B.   Review And Approval:
      1.   The application for a level I sensitive areas review will be
reviewed and approved administratively. This application process may occur
concurrently with an application for site plan review or subdivision review.
      2.   Approval of the sensitive areas development plan submitted with the
application will be based on compliance with the applicable regulations and
requirements of
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title. The
sensitive areas development plan must delineate construction area limits and
establish restrictions for current or future development activity within
protected sensitive areas. Any such restrictions must be set forth in the legal
papers approved as part of the plan.
   C.   Issuance Of Permits: Sensitive areas development plans approved under a
level I sensitive areas review will be retained in the department of housing
and inspection services, and permits will be issued only for structures and
development activity conforming to the approved sensitive areas development
plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-8: MINOR MODIFICATION:
   A.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a minor modification must be filed with the
department of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by
the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
   B.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete minor modification application, an
administrative hearing will be set.
      2.   Ten (10) days prior to the administrative hearing, written notice
shall be sent to property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior
boundaries of the property.
      3.   Following the administrative hearing, the building official will
approve, in whole or in part, the minor modification requested, with or without
conditions, provided all approval criteria as set forth in section
14-4B-1, "Minor Modifications", of this title are met. The building official
will issue a written decision listing the findings upon which the decision is
based.
      4.   The applicant or property owner shall record the decision in the
office of the county recorder. Evidence of such recording is required prior to
issuance of a building permit.
   C.   Expiration: A minor modification must be exercised within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of approval, or the minor modification shall
become null and void.
   D.   Time Extensions: For good cause, the building official may grant time
extensions not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months from the date of the
decision. Prior to granting an extension, the building official will ensure
that the minor modification complies with all current provisions of this title.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-9: SIGN PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   No sign requiring a permit in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title shall be installed,
altered, moved, improved or converted without first obtaining a sign permit
from the building official or designee. A permit is not required for incidental
repairs or routine maintenance.
      2.   Certain types of signs are allowed without a permit, and such
exemption from the sign permit requirements is clearly specified in
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title. A permit is required
for any sign that is not specifically exempted from the permit requirements.
      3.   Only a person holding a valid sign installer's license issued by the
city may obtain a permit to perform work pursuant to the regulations of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
      4.   Every applicant, before being issued a sign permit, shall pay to the
city such fee as shall be established by resolution of the city council.
However, any person found to be installing, altering, moving, improving or
converting any sign prior to the issuance of a permit or who has installed
altered, moved, improved or converted a sign prior to the issuance of a permit
shall be charged double the normal fee. The payment of such double fee shall
not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the
applicable sign regulations in the execution of the work nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a sign permit must be filed with the department
of housing and inspection services on application forms provided by the city.
      2.   All supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
   C.   Approval Procedures:
      1.   Upon the filing of a complete application for a sign permit, the
building official or designee shall, within a reasonable time, make a
determination as to whether the proposed sign meets the applicable standards of
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, and any other
applicable laws and ordinances of the city, and shall approve or disapprove the
application.
      2.   For proposed illuminated signs, the building official or designee
will examine the plans and specifications for all wiring and connections to
determine if they comply with the electrical code. No sign permit will be
issued unless such compliance is ascertained.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit: If the work authorized under a sign permit has
not been completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, said permit
shall become null and void. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8B-10: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Prior to establishing any temporary use, a temporary
use permit must be secured from the building official or designee.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted to the
department of housing and inspection services upon a form provided by the city.
      2.   All supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form. The building official or designee may also request other
data, plans, and information deemed necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of
chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.
   C.   Approval Procedure: Upon receipt of a complete application, the
building official or designee shall approve, modify, condition, or deny the
application within ten (10) working days after submittal based on compliance
with the standards and approval criteria specified for such temporary use set
forth in
chapter 4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
14-8B-11: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS REQUEST:
   A.   Applicability: A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by
any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or
provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of
a regulation, policy, practice, or procedure in Title 14 acts as a barrier to
fair housing opportunities.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   The applicant must file a written application for a reasonable
accommodations request with the Department of Neighborhood and Development
services on application forms provided by the City.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form or as requested by staff to allow a full review of the
request.
      3.   If an individual needs assistance in making the request for
reasonable accommodation, the City will assist to ensure that the process is
accessible. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection unless otherwise required by
law.
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, staff will review said
application for compliance with the following approval criteria:
         a.   The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under
fair housing laws;
         b.   The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing
available for the use and enjoyment of an individual with disabilities
protected under the fair housing laws;
         c.   The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial
or administrative burden on the jurisdiction; and
         d.   The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the City's zoning program.
      2.   Within thirty (30) working days of the date a complete application
is submitted to the City, the Director of Neighborhood and Development Services
will approve, approve with modifications agreed to by the applicant, or
disapprove the application consistent with fair housing laws.
      3.   If the Director does not act within thirty (30) working days and the
applicant does not agree to an extension of time, the application will be
deemed approved.
      4.   The Director's findings on each application shall be set forth in a
written decision, which will be filed in the respective property file in the
Department of Neighborhood and Development services. A copy of said decision
will be sent to the applicant at the time of filing. All written decisions
shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable
accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below.
   D.   Appeals:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days of the date of the reviewing authority's
written decision, an applicant may appeal an adverse decision to the Board of
Adjustment. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing pursuant
to the procedures in Section
14-8C-3, "Appeals".
      2.   If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse
decision, the City will assist to ensure that the appeals process is
accessible. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection unless otherwise required by
law.
      3.   In deciding such appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the
approval criteria in Section
14-8B-11C-1.
      4.   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment
may, in conformity with the provisions of this article or ordinances adopted
pursuant thereto, affirm, or upon finding error, reverse or modify, wholly or
partly, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end, shall have all the powers of the Director.
      5.   Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual
from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. (Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-
2023)
ARTICLE C. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-8C-1: Procedures Generally
14-8C-2: Special Exceptions And Variances
14-8C-3: Appeals
14-8C-4: Religious Institution Appeals
14-8C-1: PROCEDURES GENERALLY:
The board of adjustment shall conduct public hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Public Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public.
   B.   Public Notice: Notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation not more than twenty (20) days
nor less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing. It shall contain the street
address or location of the property and a brief description of the nature of
the appeal.
   C.   Record Of Proceedings: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the secretary of the board and shall be a public record.
   D.   Written Decisions: The board shall render written decisions, including
findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall be filed with the city
clerk and recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder. A copy of said
decision shall be provided to the applicant.
   E.   Orders; Lapse Of Approval: Unless otherwise determined by the board,
all orders of the board shall expire six (6) months from the date the written
decision is filed with the city clerk unless the applicant shall have taken
action within the six (6) month period to establish the use or construct the
building permitted under the terms of the board's decision, such as obtaining a
building permit and proceeding to completion in accordance with the terms of
the permit. Upon written request and for good cause shown, the board may extend
the expiration date of any order without further public hearing on the merits
of the original appeal or application.
   F.   Petition For Writ Of Certiorari: Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment under the
provisions of this title or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of
the city may present to a court of record a petition for writ of certiorari,
duly verified, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision in the
office of the city clerk, setting forth that such board decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005)
14-8C-2: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES:
   A.   Application Filing:
      1.   An application for a special exception or a variance must be filed
with the city clerk on application forms provided by the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
      3.   Monthly application deadlines for the board of adjustment are
published in the department of planning and community development. The board of
adjustment will review all complete applications received by the deadline at
their regularly scheduled, monthly meeting.
      4.   The applicant bears the burden of proof and must support each of the
approval criteria for the specific proposed exception or variance, as set forth
in
chapter 4, article B of this title, by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Prior to application for a special
exception or a variance, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the staff
from the department of planning and community development to discuss basic
intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to review the applicable city standards and
requirements and to ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and
approval procedures for a special exception.
   C.   Approval Procedures:
      1.   Once a complete application has been received, city staff shall
review the application for compliance with the approval criteria applicable to
the specific proposed exception or variance and issue a report and
recommendation to the board of adjustment.
      2.   At a public hearing, the board shall review all applicable evidence
presented regarding the proposed exception or variance.
      3.   The board of adjustment will approve, approve with conditions, or
deny an application based on the facts presented in evidence. In order to
approve a special exception or variance, the board must find that the specific
proposed exception or variance meets the applicable approval criteria as set
forth in
chapter 4, article B of this title or as set forth elsewhere in this title.
      4.   In permitting a special exception or a variance, the board may
impose appropriate conditions and safeguards, including, but not limited to,
landscaping and screening, fencing, construction commencement and completion
deadlines, lighting, operational controls, improved traffic circulation
requirements, highway access restrictions, increased minimum setback
requirements, parking requirements, limitations on the duration of a use or
ownership or any other requirement which the board deems appropriate under the
circumstances upon a finding that the conditions are necessary to fulfill the
purpose and intent of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8C-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Initiation Of Appeal:
      1.   Where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the city manager or designee in the
enforcement of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, any
person aggrieved by such order, requirement, decision, or determination may
appeal same to the board of adjustment.
      2.   Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the city manager or designee in the
enforcement of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, any
officer, department or board of the city aggrieved by such order, requirement,
decision or determination may appeal same to the board of adjustment.
   B.   Appeal Procedures:
      1.   The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the city clerk on
forms provided by the city, specifying the grounds of the appeal. Such appeal
must be submitted within a reasonable time from the date of the action appealed
from as provided by the rules of the board. A duplicate copy of such notice
shall be filed with the secretary of the board of adjustment.
      2.   The city manager or designee shall forthwith transmit to the board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
      3.   At a public hearing, the board shall review all applicable evidence
presented regarding the subject appeal.
      4.   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment
may, in conformity with the provisions of this title or ordinances adopted
pursuant thereto, affirm, or upon finding error, reverse or modify, wholly or
partly, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, including, without limitation, the right of the
permittee to proceed with development or other activities authorized under a
building permit, the issuance of which is a subject of the appeal, unless the
city manager or designee certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has
been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
the city manager's or designee's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings or development shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of
adjustment or by a court of record and on notice to the city manager or
designee for due cause shown. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8C-4: RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The board of adjustment may consider a special exception to
avoid or resolve any alleged violation of the freedom of religion based rights
afforded to any person under federal or state law caused by the enforcement of
any regulation or requirement of this title.
   B.   Application And Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Any person or persons may submit an application to the board of
adjustment for a special exception under the provisions of this section.
      2.   Such application must be submitted to the city clerk on application
forms provided by the city for a special exception and must include the
following additional information:
         a.   A statement specifying the particular regulation or requirement
of this title to which the requested exception relates;
         b.   A description of the intended use of land or activity for which
the exception is being sought;
         c.   Documented evidence of how the specified regulation or
requirement allegedly violates the person's freedom of religion based rights
afforded under federal or state law;
         d.   A description of how granting the exception would be in the
public interest and not be contrary to health, safety and welfare
considerations; and
         e.   Any additional information requested by the board of adjustment
that will assist them in making a determination regarding the application.
   C.   Approval Criteria: In considering an exception from the requirements of
this title under the provisions of this section, the board must find, based on
the evidence presented, that all the following approval criteria are met. The
general special exception approval criteria specified in section
14-4B-3, "Special Exceptions", of this title do not apply.
      1.   The exception is necessary to avoid or resolve a substantial burden
on the freedom of religion based rights afforded to any person under federal or
state law caused by the enforcement of a specific regulation or regulations of
this title; and
      2.   The subject regulation or requirement under review does not
constitute or further a compelling governmental interest; or alternatively, the
subject regulation or requirement under review is not the least restrictive
means for satisfying or achieving the governmental interest; and
      3.   The specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare; and
      4.   Except for the specific regulations and standards applicable to the
exception being considered, the specific proposed exception, in all other
respects, conforms to the applicable regulations or standards of the zone in
which it is to be located.
   D.   Approval Procedure: Evidence shall be presented at a public hearing
according to the approval procedures set forth for special exceptions in
section
14-8C-2 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-8D-1: Annexation Or Severance Of Territory - Voluntary
14-8D-2: Annexation Or Severance - Involuntary
14-8D-3: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
14-8D-4: Design Review Overlay (ODR) Rezoning
14-8D-5: Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings) And Zoning Code Text Amendments
14-8D-6: Level II Sensitive Areas Review
14-8D-7: Planned Development Overlay (OPD) Rezoning
14-8D-8: Vacation Of Public Right Of Way
14-8D-1: ANNEXATION OR SEVERANCE OF TERRITORY - VOLUNTARY:
   A.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Requests for annexation or severance must be filed with the city
clerk on application forms provided by the city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form and as required by state law or state administrative rules.
For annexation requests, the applicant must specify a desired zoning
designation or zoning designations for the territory.
   B.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person or persons intending to
request an annexation or severance is encouraged to meet with staff from the
department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions
before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the preapplication
conference is to discuss the purpose for the requested annexation or severance,
review applicable comprehensive plan and district plan policies that might
affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the
review and approval procedures for an annexation or severance.
   C.   Staff Review: Upon receipt thereof, the application will be reviewed
for completeness by city staff, and upon verification of a complete
application, staff will prepare a staff report and recommendation based on
comprehensive plan policies, ability of the city or neighboring communities to
provide services, and other appropriate policies and information. The staff
report and recommendation will be forwarded to the planning and zoning
commission for their review. There shall be no time limitation for review
regarding a rezoning associated with annexation of territory.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review: The commission may recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the requested annexation or
severance. In a separate motion, the commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the requested zoning designation of a
parcel to be annexed. In the event the commission recommends approval of the
annexation, but denial of the requested zoning designation, it shall make an
additional recommendation as to what zoning designation it recommends.
   E.   City Council Public Hearing Notice Requirements:
      1.   The city council shall set and publish notice regarding a public
hearing on the proposed annexation or severance following planning and zoning
commission review. The city council shall also set a public hearing on the
zoning designation of the property to be annexed. Notice of such hearings, and
the time and place of such hearings must be published in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty
(20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be
held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following
the published notice.
      2.   Following planning and zoning commission review but prior to the
city council public hearing, city staff shall complete the notification
requirements to other units of government, utilities, owners of railway right
of way, and others as prescribed by state law and state administrative rules.
      3.   In the event the public hearing on the annexation or severance is
held before the notification requirements have been fulfilled, the public
hearing on the annexation or severance shall be continued until said
notification requirements are fulfilled.
   F.   City Council Review And Decision:
      1.   Following the public hearing, the city council will consider a
resolution approving the proposed annexation or severance. In those instances
when the city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed
annexation that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter until a
discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning and zoning
commission.
      2.   Following approval of a resolution approving annexation of
territory, the city council will consider an ordinance approving a zoning
designation for the annexed territory. In those instances when the city council
has reached an informal consensus on the proposed zoning designation for
property to be annexed that is contrary to the recommendation of the planning
and zoning commission, the city council will defer formal action on the matter
until a discussion has taken place between the city council and the planning
and zoning commission.
   G.   State Review: Following approval of a severance or an annexation and
associated zoning classification by the city council, the necessary
documentation shall be forwarded to the state of Iowa city development board
and to state officials as required by state code and state administrative
rules. The annexation or severance shall be considered final once acknowledged
by the secretary of state, and recorded with the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-2: ANNEXATION OR SEVERANCE - INVOLUNTARY:
   A.   Initiation Of Involuntary Annexation Or Severance: Whenever, after
public hearing thereon, the city council determines that involuntary annexation
or severance proceedings should be undertaken, the matter shall be referred to
the planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendation.
   B.   Staff Review: Staff will prepare a report and recommendation regarding
the proposed involuntary annexation or severance for the planning and zoning
commission based on comprehensive plan policies, the public interest in
annexing or severing said territory, recommendations regarding zoning
designation of areas to be annexed, and other pertinent information. At a
minimum, the report shall contain all of the information required by state code
and state administrative rules.
   C.   Notification Requirements: Staff will notify all affected property
owners, units of government, utilities, owners of railway right of way, and
other parties as required by state code and state administrative rules.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
      1.   Once notification requirements are completed, the staff report and
recommendation for the zoning of annexed territory shall be forwarded to the
planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendation.
      2.   After discussion at a public meeting, the commission will recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the involuntary annexation or
severance. For annexations, the commission will also make a recommendation as
to the zoning of said territory.
   E.   City Council Public Hearing:
      1.   Once the planning and zoning commission has completed their review,
the city council shall set a public hearing on the proposed annexation and
zoning, or severance. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such
hearing must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public
hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next
regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice.
      2.   After the public hearing, the city council will consider a
resolution approving the annexation or severance.
      3.   Following approval of a resolution to annex territory, the city
council will consider an ordinance approving a zoning designation for the
annexed territory.
      4.   In those instances when the city council has reached an informal
consensus on a proposed involuntary severance, annexation, or the proposed
zoning designation for property to be annexed that is contrary to the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will
defer formal action on the matter until a discussion has taken place between
the city council and the planning and zoning commission.
   F.   State Review:
      1.   Following approval of a resolution approving an involuntary
annexation or involuntary severance, all necessary documentation will be
forwarded to state officials and the state of Iowa city development board as
required by state code and state administrative rules. state officials will
then conduct a process as required in state code and state administrative rules
to consider the involuntary annexation or severance request.
      2.   The involuntary annexation or severance request shall be considered
final once approved by state officials, published according to state code
requirements, and once proceedings of the process as required by state code are
filed with the secretary of state, the city clerk, the state department of
transportation, and recorded with the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT:
   A.   Authority:
      1.   The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, amend by resolution the city's comprehensive plan, including any
district plans or other amendments thereto. Any proposed amendment initiated by
the city council shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission
for its recommendation and report.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may from time to time, on its own
motion or on petition, recommend to the city council amendments to the city's
comprehensive plan, including any district plans or other amendments thereto.
   B.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request an
amendment to the city's comprehensive plan is encouraged to meet with staff
from the department of planning and community development. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to discuss basic intentions, review the applicable
comprehensive plan and district plan policies that might affect the intended
request, and ensure that the applicant is familiar with the review and approval
procedures for a comprehensive plan amendment.
   C.   Submittal Requirements: Unless the comprehensive plan amendment is
initiated by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, the
following application submittal procedures must be followed:
      1.   Applications for a comprehensive plan amendment must be filed with
the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning and
community development.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form and must provide evidence that the approval criteria as set
forth in subsection D of this section are met.
      3.   The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of
planning and community development.
   D.   Approval Criteria: Applications for a comprehensive plan amendment must
include evidence that the following approval criteria are met:
      1.   Circumstances have changed and/or additional information or factors
have come to light such that the proposed amendment is in the public interest.
      2.   The proposed amendment will be compatible with other policies or
provisions of the comprehensive plan, including any district plans or other
amendments thereto.
   E.   Staff Review: After receipt of a complete application, the director of
planning and community development or designee will forward a written report
and recommendation to the planning and zoning commission.
   F.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
      1.   After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the
planning and zoning commission will schedule a public hearing. Notice of such
hearing, and the time of place of such hearing will be published in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not more than
twenty (20), days before the public hearing.
      2.   Following the public hearing, the commission will consider a motion
to recommend approval, modification, or denial of the proposed amendment. Not
less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend approval of an
amendment to the comprehensive plan.
      3.   The commission will forward their report and recommendation to the
city council for their review.
   G.   City Council Public Hearing:
      1.   After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning
commission have been filed, the city council shall, before enacting any
amendment to the city's comprehensive plan, hold a public hearing in relation
thereto. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be
published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least
seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no
case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled
city council meeting following the published notice. The city council may set
such public hearing either before or after it submits the proposed amendment to
the commission for its recommendation or during the period while the commission
is considering such matter.
      2.   Following the public hearing, the city council will consider a
resolution implementing the proposed comprehensive plan amendment. Any proposal
for an amendment to the comprehensive plan that is counter to the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the city
council. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-4: DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY (ODR) REZONING:
   A.   Initiation:
      1.   The city council may, on its own motion or on petition, designate by
ordinance areas of the city as design review districts. Any proposed design
review district initiated by the city council shall first be submitted to the
planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or on
petition, recommend to the city council areas of the city for designation as a
design review district.
   B.   District Report: Once the proposal for a design review district is
initiated by the city council or the planning and zoning commission, the
commission will direct city staff to prepare a district report. The district
report will include background information and recommendations regarding the
proposed district, including the following:
      1.   A map defining the boundaries of the proposed district; and
      2.   A study of the characteristics of the proposed district, including
zoning and existing land use, elements of the streetscape, property ownership
patterns, and the architectural characteristics, physical condition, and age of
buildings in the proposed district; and
      3.   A list of any proposed design guidelines for the district.
   C.   Approval Procedure: The process of designating an area as a design
review district is considered a design review overlay rezoning and must
therefore follow the procedures for a zoning map amendment (rezoning) as
specified in section
14-8D-5 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-5: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS) AND ZONING CODE TEXT AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Initiation:
      1.   The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, amend by ordinance the boundaries of zoning districts or the
regulations or restrictions of this title. Any proposed amendment initiated by
the city council shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission
for its recommendation and report.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may, from time to time, on its
own motion or on petition, recommend to the city council amendments to this
title or to the boundaries of zoning districts or to the zoning of particular
tracts.
   B.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request a
zoning map amendment or zoning code text amendment is encouraged to meet with
staff from the department of planning and community development to discuss
basic intentions before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to review the existing zoning, discuss the purpose
for the requested amendment, review applicable comprehensive plan and district
plan policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the
applicant is familiar with the review and approval procedures for a zoning map
or zoning code text amendment.
   C.   Submittal Requirements: Unless the zoning map or zoning code text
amendment is initiated by the planning and zoning commission or the city
council, the following application submittal procedures must be followed:
      1.   Applications for a zoning map or zoning code text amendment must be
filed with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of
planning and community development.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form and must include a statement from the applicant explaining the
reasons and justification for the requested amendment.
      3.   The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of
planning and community development.
   D.   Staff Review: After receipt of a complete application, the director of
planning and community development or designee will forward a written report
and recommendation to the planning and zoning commission.
   E.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
      1.   After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the
planning and zoning commission will schedule one or more public meetings to
receive public comment regarding the proposed request. The commission will then
make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the
city council.
      2.   If the planning and zoning commission makes no report within forty
five (45) days from the date a complete application was received, it shall be
considered to have made a report approving the proposed amendment.
      3.   Not less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend approval
of an amendment to this title or to the boundaries of zoning districts or to
the zoning of a particular parcel of land.
   F.   City Council Public Hearing:
      1.   After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning
commission have been filed, the city council shall, before enacting any
proposed amendment, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of such
hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not
more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the
public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting following the published notice. The city council may set such public
hearing either before or after it submits the proposed amendment to the
commission for its recommendation or during the period while the commission is
considering such matter.
      2.   Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an
ordinance implementing the proposed zoning map amendment or zoning code text
amendment. In those instances when the city council has reached an informal
consensus on a proposed zoning map amendment or zoning code text amendment that
is contrary to the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the
city council will defer formal action on the matter until a discussion has
taken place between the city council and the planning and zoning commission. In
such instances, if the planning and zoning commission declines the city
council's offer to meet, formal action on the matter may commence forthwith.
   G.   Protests: If a protest against such amendment is presented in writing
to the city clerk, duly signed and notarized by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the area of the lots included within the area for which the
amendment is proposed or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the
property which is located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior
boundaries of the area for which the amendment is proposed, such amendment
shall require the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the
city council for passage.
   H.   Effect On Development Activity:
      1.   Regulated Development Activity: When a proposed text or map
amendment to this title would prohibit or be counter to a use, building,
structure, portion of a building or structure, attachment to a building or
structure, demolition of a building or structure or portion thereof, or any
other type of development activity for which a permit or license is currently
required, the setting of a city council public hearing on the amendment shall
suspend the following for sixty (60) days:
         a.   Issuance of a permit or license for the establishment,
conversion, or enlargement of any use that would be counter to or prohibited by
the existing code or by the proposed amendment; and
         b.   Issuance of a permit or license for any land clearing, grading,
construction, demolition, or other development activity that would be counter
to or prohibited by the existing code or by the proposed amendment; and
         c.   Any issued permit or license for the establishment, conversion,
or enlargement of any use, or for any land clearing, grading, construction,
demolition, or other development activity that would be counter to or
prohibited by the proposed amendment, if no substantial part of the permitted
or licensed use or development activity has begun.
      2.   Currently Unregulated Development Activity: When a proposed text or
map amendment to this title would prohibit or regulate a use, building,
structure, portion of a building or structure, attachment to a building or
structure, demolition of a building or structure or portion thereof, or any
other type of development activity for which a permit is not currently
required, the official publication of a notice of public hearing on the
proposed amendment shall suspend for sixty (60) days the establishment,
conversion or enlargement of any use, or commencement of any land clearing,
grading, construction, demolition, or other development activity that would be
counter to or prohibited by the proposed amendment, provided no substantial
portion of the previously unregulated development activity has begun.
      3.   Subsequent To City Council Action:
         a.   If, within the sixty (60) day period, the city council enacts the
proposed amendment, this title, as amended, shall apply. Any permit or license
for a use or development activity counter to or prohibited by such amendment
shall not be issued, or if already issued, shall be revoked, provided no
substantial part of the permitted development activity has begun. Any required
permit or license for a previously unregulated use or development activity must
be obtained prior to continuation.
         b.   If, at any time in the sixty (60) day period, the city council
rejects the proposed amendment or if, by the end of the sixty (60) day period,
has not enacted or has rejected the proposed amendment, the suspension shall be
terminated. Review of any suspended applications for a permit under the current
title shall resume, uses or development activity may proceed under permits or
licenses that have already been issued, and unregulated uses or development
activity may proceed.
         c.   No already issued permit or license may be suspended under this
subsection more than once, nor shall any property be subject to suspension
under this subsection within twelve (12) months of a previous suspension
applied to the same property under the same proposed amendment. Said twelve
(12) month period will commence from the final day of the sixty (60) day
suspension period. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-6: LEVEL II SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW:
A level II sensitive areas review and its associated sensitive areas
development plan is considered a type of planned development and as such, will
be reviewed according to the approval procedures for a planned development
overlay rezoning as set forth in section
14-8D-7 of this article. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-7: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (OPD) REZONING:
   A.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to request an
OPD rezoning is encouraged to meet with staff from the department of planning
and community development to discuss basic intentions before investing time in
detailed plans. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to review the
existing zoning, discuss the purpose for the requested planned development,
review applicable comprehensive plan policies, including any district plan
policies that might affect the intended request, and ensure that the applicant
is familiar with the review and approval procedures for a planned development
overlay rezoning.
   B.   Submittal Requirements: Applications for an OPD rezoning must be filed
with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning
and community development.
      1.   Preliminary Approval:
         a.   Supporting materials for preliminary approval of a planned
development overlay rezoning must be submitted as specified on the application
form and must include a preliminary OPD plan, a statement from the applicant
listing the category or categories of planned development applied for, a list
of all requested variations from the underlying zoning requirements or from
city street standards, and a proposed time schedule for the completion of
various phases of the development. The preliminary OPD plan may show a range of
dimensions and need not have the specificity of the final plan.
         b.   A preliminary OPD plan for developments containing regulated
sensitive features must be entitled "Preliminary Sensitive Areas Development
Plan". Such sensitive areas development plans, in addition to illustrating all
the applicable elements for a planned development, must delineate all regulated
sensitive areas and associated buffers according to the applicable regulations
contained in
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title and must
delineate construction area limits and list all proposed restrictions for
current or future development activity within protected sensitive areas.
      2.   Final Approval:
         a.   Supporting materials for the final OPD plan must be submitted as
specified on the application form.
         b.   If the application is for a final sensitive areas development
plan, the plan must establish restrictions for current or future development
activity within protected sensitive areas. Any such restrictions must be set
forth in the legal papers approved as part of the final plan.
   C.   Approval Procedures For Planned Development Overlay Rezoning: Approval
of a planned development overlay rezoning shall be by ordinance in accordance
with the following procedures. Approval of a rezoning to OPD shall constitute
approval of the preliminary OPD plan or, if applicable, the preliminary
sensitive areas development plan.
      1.   Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, staff from the
department of planning and community development will review the application
for compliance with the applicable approval criteria as set forth in
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title.
Staff will forward a report and recommendation to the planning and zoning
commission for their consideration.
      2.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
         a.   After receipt of a report and recommendation from city staff, the
planning and zoning commission will schedule one or more public meetings to
receive public comment regarding the application. The commission will then make
a written report of its findings to the city council with a recommendation for
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the planned development
overlay rezoning. The report shall include findings with regard to the
applicable approval criteria as set forth in
chapter 3, article A, "Planned Development Overlay Zone (OPD)", of this title.
If the planning and zoning commission makes no report within forty five (45)
days from the date a complete application was received, it shall be considered
to have made a report approving the proposed planned development overlay
rezoning.
         b.   Not less than four (4) votes shall be required to recommend
approval of a planned development overlay rezoning.
      3.   City Council Hearing:
         a.   After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning
commission have been filed, the city council shall, before approving any
planned development overlay rezoning, hold a public hearing in relation
thereto. Notice of such public hearing, and the time and place of such hearing,
must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at
least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing.
In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly
scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The city council
may set such public hearing either before or after it submits the proposed
planned development overlay to the commission for its recommendation or during
the period while the commission is considering such matter.
         b.   Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an
ordinance approving the proposed planned development overlay rezoning. In those
instances when the city council has reached an informal consensus on a proposed
planned development overlay rezoning that is contrary to the recommendation of
the planning and zoning commission, the city council will defer formal action
on the matter until a discussion has taken place between the city council and
the planning and zoning commission. In such instances, if the planning and
zoning commission declines the city council's offer to meet, formal action on
the matter may commence forthwith.
      4.   Lapse Of Approval: A preliminary OPD plan or preliminary sensitive
areas development plan shall be valid for no more than twenty four (24) months
unless otherwise specified in the ordinance approving the OPD overlay zone. If
no building permit has been issued for the development within the twenty four
(24) month period, the area of land to which the OPD ordinance applies may be
considered by the city for rezoning.
      5.   Protests And Effect On Development Activity: Since a planned
development overlay rezoning is a type of zoning map amendment (rezoning), a
planned development overlay rezoning is subject to the same provisions for
protest and effect on development activity as for a zoning map amendment as set
forth in subsections
14-8D-5G and H of this article.
   D.   Final OPD Plan Approval:
      1.   Administrative Review And Approval:
         a.   Approval of a final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development
plan shall be by administrative review. Approval shall be based on compliance
with an approved preliminary OPD plan or preliminary sensitive areas
development plan. Such plan may be submitted concurrently with an application
for site plan review or subdivision review.
         b.   Requests for minor changes from the approved preliminary OPD or
sensitive areas development plan that do not constitute substantive changes, as
described in subsection E of this section, may be approved administratively
without further city council action.
         c.   Appropriate legal papers must be submitted and approved prior to
approval of the final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan.
         d.   A final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan of
only a portion of the area rezoned to OPD may be approved if:
            (1)   The plan of such subarea meets all requirements of a final
OPD plan; and
            (2)   The final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development plan
for the subarea complies with the approved preliminary plan; and
            (3)   The dwelling unit density in the subarea does not exceed the
dwelling unit density approved under the preliminary plan for the specific area
under review; and
            (4)   The subarea can function as an independent development with
adequate vehicular and pedestrian access, services, utilities, open space,
etc.; and
            (5)   The developer dedicates all public right of way necessary to
support the subarea.
      2.   Issuance Of Permits:
         a.   The approved final OPD plan or final sensitive areas development
plan for the entire development and/or any subareas shall be filed in the
department of housing and inspection services, and permits will be issued only
for structures and development activity conforming to the approved final OPD
plan or final sensitive areas development plan, whichever is applicable.
         b.   Requests for minor changes to a final OPD or final sensitive
areas development plan that do not constitute substantive changes, as described
in subsection E of this section, may be approved administratively without
further city council action.
         c.   If the underlying base zone is residential and commercial uses
are approved as a part of the planned development, no building permit for a
commercial use shall be issued until a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of
the housing units planned for the area or approved subarea have been completed,
or unless twenty five percent (25%) of the housing units planned for the area
or approved subarea will be built simultaneously.
   E.   Amending Approved OPD Plans Or Sensitive Areas Development Plans:
Requests for substantive changes to an approved preliminary or final OPD or
sensitive areas development plan may not be approved administratively, but must
be submitted as an amendment to such a plan and will be reviewed according to
the procedures for approval of a planned development overlay rezoning, as
specified in this section. A substantive change is any significant change in
the land uses, street locations, or character of the development from what is
shown on the approved OPD plan or sensitive areas development plan or any
variation from the underlying zoning requirements or street standards beyond
the ranges approved on the preliminary OPD plan or preliminary sensitive areas
development plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8D-8: VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Optional Preapplication Conference: Any person intending to apply for a
vacation of public right of way is encouraged to meet with staff from the
department of planning and community development to discuss basic intentions
before investing time in detailed plans. The purpose of the preapplication
conference is to review the proposed vacation and ensure that the applicant is
familiar with the review and approval procedures for a vacation of public right
of way.
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   An application for a vacation of public right of way must be filed
with the city clerk on application forms provided by the department of planning
and community development.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form.
      3.   The city clerk shall forward said application to the department of
planning and community development.
   C.   Staff Review:
      1.   The director of planning or designee will review the application
with regard to the following factors:
         a.   Impact on pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation.
         b.   Impact on emergency and utility vehicle access and circulation.
         c.   Impact on access of adjacent private properties.
         d.   Desirability of right of way for access or circulation needs.
         e.   Location of utilities and other easements or restrictions on the
property.
         f.   Any other relevant factors pertaining to the specific requested
vacation.
      2.   Once information regarding utilities, adjacent property owners, and
access issues has been collected and reviewed, the director of planning or
designee will forward a written report and recommendation to the planning and
zoning commission regarding the requested vacation.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review: After receipt of a report and
recommendation from staff, the planning and zoning commission will schedule one
or more public meetings to receive public comment regarding the proposed
vacation request. The commission will consider the evidence presented in the
application, in the staff report, and at the public discussion(s) and make a
recommendation for approval or disapproval to the city council.
   E.   Purchase Offer: Unless the vacated right of way is to remain public
property, the applicant must make a purchase offer for the area proposed to be
vacated. The purchase offer should reflect the applicant's estimate of fair
market value of the property. The estimate of the value of the property to be
vacated should be based on the assessed and/or appraised value of adjacent or
similar properties. Once a written purchase offer for the property is received,
a public hearing before the city council will be scheduled.
   F.   Public Hearing On Vacation And Disposition:
      1.   After the recommendation and report of the planning and zoning
commission have been filed, and a written purchase offer has been received from
the applicant, the city council will hold a public hearing on an ordinance to
vacate the subject right of way and on a resolution to dispose of the property
to the applicant. Notice of such hearing, and the time and place of such
hearing must be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
city at least seven (7), but not more than twenty (20), days before the public
hearing. In no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next
regularly scheduled city council meeting following the published notice. The
city council may set such public hearing before, after, or during the period
when the planning and zoning commission is considering such matter.
      2.   If the city council approves the ordinance and resolution to vacate
and dispose of the property, the office of the city attorney will complete the
necessary documents to deed the property to the applicant and complete the
transaction. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-8E-1: Designation Of Historic Districts, Conservation Districts And Local
Historic Landmarks
14-8E-2: Historic Review
14-8E-3: Certificate Of Economic Hardship
14-8E-1: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS, CONSERVATION DISTRICTS AND LOCAL
HISTORIC LANDMARKS:
   A.   Initiation:
      1.   The city council may, on its own motion or on petition, designate by
ordinance areas of the city as historic or conservation districts or may
designate by ordinance local historic landmarks. Any proposed historic landmark
or historic or conservation district initiated by the city council must first
be submitted to the historic preservation commission for its recommendation and
report. Designating a historic district, conservation district, or local
historic landmark is considered an overlay rezoning, and as such, must also,
subsequent to consideration by the historic preservation commission, be
submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and
report regarding the rezoning.
      2.   The historic preservation commission may, on its own motion or on
petition, recommend to the city council areas of the city for designation as
historic or conservation districts or properties for designation as local
historic landmarks. Designating a historic district, conservation district, or
local historic landmark is considered an overlay rezoning, and as such, must
also be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation
and report regarding the rezoning.
   B.   Historic Landmark Applications:
      1.   Applications for a historic landmark designation must be filed in
the department of planning and community development on application forms
provided by the city. Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on
the application form.
      2.   If the property has been registered on the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP), the NRHP registration form must accompany the
application.
   C.   Historic Preservation Commission Public Hearing:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for historic landmark designation or
following initiation of a proposal to designate a historic or conservation
district, the historic preservation commission will hold a public hearing on
the proposal.
      2.   The historic preservation commission will give notice of the time,
date, place and subject matter of such public hearing. Such notice shall be
sent by ordinary mail, not less than seven (7) days before the date the hearing
is held, to the owner of record of each property or property interest at the
owner’s last known address as shown in the records of the Iowa City Assessor,
not more than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of mailing. A change in
ownership of any such property which is not reflected in the records of the
Iowa City Assessor during the period those records are searched as above
provided shall not affect the validity of the notice. An affidavit of mailing
will be filed with the city clerk setting forth the date that notice was mailed
and the names and addresses of all property owners notified pursuant to this
subsection.
      3.   Following the public hearing, the historic preservation commission
will consider a motion recommending approval of the proposed district or
historic landmark.
      4.   Upon approval of the motion, the historic preservation commission
will submit an application to rezone the proposed area to historic district
overlay or conservation district overlay, whichever is applicable. For
properties proposed as local historic landmarks, an application for a historic
district overlay rezoning must be submitted.
   D.   State Historic Preservation Office Review: Following the public hearing
before the historic preservation commission, any proposal regarding a local
historic district will be submitted to the state historic preservation office
(SHPO) for review and recommendations. The city will make any recommendations
made by the state historic preservation office available to the public for
viewing during normal business hours at a city government place of public
access. Any proposals regarding conservation districts and/or local historic
landmarks need not be submitted to SHPO.
   E.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
      1.   After receipt of the rezoning application and the report and
recommendation of the historic preservation commission, the planning and zoning
commission will schedule one or more public meetings to receive public comment
regarding the proposed district.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission will review the proposed overlay
rezoning based on its relation to the comprehensive plan, as amended, to the
provisions of this title, and to any proposed public improvements and other
plans for the renewal of the area involved. The planning and zoning commission
will recommend approval, denial, or modification of the proposed historic
district or conservation district overlay zone.
      3.   If the planning and zoning commission makes no report to the city
council within forty five (45) days from the date the rezoning application was
received, it shall be considered to have made a report approving the proposed
rezoning.
      4.   A two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the commission present at
the meeting, but not less than four (4) votes, shall be required in
consideration of such a rezoning.
      5.   If the planning and zoning commission alters the area of the
proposed district as approved by the historic preservation commission, the
planning and zoning commission must submit a description of the altered
proposed area or the petition describing the area to the state historic
preservation office where required and the historic preservation commission for
review and recommendations concerning the altered proposed district.
   F.   City Council Public Hearing:
      1.   After receiving the report and recommendation of the historic
preservation commission and the planning and zoning commission regarding the
proposed historic district or conservation district overlay zone, the city
council shall, before enacting any proposed historic district or conservation
district overlay zone, hold a public hearing in relation thereto. Notice of
such hearing, and the time and place of such hearing must be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least seven (7), but not
more than twenty (20), days before the public hearing. In no case shall the
public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting following the published notice. The city council may set such public
hearing either before or after the proposed rezoning is submitted to the
planning and zoning commission for its recommendation or during the period
while the planning and zoning commission is considering such matter.
      2.   Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider an
ordinance implementing the proposed historic district or conservation district
overlay zone. The city council may approve or deny the ordinance or may refer
the overlay zoning to the historic preservation commission for modification.
Comments from the state historic preservation office must be received by the
city council prior to approval, denial, or modification of the proposed
rezoning.
      3.   If the city council refers the overlay zoning back to the historic
preservation commission for modification, the commission will follow the
procedures as set forth in this subsection and subsections C, D and E of this
section, with the following exceptions:
         a.   Unless substantial modifications are proposed, the public hearing
before the historic preservation commission may be waived.
         b.   Only property owners affected by the city council's proposed
modification shall be notified by mail of the modification prior to action by
the historic preservation commission.
   G.   Protests And Effect On Development Activity: Since a historic district
or conservation district overlay rezoning is a type of zoning map amendment
(rezoning), such an overlay rezoning is subject to the same provisions for
protest and effect on development activity as for a zoning map amendment as set
forth in subsections
 14-8D-5G and H of this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 22-4884, 8-
2-2022)
14-8E-2: HISTORIC REVIEW:
   A.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Applications for historic review must be filed with the department
of planning and community development on application forms provided by the
city.
      2.   Supporting materials must be submitted as specified on the
application form. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   B.   Levels Of Historic Review:
      1.   Minor Review:
         a.   A minor review will be conducted if the change proposed in the
application is of a type specifically defined and listed as eligible for minor
review in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as amended.
         b.   Applications for minor review will be reviewed by a designated
commission member or designated staff to the commission. Applications will be
approved upon finding that the proposed change to the property will have no
material effect on the historic character of the property or the historic or
conservation district. Decisions may be appealed to and reviewed by the
historic preservation commission, if so requested by the applicant. If there is
evidence that the proposed change may have a material effect on the historic
character of the property or historic or conservation district, the application
for minor review will be deferred and will be forwarded for major review by the
historic preservation commission.
         c.   A written report of the minor reviews processed shall be made to
the commission at the next scheduled commission meeting.
      2.   Intermediate Review:
         a.   An intermediate review will be conducted if the change proposed
in the application is of a type specifically defined and listed as eligible for
intermediate review in the "Iowa City Historic Preservation Handbook", as
amended.
         b.   Applications for intermediate review will be reviewed jointly by
the designated commission staff and the historic preservation commission chair
or the chair's designee. Decisions may be appealed to the historic preservation
commission, if so requested by the applicant. If the designated commission
staff or the historic preservation commission chair determines that an
application warrants review by the full commission, said application will be
forwarded for major review.
         c.   A written report of the intermediate reviews processed shall be
made to the commission at the next scheduled commission meeting.
      3.   Major Review:
         a.   A major review will be conducted for applications that meet one
or more of the following criteria:
            (1)   The application is for a specific change that does not
qualify for minor or intermediate review; or
            (2)   The application is for minor or intermediate review and has
been recommended for major review by the designated commission staff or the
historic preservation commission chair; or
            (3)   An appeal of a decision regarding a minor or intermediate
review.
         b.   Major reviews will be conducted by the historic preservation
commission. Applications that are denied may be appealed to the city council if
the property is a historic landmark or a property located within a historic
district; or appealed to the board of adjustment if the property is located
within a conservation district. (Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010)
   C.   Approval Procedure: Applications for historic review will be reviewed
for compliance with the applicable approval criteria for historic review as set
forth in
chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of
this title. Historic review will result in one of the following outcomes:
      1.   If the proposed material change to the property will have no effect
on any architecturally significant feature, or there will be no change in
appearance to a landmark or property located within a historic or conservation
district, a certificate of no material effect will be issued, signed by the
chair of the historic preservation commission or designee and be transmitted
along with the application to the building official and the city clerk.
      2.   If the application is approved or approved with modifications
acceptable to the applicant, a certificate of appropriateness will be issued,
signed by the chairperson or designee and be transmitted along with the
application to the building official and the city clerk.
      3.   If the application is disapproved, the commission will issue a
written decision setting forth the factual basis for the decision and the vote
of each member participating therein. The decision will be issued, signed by
the chairperson or designee, and be transmitted along with the application to
the building official and the city clerk.
   D.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission
regarding an application for historic review in a historic district or for a
historic landmark may appeal the action to the city council. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the commission regarding an application for
historic review in a conservation district may appeal the action to the board
of adjustment. Procedures for such appeals are as follows:
      1.   Any appeal submitted by the applicant must be in writing and must be
filed with the city clerk no later than ten (10) business days after the filing
of the above mentioned decision. An appeal submitted by an aggrieved party,
other than the applicant, must be in writing and must be filed with the city
clerk no later than ten (10) business days after construction work pursuant to
an approved certificate of appropriateness, certificate of no material effect,
or certificate of economic hardship is observable from adjacent properties or
the public right of way or ten (10) business days after an alleged violation of
this article is similarly observable.
      2.   The city council or board of adjustment, as applicable, shall,
within a reasonable time, hold a public hearing on the appeal, give the public
notice as required by state law, as well as provide written notice to the
applicant and to the appellant, if different from the applicant, and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time.
      3.   In deciding such appeal, the city council or the board of
adjustment, as applicable, shall consider whether the commission has exercised
its powers and followed the guidelines established according to this title, and
whether the commission's action was patently arbitrary or capricious.
      4.   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the city council or the
board of adjustment, as applicable, may, in conformity with the provisions of
this article or ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, affirm, or upon finding
error, reverse or modify, wholly or partly, the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all the powers
of the historic preservation commission. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
14-8E-3: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
   A.   Initiation Of Review: After receiving written notification from the
commission of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness, the owner of
record may apply for a certificate of economic hardship. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-
2005)
   B.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Applications for a certificate of economic hardship must be filed
with the department of planning and community development.
      2.   The application shall consist of a letter and supporting materials
that provide evidence of the approval criteria for a certificate of economic
hardship as set forth in
chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of
this title are met.
      3.   The owner must, in good faith, consult with the historic
preservation commission, local preservation groups and interested parties in a
diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the
property. Documentation of such effort must be presented to the commission.
(Ord. 10-4404, 9-7-2010)
   C.   Approval Procedures:
      1.   The historic preservation commission will hold a public hearing on
the application for the certificate of economic hardship within sixty (60) days
following receipt of a complete application and all information requested by
the commission.
      2.   The public hearing will result either in approval or denial of the
application for a certificate of economic hardship. The commission will issue a
written decision setting forth the factual basis for the decision and vote of
each member participating therein. The written decision will be issued, signed
by the chairperson or designee, and be transmitted along with the application
to the building official and the city clerk. If the commission finds that
unreasonable economic hardship exists, a certificate of economic hardship will
be issued, specifying the material changes that are authorized thereto.
      3.   For the purpose of developing alternative solutions to the economic
hardship, the historic preservation commission may consult with professional
architects, engineers, contractors, realtors, appraisers or other consultants
that have expertise in the rehabilitation, repair, maintenance and value of
historic properties. If the commission chooses to use said consultation, the
commission may delay issuing any certificate for a period of ninety (90) days.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
CHAPTER 9
DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9A-1: Definitions
14-9A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except when alternate definitions apply as specified in articles B through F of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms used in this
title. Descriptions and definitions of land use categories are set forth in
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title; although, where it is
deemed necessary for clarification, more specific definitions of certain land
use category subgroups and specific land uses are defined in this section.
14-9A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except when alternate definitions apply as specified in articles B through F of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms used in this
title. Descriptions and definitions of land use categories are set forth in
chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title; although, where it is
deemed necessary for clarification, more specific definitions of certain land
use category subgroups and specific land uses are defined in this section.
ABUT/ABUTTING: Contiguous; having a common boundary, wall, or property line.
ACCESS:        The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles have ingress and egress
               to a property or parking area.
               A building, structure, or use which:
               A.   Is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to the
               comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees of the
               principal use; and
ACCESSORY      B.   Is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the property;
BUILDING/USE/  and
STRUCTURE:     C.   Does not include structures, structural features, or activities inconsistent
               with the uses to which they are accessory; and
               D.   Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved through
               a special exception, is located on the same lot as the principal use or uses to
               which it is accessory.
ACCESSORY      An accessory dwelling unit located within an owner occupied, single-family or
DWELLING UNIT  duplex use or in an accessory building and meeting the requirements of this
(ADU):         title.
ADDITION:      An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADULT:         A person that is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
ADULT BUSINESS See "adult business use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
USE:           of this title.
               An organized program of short term supportive daycare in a group environment for
               adults who need supervision, assistance or both. Services may include, but shall
ADULT DAYCARE: not be limited to, nursing and rehabilitative services, personal care,
               transportation services, social or recreational activities and preventative or
               restorative services. See "daycare uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
               "Use Categories", of this title.
AGRICULTURE    See "agricultural uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
USE:           this title.
               A permanent, durable surface connected directly to a parking or loading space and
AISLE:         designed to permit ingress or egress of a vehicle. An "aisle" is not the same as
               a drive. (See definition of drive/driveway.)
ALCOHOL SALES  See "retail uses" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
ORIENTED       title.
RETAIL USE:
ALLEY:         An open public way intended for use as a means of vehicular access to abutting
               property.
ALTER/         A structural alteration, enlargement or remodeling of a building or the moving of
ALTERATION:    a building from one location to another.
ANIMAL         A nonresidential facility offering care for domestic animals during daytime
DAYCARE:       hours, not during overnight hours.
ANIMAL RELATED See "animal related commercial use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
COMMERCIAL     Categories", of this title.
USE:
APARTMENT      See "household living, multi-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
HOUSE:         "Use Categories", of this title.
ARCADE:        A continuous, covered passageway parallel to and open to a street, private or
               public open space, or building, and typically accessible and open to the public.
               Exterior building elements intended to provide ornamentation to the building
ARCHITECTURAL  massing, including, but not limited to: awnings, balconies, bay windows, belt
FEATURES:      courses, canopies, chimneys, cornices, eaves, light fixtures, and window and door
               surrounds.
ARCHITECTURAL  Exterior finish(es) applied to a building facade and intended for ornamentation
TREATMENT:     or to reduce the visual size and scale of a building.
ARTERIAL       See definition of street, arterial.
STREET:
ARTISANAL
INDUSTRIAL     A business that makes food and/or products by hand.
BUSINESS:
ASSESSED       The value of real property as established by the City Assessor. It is the value
VALUE:         upon which the next fiscal year's Real Estate Taxes are based.
AVIATION       See "aviation related uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
RELATED USE:   Categories", of this title.
               A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a building,
BALCONY:       enclosed by a railing, accessible from above grade and not attached to the
               ground.
               A portion of a building located partially underground but having three and one-
BASEMENT:      half feet (3.5') or more of its floor to ceiling height above grade. A "basement"
               is counted as a story for the purpose of height and setback regulations.
BASIC          See "basic utility uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
UTILITIES:     of this title.
BAY WINDOW:    A window that projects from the building fascade or elevation that begins on the
               ground floor and can extend to upper floors.
BED AND        An accessory use in conjunction with any residential use in which bedrooms are
BREAKFAST:     provided to guests who stay for periods not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive
               days.
BLOCK FACE:    The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block.
               The horizontal distance measured from one end of the block to the other end along
BLOCK LENGTH:  the same street. Typically measured from one right-of-way to another right-of-
               way.
BLOCK          The aggregate of all sides of a block measured along the adjacent streets.
PERIMETER:
BLOCK SCALE,   A building that is individually as large as a block or individual buildings
BUILDING:      collectively arranged along a street to form a continuous facade running the
               length of most or all of a block.
               A quasi-judicial board, the creation of which is authorized by the Code of Iowa,
BOARD OF       as amended. The "Board of Adjustment" is authorized to grant variances and
ADJUSTMENT:    special exceptions and is authorized to hear appeals of administrative decisions
               of the City Manager or designee in the enforcement of this title or of any
               ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
BUILD:         To construct, assemble, install, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally
               alter a building or structure.
BUILDABLE      The area remaining on a lot after the minimum open space requirement for setbacks
AREA:          has been met.
               Any structure with a roof and designed or intended to support, enclose, shelter
BUILDING:      or protect persons, animals or property. Solar energy systems are not considered
               buildings.
               Sometimes referred to as building footprint. The area of a building within its
BUILDING AREA: largest outside dimensions, computed on a horizontal plane at the first floor
               level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces and exterior stairways.
BUILDING       The amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by building area, usually
COVERAGE:      measured in terms of lot percentage.
BUILDING,      A building that is not connected to another building.
DETACHED:
BUILDING       The exterior wall of a building adjacent to a street, the front or side along a
FACADE:        private street, or civic space.
BUILDING FORM: The overall shape and dimensions of a building.
BUILDING       The length of the design site line of any one premises parallel to and along each
FRONTAGE:      street and/or open space which it borders.
               1. General: The vertical distance from grade to the roofline. (See definitions of
               grade and roofline.)
               2. In Form-Based Zones subject to Article 14-2H: The vertical distance between
               the point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk
BUILDING       within the area between the building and the streetside property line(s), or when
HEIGHT:        the streetside property line is more than five feet (5') from the building,
               between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building, and the
               roofline. (See definition of ROOFLINE.) Grade shall be calculated measuring the
               level of the surface of the ground at least every twenty feet (20') along the
               entire frontage of the property.
BUILDING LINE: The front setback line as specified for principal buildings.
BUILDING       The city employee designated to enforce this title.
OFFICIAL:
               Official certification that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions
BUILDING       of this title and other applicable ordinances. A "building permit" is required
PERMIT:        for new construction, demolition, and for alterations or additions to existing
               structures, prior to commencement of construction or demolition. (See title 17,
               "Building And Housing", of this code.)
BUILDING TYPE: A structure defined by its combination of configuration, disposition and
               function.
CARSHARE       A parking space dedicated for use by a carshare service.
PARKING SPACE:
CARSHARE       A service that provides a network of motor vehicles available to rent by members
SERVICE:       by reservation on an hourly basis, or in smaller intervals.
CEILING        The height from finished floor to finished ceiling of primary rooms on the floor
HEIGHT, UPPER  (s) above the ground floor, not including secondary rooms including, but not
FLOOR(S):      limited to: bathrooms, closets, utility rooms, and storage spaces.
               A portion of a building located partially or wholly underground and having less
CELLAR:        than three and one-half feet (3.5') of its floor to ceiling height above grade. A
               "cellar" is not counted as a story for the purpose of height and setback
               regulations.
               Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of this title and
CERTIFICATE OF other applicable ordinances and may be used or occupied. A "certificate of
OCCUPANCY:     occupancy" is granted upon completion of new construction or completion of
               alterations or additions to existing structures.
CHAMFERED      An external wall of a building joining two (2) perpendicular exterior walls,
CORNER:        typically at a symmetrical, forty-five (45) degree angle creating a beveled edge
               to the building rather than a ninety (90) degree corner.
               A nonresidential daycare use which provides less than twenty four (24) hours'
CHILDCARE      per-day care or supervision for twelve (12) or more children, and is licensed by
CENTER:        the state. (See "daycare", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
               of this title.)
               A daycare use that is accessory to a household living use, which provides less
CHILDCARE      than twenty four (24) hours' per-day care or supervision in a residence for a
HOME:          maximum of sixteen (16) children at any one time. (See "daycare", as defined in
               chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
CITY:          The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
CITY COUNCIL:  The city council of Iowa City, Iowa.
               A term defining not-for-profit organizations that are dedicated to arts, culture,
CIVIL:         education, religious activities, recreation, government, transit, and public
               parking facilities.
CIVIC          A structure operated by governmental or not-for-profit organizations and limited
BUILDING:      to civic and related uses.
CIVIC SPACE:   Open space that is accessible and dedicated for public use. Civic spaces may be
               privately or publicly maintained.
CIVIC SPACE    One of the allowed types in section 14-2H-5 (Civic Space Types Standards) of this
TYPE:          article.
COLLECTOR      See definition of Street, Collector.
STREET:
COLLEGES AND   See "colleges and universities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
UNIVERSITIES:  Categories", of this title.
COMMERCIAL     See "commercial parking uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
PARKING:       Categories", of this title.
COMMERCIAL     See "commercial recreational uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
RECREATIONAL   Categories", of this title.
USE:
COMMUNICATIONS A structure that is intended to support equipment used to transmit or receive
/              telecommunications signals. Examples of such towers include monopoles and lattice
BROADCAST      steel structures. (See "communication transmission facility uses", as defined in
TOWER:         chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
COMMUNICATIONS See "communications transmissions facility uses", as defined in chapter 4,
TRANSMISSION   article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
FACILITY USES:
COMMUNITY      See "community service uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
SERVICE USE:   Categories", of this title.
CONFINEMENT    One or more roofed or partially roofed enclosures intended to confine animals for
FEEDING        feeding and growth prior to slaughter and which are designed to contain liquid or
OPERATIONS:    semiliquid animal waste.
CONSERVATION   See section 14-3B-2, "Conservation District Overlay Zone", of this title for a
DISTRICT:      detailed definition of a "conservation district".
               A retail establishment engaged in selling used merchandise, such as clothing,
               furniture, books, shoes or household appliances, on consignment, or a retail
               establishment engaged in selling donated used merchandise which is operated by an
CONSIGNMENT    organization granted federal tax exemption pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the
STORE:         internal revenue code, as amended. Merchandise is brought to the establishment
               and processed by marking, cleaning, sorting and storing as a major part of the
               principal use. Such stores do not include those selling vehicles, auto parts,
               scrap or waste.
               Any change from one principal use to a principal use in another use category.
               "Conversion" also includes any change from one principal use to another principal
CONVERSION:    use in a different use category subgroup. For example, it is considered a
               "conversion" if the use of a site is changed from a single-family use to a multi-
               family use or if a sales oriented retail use is changed to a repair oriented
               retail use.
CORNER         A physical distinction in a building at the corner of two (2) streets or a street
ELEMENT:       and public space. The physical distinction is from the ground floor through the
               top of the facade.
               A firm that manufactures and/or assembles goods that are intended for retail sale
               to the general public. The goods may also be sold at wholesale to other outlets
COTTAGE        or firms, but retail sales is a significant component of the operation. The
INDUSTRY:      manufacturing component for such a firm is small in scale. Size limitations may
               apply to such uses in commercial zones to keep the uses in scale and character
               with surrounding land uses.
               An unroofed area that is completely or partially enclosed by walls or buildings
COURTYARD:     on at least two (2) sides and often shared by multiple residential units or non-
               residential suites.
               A furnace or establishment for the cremation of corpses. "Crematoriums" for human
               corpses are sometimes established as accessory uses to a cemetery, mortuary,
               funeral home, or hospital; however, if established as a principal use on a
CREMATORIUM/   property, will be considered a personal service oriented retail use for purposes
CREMATORY:     of this title. "Crematoriums" for pets are sometimes established as an accessory
               use to a cemetery, mortuary, funeral home, or veterinary clinic; however, if
               established as a principal use on a property, will be considered a general animal
               related commercial use for purposes of this title.
CUL-DE-SAC:    See definition of Street, Cul-De-Sac.
DAYCARE:       See "daycare uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
               title.
DECK:          A covered or uncovered platform area abutting the wall of a building, accessible
               at or from above grade and attached to the ground.
               An individual, group of individuals, partnership, association, corporation, or
               any other business unit or legal entity, who for a fee accepts a check dated
               subsequent to the date it was written or a check dated on the date it was written
DELAYED        and holds said check for a period of time prior to deposit or presentment
DEPOSIT        pursuant to an agreement with, or any representation made to, the maker of the
SERVICE USE:   check, whether express or implied. For purposes of this title, this definition
               includes only those individuals and entities to which Iowa Code chapter 533D is
               applicable. For the purposes of this title, "check" means a check, draft, share
               draft, or other instrument for the payment of money.
DENSITY,       The number of dwelling units per unit area of land, usually expressed as
GROSS:         "dwelling units per acre".
DEPTH, GROUND- The distance from the street-facing facade to the rear interior wall of the
FLOOR SPACE:   ground-floor space available to an allowed use.
               An area designated by the city council that contains contiguous parcels of real
               property, the built portions of which:
DESIGN REVIEW     A. Are expressive of the defining architectural and other physical and
DISTRICT:      aesthetic properties that give evidence to the physical traditions of Iowa City
               and/or unique features of the area; or
                  B. Lack any defining physical or aesthetic qualities but constitute areas in
               which the city wishes to establish such qualities.
               A portion of land delineated on a preliminary plat and neighborhood plan from
DESIGN SITE:   others to accommodate no more than one (1) primary building type (except as
               allowed by Article 14-2H). A lot may have multiple design sites when each design
               site meets the minimum width and depth required by the zone.
DESIGN SITE    The horizontal distance between the front design site line and rear design site
DEPTH:         line measured perpendicular to the front design site line.
DESIGN SITE    The perimeter and geometry of a parcel of property demarcating one design site
LINE:          from another.
DESIGN SITE    The design site line that abuts a civic space or thoroughfare other than an alley
LINE, FRONT:   and is the narrowest of the design site’s sides.
DESIGN SITE    The horizontal distance between the design site lines measured parallel to the
WIDTH:         front design site line.
DETENTION      See "detention facilities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
FACILITIES:    of this title.
               Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved property, including, but not
DEVELOPMENT/   limited to, placement of manufactured housing, buildings or other structures,
DEVELOPMENT    construction, demolition, clearing, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
ACTIVITY:      excavating or drilling. "Development activity" does not include transfer of
               ownership.
DIRECTOR:      Director of Neighborhood and Development Services, or designee.
               With respect to an individual person, someone who has a physical or mental
DISABILITY/    impairment that limits one or more of such person's major life activities; anyone
HANDICAP:      who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such
               impairment.
               A change in the zoning classification of land to a classification permitting less
DOWNZONING:    intensive or less dense development, such as from a multi-family zone to a
               single-family zone or from a commercial or industrial zone to a residential zone.
DRINKING       See "eating and drinking establishments" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
ESTABLISHMENT: Categories", of this title.
               A permanent, durable surface designed to provide vehicular access from a street
DRIVE/         to a lot or to provide vehicular access between different parts of a lot or
DRIVEWAY:      parking area. A drive that is internal to a parking area is not the same as an
               aisle. (See definition of aisle.)
DWELLING:      A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for residential
               occupancy.
DWELLING,      A single-family use that is not attached to any other dwelling unit. (See
DETACHED       "single-family use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
SINGLE-        this title.)
FAMILY:
DWELLING,      A "two-family use", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
DUPLEX:        title. Or as outlined in sub- section 14-2H-6F (Duplex Side-by-Side) or sub-
               section 14-2H-6G (Duplex Stacked).
DWELLING,      A detached single family dwelling located on a farm and occupied by the household
FARM:          that maintains and operates, owns or leases the farm on which the dwelling is
               located.
DWELLING,      See "multi-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
MULTI- FAMILY: this title.
DWELLING,      See "single-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
SINGLE-FAMILY: of this title.
               Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a
               dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities used or intended to be used by
               one household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating meals. Multiple dwelling
DWELLING UNIT: units exist if there is more than one meter for any utility, more than one
               address to the property, more than one kitchen, and/or if there is a lockable,
               physical separation between rooms within the dwelling unit such that a room or
               rooms on each side of the separation could be used as a dwelling unit.
               A dwelling unit within a multi-family use consisting of one principal room, in
DWELLING UNIT, addition to a bathroom, hallway and closets, which serves as the occupant's
EFFICIENCY:    living room and bedroom. The kitchen may be located in this principal room or may
               be located in a separate room.
               A single-family use with one or more walls located on a side lot line that is not
DWELLING, ZERO a street or alley right-of-way line. Zero lot line dwellings may be attached or
LOT LINE:      detached. (See "single-family uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
               Categories", of this title.)
               A right given by the owner of land to another person or persons for specific
EASEMENT:      limited use of that land, e.g., to allow access to another property or for
               utilities.
EATING         See "eating and drinking establishments" as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
ESTABLISHMENT: Categories", of this title.
EDUCATIONAL    Elementary and secondary schools below university grade (ordinarily grades 1
FACILITIES,    through 12), including denominational and sectarian schools, kindergartens and
GENERAL:       military academies. (See "educational facilities", as defined in chapter 4,
               article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
               Schools primarily engaged in offering specialized trade, business, or commercial
EDUCATIONAL    courses, but not academic training. Also specialized nondegree granting schools,
FACILITIES,    such as music schools, dramatic schools, dance studios, martial arts studios,
SPECIALIZED:   language schools and civil service and other short term examination preparatory
               schools. (See "educational facilities", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
               Categories", of this title.)
ELDER:         A person at least fifty five (55) years old.
ELDER          A multi-family use intended for use and occupancy by elders and persons with
APARTMENT      disabilities.
HOUSING:
               A group household that is managed or owned by a responsible party and offers a
ELDER FAMILY   social living arrangement for at least two (2), but for no more than eight (8),
HOME:          persons living in the residence, the majority of whom are elders, who are
               essentially capable of physical self- care.
               A group household that is the residence of a person who is providing room, board
               and personal care for up to five (5) elders who are not related to the caregiver.
ELDER GROUP    Personal care, in this case, means assistance with the essential activities of
HOME:          daily living which the recipient can perform personally only with difficulty, and
               may include bathing, personal hygiene, dressing, grooming and the supervision of
               self-administered medications, but does not include the administration of
               medications.
ELDERLY        A multi-family use, group household use, or group living use intended for use and
HOUSING:       occupancy by elders and persons with disabilities.
               Any architectural feature, structure, or structural element that breaks the plane
ENCROACHMENT:  of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit extending into a setback, or beyond
               the build-to-line into the public frontage, or above a height limit.
               An increase in the volume of a building, an increase in the area of land or
               building occupied by a use, an increase in the number of bedrooms within a
               dwelling unit or an increase in the number of dwelling units. For nonresidential
               buildings, an increase in the occupancy load of a building is considered an
               enlargement/expansion. For alcohol sales oriented retail uses, any change in the
               type of liquor license that would increase the types of alcohol or alcoholic
ENLARGEMENT/   beverages that can be sold is considered an enlargement/expansion of the use. For
EXPANSION:     group living uses, any alteration that allows an increase in the number of
               residents is considered an enlargement/expansion of the use. For nonconforming
               drinking establishments, neither sidewalk cafes nor any alteration or addition to
               a commercial kitchen that does not result in an increase in the allowable
               occupancy load shall be considered an enlargement/expansion of the use. A door
               connecting a drinking establishment to a sales-oriented retail use in accordance
               with
               14-4E-5G5 shall not be considered an expansion of a drinking establishment.
EXTRACTION     See "extraction uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
USE:           this title.
FACADE:        See BUILDING FACADE.
               The area between the minimum and maximum setback lines along the front of a
FACADE ZONE:   design site and along the side street of a corner design site where a specified
               amount of the building facade is required to be placed.
FAMILY:        One person or a group of persons that meet the definition of “household”.
               A type of group household, such as a residential care facility, a child foster
               care facility, a supervised apartment living arrangement or other small group
               residential arrangement for not more than eight (8) persons with verifiable
               disabilities, as defined by the federal fair housing act, as amended, that are
               occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. Certain types of "family
               care homes" may require a government license or approval and may provide room and
FAMILY CARE    board, personal care, rehabilitation services, and supervision by counselor(s) or
HOME:          a resident family. An individual foster care family home licensed under chapter
               237 of the code of Iowa, as amended, is not considered a "family care home"; such
               a living arrangement would be considered a "family" under this title.
               Alternatives to incarceration, such as halfway houses, where residents of the
               facility are placed by order of the court and are under twenty four (24) hour
               supervision of employees or contractees of the Iowa department of corrections are
               classified under this title as "detention facilities" and not as "family care
               homes".
               An area of not less than ten (10) acres for which the principal use is growing
FARM:          farm products, such as vegetables, fruits and grain, for sale and storing those
               products on the land. The term "farm" includes the necessary accessory uses and
               buildings for treating and storing the food produced.
               A lot, yard, corral or other area where livestock are confined, primarily for the
FEEDLOT:       purposes of feeding and growth prior to slaughter. The term does not include
               areas which are used for raising crops or other vegetation or upon which
               livestock are allowed to graze.
               Height difference between the finished floor on the ground floor and the adjacent
FINISH LEVEL,  sidewalk. In the case of a terrace frontage that serves as the public right-of-
GROUND FLOOR:  way, the floor finish level is the height of the walk above the adjacent street.
               Standards for ground floor finish level for ground floor residential uses do not
               apply to ground floor lobbies and common areas in buildings.
               The total area of all floors of a building, or a portion of a building, measured
               to the outside surface of exterior walls or to the centerline of walls of
               attached buildings or uses. Floor area includes all space within the building,
               including space in the basement or cellar, if such space is used for a principal
FLOOR AREA:    or accessory use. However, floor area does not include the area of porches,
               balconies and other appurtenances. When calculating the floor area of a principal
               dwelling, the area of any attached garage is excluded. Floor area of basements
               and cellars is excluded from the calculation of FAR. (See definition of Floor
               Area Ratio.)
FLOOR AREA     The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or
RATIO (FAR):   buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area of a basement or
               cellar is not included in this calculation.
               Zones listed in Article 14-2H “Form-Based Zones and Standards.” It does not
FORM-BASED     include Article 14-2G “Riverfront Crossings and Eastside Mixed Use Districts Form
ZONES:         Based Development Standards.” Neighborhood Form-Based Zones include the T3NE,
               T3NG, T4NS, and T4NM zones.
               A fraternal group living use used as a residence and as a center for activities
FRATERNITY/    and operations by a chapter of a nonprofit fraternity or sorority recognized by a
SORORITY:      "college" or "university", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
               of this title. This definition does not include a rooming house.
FREE STANDING  A wall that is separate from a building and supported by independent means.
WALL:
FRONT:         See DESIGN SITE LINE, FRONT.
               The distance as measured along a right of way line from one intersecting street
FRONTAGE:      to another, from one intersecting street to the end of a dead end street or from
               one intersecting street to the end of a cul-de-sac.
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2753.png]
FRONTAGE,      The area between the building facade and the back of the sidewalk abutting a
PRIVATE:       street or public open space.
FRONTAGE,      The area between the on-street parking and the back of the sidewalk.
PUBLIC:
FRONTAGE TYPE: Physical element(s) configured to connect the building facade to the back of the
               sidewalk abutting a street or public open space.
               A personal service oriented retail use where the deceased are prepared for
FUNERAL HOME:  burial, funerals are conducted, and which provides for viewing of the deceased.
               Funeral homes may include crematoriums as an accessory use subject to compliance
               with any state or federal regulation.
GABLE:         A vertical wall in the shape of a triangle formed between the cornice or eave and
               the ridge of the roof.
GARAGE,        An accessory building that is used primarily for storing motor vehicles and which
PRIVATE:       is under the control of and used by the occupants of the principal building on
               the site.
GLAZING:       Openings in a building in which glass is installed.
               The average point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or
GRADE          sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the
(Adjacent      property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building
Ground         and a line five feet (5') from the building. When the finished surface of the
Elevation):    ground has been raised by adding fill to create a higher grade around a building,
               the slope of the fill within twenty feet (20') of the building shall not exceed
               four (4) horizontal to one vertical or twenty five percent (25%).
GROSS FLOOR    The total floor area inside the building envelope, including the external walls,
AREA:          but not including the roof.
GROUND FLOOR/  The lowest floor of a building having its floor to ceiling height at or above the
FIRST FLOOR:   grade.
               An assisted group living use that is government licensed or approved and that
               provides services in a residential setting to more than eight (8) individuals,
               not including resident staff. These individuals are persons with one or more
GROUP CARE     disabilities, as defined by the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, who are in
FACILITY:      need of adult supervision and who are provided services in accordance with their
               individual needs. This definition also includes facilities, such as nursing
               homes, that provide residential services and skilled care to convalescents or the
               elderly.
               A "family care home", "elder family home", "parental group home", or "elder group
GROUP          home", as defined in this title, wherein a collective number of individuals live
HOUSEHOLD:     together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, where the
               relationship between the individuals is of a regular and permanent nature and has
               a distinct domestic character, similar to a family.
GROUP LIVING   See "group living uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
USE:           this title. "Group living uses" include assisted group living uses, independent
               group living uses, and fraternal group living uses.
               An individual who shares a dwelling on a temporary basis for not more than thirty
GUEST:         (30) days in any given calendar year; or a person who stays in a hospitality
               oriented retail use.
               A small hospitality oriented retail use containing nine (9) or fewer bedrooms
GUESTHOUSE:    providing lodging for guests, which is licensed as a hotel by the State and
               subject to City inspection and compliance with the Iowa City Housing Code.
HEDGE:         A boundary formed by a row of closely planted shrubs or bushes.
HEIGHT:        See BUILDING HEIGHT.
HISTORIC       See definition of "historic districts" in section 14-3B-1, "Historic District
DISTRICT:      Overlay Zone", of this title.
HISTORIC       See definition of "historic landmark" in section 14-3B-1, "Historic District
LANDMARK:      Overlay Zone", of this title.
HOME           An accessory use consisting of an occupation or profession carried on by a person
OCCUPATION:    residing on the premises.
HOSPITAL:      See "hospitals", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
               title.
HOSPITALITY    See "retail uses, hospitality oriented", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
ORIENTED       Categories", of this title.
RETAIL USE:
               A hospitality oriented retail use that is licensed by the State and occupied and
HOTEL:         used principally as a place of lodging for guests. "Hotels" may or may not
               provide meals and there are usually no cooking facilities in the guestrooms.
HOUSE SCALE,   A building that is the size of a small-to-large house and detached from other
BUILDING:      buildings, typically ranging from twenty-four feet (24') to as large as eighty
               feet (80') overall, including secondary wings.
               An individual or group of individuals that reside within a single family dwelling
               or within a dwelling unit of a two family dwelling or multi-family dwelling as a
HOUSEHOLD:     single housekeeping organization, where the responsibilities and expenses of
               maintaining the household are shared among the members; also a group of
               individuals that meet the definition of a group household, as defined in this
               title.
HOUSEHOLD      See "household living uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
LIVING USE:    Categories", of this title.
INDOOR ANIMAL  An indoor facility used for the exercise, recreation, or training of domestic
RECREATION:    animals.
INDUSTRIAL     See "industrial service uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
SERVICE USE:   Categories", of this title.
KENNEL:        An establishment where small animals are bred, raised, trained, groomed, or
               boarded for compensation, sale or other commercial purposes.
               A unit that combines and accommodates both residential and the place of business
LIVE/WORK:     for the resident(s) of the unit. Typically characterized with having the “work”
               function at the ground level an the “live” function on upper levels.
LIVESTOCK:     Cattle, sheep, swine, poultry and other animals or fowl that are produced
               primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption.
LOADING SPACE, Space logically and conveniently located and designed for bulk pick ups and
OFF STREET:    deliveries and accessible to delivery vehicles from aisles.
LOCAL STREET:  See definition of Street, Local.
LODGING HOUSE: See definition of Rooming House.
LONG TERM CARE See definition of Group Care Facility.
FACILITY:
LOT:           A plot, separate tract or parcel of land with fixed boundaries suitable for
               occupancy by a use.
LOT AREA:      The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any public or private
               street rights of way.
LOT, CORNER:   A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
               The percentage of the lot area covered by certain specified elements of
LOT COVERAGE:  development. There are a number of lot coverage standards within this title,
               including building coverage standards, setback coverage standards, and standards
               related to the amount of land that can be covered by accessory uses.
               The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
LOT DEPTH:     or the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of
               the rear lot line. On a double frontage lot, lot depth is the average horizontal
               distance between the two parallel or approximately parallel front lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE    A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
FRONTAGE:
LOT FRONTAGE:  The continuous width of a lot measured along the street right of way line.
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2755.png]
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot bounded by a street on only one side.
LOT LINE:      A line oriented by stable points of reference which establishes one boundary of a
               lot.
               A lot line separating a lot from the street right of way. On corner lots, the
LOT LINE,      front lot line is the shortest street dimension, unless the lot is square or
FRONT:         almost square, having dimensions at a ratio between three to two (3:2) and three
               to three (3:3). In that case, the front lot line may be along either street. On
               double frontage lots, there are two (2) front lot lines.
               The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a
LOT LINE,      triangular shaped lot, it is an imaginary line within the lot, ten feet (10')
REAR:          long, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line. However, on a double
               frontage lot, there is no rear lot line.
LOT LINE,      Any lot line that is not a street-side lot line, front lot line or rear lot line.
SIDE:
LOT LINE,      Any lot line that separates a lot from a public or private street (not including
STREET- SIDE:  alleys or private rear lanes).
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2757.png]
LOT, REVERSED  A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.
CORNER:
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
               The length of the front setback line. On corner and double frontage lots, the
               "lot width" is measured along the shortest street frontage, unless the lot is
LOT WIDTH:     square or almost square, having dimensions at a ratio between three to two (3:2)
               and three to three (3:3). In that case, the lot width may be measured along
               either street.
MAIN BODY:     The primary massing of a main building.
MAIN ENTRANCE  The primary entrance located on the exterior wall of a building used by residents
(To A          of a dwelling to gain access to their dwelling unit. Such an entrance is
Residential    typically located on a street-facing wall of the dwelling. An entrance to a
Use):          dwelling from a parking garage is not a "main entrance".
MAIN FACADE:   The front facade of a primary building.
               A detached single-family dwelling which is manufactured or constructed under the
               authority of 42 USC section 5403, federal manufactured home construction and
               safety standards, as amended, which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or
MANUFACTURED   other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a
HOME:          permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame
               any wheels or axles. A mobile home constructed to the federal manufactured home
               construction and safety standards, as amended, is not a "manufactured home"
               unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as a site built
               dwelling as provided in the code of Iowa, as amended.
MANUFACTURED   A plot of ground in a manufactured housing park designed to accommodate one
HOUSING LEASE  dwelling unit and which is leased to the owner or tenant of the dwelling unit.
LOT:
MANUFACTURED   A tract of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of
HOUSING PARK:  manufactured homes, mobile homes or modular homes on leased lots.
MANUFACTURING  See "manufacturing and production uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
AND PRODUCTION Categories", of this title.
USE:
MASSING:       The overall shape or arrangement of the bulk or volume of a building.
               A mechanical structure is an accessory use which includes any equipment that is
               powered by electricity, gas, or other similar method. This may include plumbing,
MECHANICAL     electrical, or other similar utility equipment that serves a property. Mechanical
STRUCTURES:    structures may be located on the ground level, attached to a structure, or on the
               rooftop level. Examples include, heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency
               generators, water pumps, Electric Vehicle (EV) charging stations, and solar
               energy systems.
MISSING MIDDLE House-scale buildings with multiple units in walkable neighborhoods.
HOUSING:
MIXED USE      A building that contains a mix of residential dwelling units and commercial or
BUILDING:      institutional uses.
               Any vehicle without motive power used, manufactured or constructed so as to
               permit its conveyance upon the public streets and highways and designed,
               constructed or reconstructed so as to permit its use for year round occupancy as
               a dwelling. The vehicle must contain water supply, waste disposal, heating and
               electrical conveniences. A "mobile home" is factory built housing built on a
               chassis. A "mobile home" shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other
MOBILE HOME:   form of recreational vehicle. A "mobile home" shall be construed to remain a
               "mobile home", subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not
               wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and
               regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. "Mobile homes" are
               classified as detached single-family dwellings if converted to real property and
               taxed as a site built dwelling, as provided in the code of Iowa, as amended, or
               if they are located within a manufactured housing park approved through a planned
               development overlay rezoning process.
               A permanent structure within a residential zone, which is primarily intended to
MODEL DWELLING be used as a dwelling unit, but which is temporarily being used for marketing
UNIT:          purposes as an example of other units to be built in the same development. "Model
               dwelling units" are considered provisional temporary uses as set forth in chapter
               4, article D, "Temporary Uses", of this title.
               Any detached single-family dwelling manufactured, in whole or in components, at a
               place other than the location where it is to be placed; which is assembled, in
               whole or in components, at the location where it is to be permanently located;
MODULAR HOME:  which rests on a permanent foundation or slab; which does not have wheels or
               axles affixed as a part of its normal construction; and which does not require a
               license by any agency as a motor vehicle, special equipment, trailer, motor home
               or mobile home.
               A hospitality oriented retail use that is licensed by the State, usually located
MOTEL:         along highways, occupied by and used principally as a place of lodging for
               guests. The term "motel" includes "motor hotel".
MUNICIPAL      A commercial parking facility owned and operated by the City, and designed to
PARKING        accommodate the off street parking of motor vehicles as a capital improvement.
FACILITY:      Such parking may be located in a structured parking facility, a surface lot or a
               combination thereof.
               That area of Iowa City bounded by Burlington Street on the north, Gilbert Street
NEAR SOUTHSIDE on the east, the Iowa Interstate Railway Main Line on the south and Madison
PARKING        Street on the west, except for Blocks 10 and 21 of County Seat Addition; Lots 5
FACILITY       and 6 of Block 13, County Seat Addition; Lots 3, 4, 5, the east 50 feet of Lot 6,
DISTRICT:      and the south 40 feet of Lot 2, Block 11, County Seat Addition; and Lots 10-15,
               Lyon's First Addition.
               A use owned and operated by a nonprofit organization, as defined by section 501
               (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, providing a place for social
NEIGHBORHOOD   services, such as childcare, supervised recreation, counseling referral for
CENTER:        children and adults or support groups for children and adults. Such services
               should be intended primarily, though not exclusively, for those persons living
               within a mile radius of the center.
               An element of a development, such as a parking area, a loading area, outdoor
NONCONFORMING  lighting, landscaping, screening, or signage, that was established in conformance
DEVELOPMENT:   with this title, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zoning or to the
               requirements of this title, is no longer in conformance with the current
               applicable standards.
               A lot of record that was established in conformance with the minimum lot area,
NONCONFORMING  width, and frontage requirement of this title, but which subsequently, due to a
LOT:           change in the zone or the requirements of this title, is no longer in conformance
               with one or more of these requirements.
               A structure or portion of a structure that was established in conformance with
               the setback, building height, building width, and lot coverage standards, or
NONCONFORMING  other requirements or standards of this title that relate to the design of the
STRUCTURE:     building or structure, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or to
               the requirements of this title, is no longer in conformance with one or more of
               these standards.
               A use that, when established, was a permitted use, was allowed as a provisional
               use, or was approved as a special exception, but which subsequently, due to a
NONCONFORMING  change in the zone or to the requirements of this title, is no longer allowed.
USE:           This definition includes residential uses that exceed the allowable residential
               density of a zone (minimum lot area per unit requirements) and uses that exceed
               the maximum floor area ratio or maximum floor area standards specified for a
               particular use or zone.
NURSING HOME:  See definition of group care facility.
OFFICIALLY     A private street permitted prior to 1984. Such streets were established either by
APPROVED       the City Council or by the Board of Adjustment as a variance to the requirement
PLACE:         that a lot front on a public street.
OPEN SPACE,    Open space used by occupants of the dwelling unit or units on one lot or design
PRIVATE:       site. Such open space and any private recreational facilities located therein are
               considered an accessory use to the principal use of the property.
OPEN SPACE,    Open space, the use of which is shared by occupants of an entire subdivision or
PRIVATE,       planned development, but which is not generally open to the public. Such open
SHARED:        space is typically managed and maintained by an owners' association.
OPEN SPACE,    Open space that has been dedicated for public use or for which an easement has
PUBLIC:        been granted for public use.
OPEN SPACE     See "parks and open space uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
USE:           Categories", of this title.
ORIEL WINDOW
(Syn Upper     A window that projects from the building facade or elevation, located on upper
Story Bay      floors and may extend for multiple stories.
Window):
               Includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for
               sale or lease. "Outdoor display" is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine
               and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on
OUTDOOR        display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not
DISPLAY:       have to be visible to the street. "Outdoor display" does not include goods that
               are being stored or parked outside. It does not include damaged or inoperable
               vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and
               other similar products. Examples of uses that often have "outdoor display" are
               car and boat sales, and plant nurseries. See also definition of outdoor storage.
               Includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no
               differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so,
               they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. "Outdoor
OUTDOOR        storage" includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk),
STORAGE:       including gravel; mulch; building materials, packing materials, salvage goods;
               machinery, tools and equipment; and other similar items. Examples of uses that
               often have "outdoor storage" are lumberyards, vehicle repair; tool and equipment
               rental, bark chip and gravel sales, salvage yards; and recycling processing
               facilities. See also definition of outdoor display.
OUTDOOR
STORAGE AND    See "retail uses, outdoor storage and display oriented", as defined in chapter 4,
DISPLAY        article A, "Use Categories", of this title.
ORIENTED
RETAIL:
               A set of zoning requirements imposed in addition to those of the underlying base
OVERLAY ZONE:  zone. Development in overlay zones must conform to the requirements of the
               overlay zone as well as those of the underlying base zone, unless modifications
               to base zone requirements are approved as a part of the overlay rezoning process.
OWNER:         The person holding fee simple or equitable title to the property.
PARAPET:       A wall along the edge of a roof or the portion of a wall that extends above the
               roof line.
PARCEL:        See definition of lot.
               A type of group household containing not more than three (3) teenagers or adults
               and up to four (4) children under five (5) years of age, each of whom is related
PARENTAL GROUP by blood to at least one of said teenagers or adults, placed in a residential
HOME:          dwelling unit by a government or social service agency and occupying said
               dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit for purposes of social and/or
               economic support.
               An off street facility intended and designed for the parking of more than four
               (4) motor vehicles. A parking area includes parking spaces, aisles, landscaped
PARKING AREA:  islands and medians, and drives that provide circulation within a parking area or
               around the perimeter of a parking area. Drives that are external to a parking
               area are not considered a part of the parking area.
PARKING        The horizontal measurement of an access driveway to a parking area, beginning at
DRIVEWAY       the sidewalk, measured perpendicular to the direction of travel.
WIDTH:
PARKING,       Any parking spaces assigned to more than one (1) user, where different persons
SHARED:        utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the spaces at the same time of day.
PARKING SPACE: A permanent, durable surface intended for off street vehicular parking.
PARKS AND OPEN See "parks and open space uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
SPACE USES:    Categories", of this title.
PATIO:         A covered or uncovered, surfaced outdoor living area located at grade, adjacent
               to and accessible from a dwelling.
               "Pedestrian oriented" streets and developments are those that are designed to
               provide a safe, comfortable environment for pedestrians. Important elements
               include sidewalks that are separated and buffered from vehicular traffic with
               limited interruption from driveways; the provision of street trees and
PEDESTRIAN     appropriate street furniture; and buildings that visually address the street with
ORIENTED:      visible entranceways and windows, and, in the case of commercial buildings, may
               include awnings or canopies that protect pedestrians from the weather. Buildings
               with blank facades along the street, long stretches of repetitive building
               designs, entranceways that are difficult to find or identify, unscreened surface
               parking lots, and other expanses of paving are contrary to a "pedestrian
               oriented" design.
PERFORMANCE    Regulatory language stating the minimum requirement or the maximum allowable
STANDARD:      limit on the effects or characteristics of a use.
               Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target
               population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the
               supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health
PERMANENT      status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
SUPPORTIVE     community. The target population is defined as persons with low incomes who have
HOUSING:       one or more disabilities, including mental illness, substance abuse, or chronic
               health conditions, and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated
               minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the
               foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans,
               and homeless people.
               A principal use allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to compliance
PERMITTED USE: with the dimensional requirements, development standards, and any other special
               requirement of the zone and the general requirements of this title.
PERSON:        Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or
               any entity, including state and local governments and agencies.
PERSONAL       See "retail uses, personal service oriented", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
SERVICE:       "Use Categories", of this title.
PLANTING AREA: An unpaved pervious area intended or used for the placement of a tree or other
               required landscaping elements.
PLANTING       A landscaped or grassy area located between a street and a sidewalk.
STRIPS:
PORCH:         A covered entrance to a building consisting of a platform area, with open or
               enclosed sides, projecting from the wall of a building.
PREMISES:      See definition of Lot.
PRIMARY        The building that serves all activities related to the principal use of the
BUILDING:      design site.
PRIMARY STREET The frontage of a lot to which the address is assigned.
FRONTAGE:
PRINCIPAL      A building containing the principal use.
BUILDING:
               The primary use of land or a structure as distinguished from an accessory use,
PRINCIPAL USE: e.g., a dwelling is a principal use on a lot in a residential zone, while a
               garage or pool is an accessory use.
PRIVATE        An outdoor facility used for the exercise, recreation, or training of domestic
OUTDOOR ANIMAL animals.
RECREATION:
PROJECTIONS    Parts of buildings, such as architectural features, which protrude into required
(INTO          setback areas.
SETBACKS):
               A principal use allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to compliance
PROVISIONAL    with the specific requirements mentioned with the use and all other dimensional
USE:           and development requirements and special requirements, if any, of the zone as
               well as the general requirements of this title.
               The combined area along the front and side street portions of design sites,
PUBLIC REALM:  visible to the pedestrian, that is between the facades of buildings on both sides
               of a thoroughfare or between the facades on one side of the thoroughfare and the
               edge of the adjacent open or civic space.
PUBLIC RIGHT   Property dedicated to public use and intended for the movement of the public.
OF WAY:
PUBLIC         A system owned and operated by a licensed public utility company or by a railroad
UTILITY:       company. Such systems do not include those owned and operated by the city of Iowa
               City or other governmental agency.
PUBLIC VIEW,   Visible from a public street, public sidewalk, public access easement, or other
WITHIN:        public way, or from a public park or other public open space area.
QUARRY:        Land used for excavating stone or slate.
QUICK VEHICLE  See "quick vehicle servicing uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
SERVICING      Categories", of this title.
USES:
               A provisional temporary use consisting of an on site office within a model
REAL ESTATE    dwelling unit that is used as a real estate office for the sale of dwelling units
SALES CENTER:  or lots within the same subdivision or development in which the sales center is
               located.
REAR:          Opposite of front.
REAR-LOADED    Design sites that provide vehicular access from the rear of the design site.
(REAR ACCESS):
               With respect to land use and zoning, it means providing individuals with
REASONABLE     disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility
ACCOMMODATION: in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies,
               practices and procedures, or waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary
               to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
RECESSED       An entrance to a building that is set back from the facade of the building.
ENTRY:
               Reusable materials including, but not limited to, metal, glass, plastic,
               cardboard, and paper products which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or
RECYCLABLE     reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. "Recyclable materials"
MATERIALS:     does not include automobiles or other vehicles or machinery and their components,
               structural steel materials and equipment, hazardous chemicals or materials such
               as used motor oil and discarded automobile batteries, or biodegradable materials
               such as yard waste.
               A waste related use where recyclable materials are collected, stored, and
RECYCLING      processed for efficient shipment, or to an end user's specifications, by such
PROCESSING     means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing,
FACILITY:      sorting, shredding or cleaning, but not by processes involving heat for melting,
               smelting or burning. A "recycling processing facility" does not include "salvage
               operations", as defined in this title.
               Any religious/private group assembly use primarily intended to provide a place of
               assembly for the practice of religion, which has been granted a federal tax
               exemption as a section 501(c)(3) organization under the internal revenue code, as
RELIGIOUS      amended. For purposes of this title, not all facilities, businesses, and
INSTITUTION:   institutions owned and operated by a "religious institution" are categorized as
               religious/private group assembly. (See "religious/private group assembly uses",
               "educational facilities", "hospitals", "colleges and universities", as defined in
               chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this title.)
RELIGIOUS/     See "religious/private group assembly uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
PRIVAT E GROUP "Use Categories", of this title.
ASSEMBLY USE:
REMODEL/       Any improvement in a building that is not a structural alteration.
REPAIR:
RESPONSIBLE    A person who resides in and provides room and board in an elder family home. The
PARTY:         "responsible party" may be, but is not required to be, an elder.
RESTAURANT:    An eating establishment as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of
               this title.
RETAIL         See "retail uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories", of this
ESTABLISHMENT: title.
               An amendment to the text of this title, including any amendment or change to any
REZONING:      maps, graphic representations, or tables incorporated herein; and/or an amendment
               to the zoning map, i.e., a change in the zoning designation of a particular
               parcel or parcels of land. Overlay rezonings are considered a type of "rezoning".
ROOF:          The top covering of a building constructed to shield the area beneath from the
               weather. The term "roof" includes the term "canopy".
               The highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof
ROOFLINE:      or the midpoint between the eaves and ridge of a saddle, hip, gable, gambrel or
               ogee roof.
               A room, with or without a roof, limited in size that is located on the uppermost
ROOFTOP ROOM:  roof of certain house-scale buildings to provide views across a neighborhood or
               the community. See sub-section 14-2H-7F (Rooftop Room).
               An accessory use to an eating or drinking establishment, commercial recreational
               use, hospitality oriented retail use or similar principal use that is designed as
               an outdoor seating or gathering space located on a rooftop or upper floor terrace
               of a building, and that is open to the public for events, entertainment,
ROOFTOP        meetings, and/or as a food and beverage service area. Rooftop patios or upper
SERVICE AREA   floor terraces intended for private use by the residents or occupants of a
(RSA):         building are not considered RSAs. If the RSA is accessory to an establishment
               that is licensed by the State to sell alcoholic beverages, it is considered a
               type of "outdoor service area" as defined in section 4-1-1 of this Code, and is
               subject to the applicable regulations in title 4, "Alcoholic Beverages", of this
               Code.
               An individual who leases and resides within a rooming unit of a group living use.
ROOMER:        Staff, including live-in staff of an assisted group living use, are not
               considered "roomers".
               Any dwelling containing two (2) or more rooming units in which space is let by
ROOMING HOUSE: the owner or operator to four (4) or more roomers. A rooming house is categorized
               as an independent group living use.
               A fraternal group living use that is organized as a nonprofit entity and that is
               an active member of North American Students of Cooperation (NASCO) or one of its
ROOMING HOUSE  affiliates, whose primary mission is to provide a cooperative living environment
COOPERATIVE:   for its members. Said use is governed by a board that is democratically elected
               by members of the cooperative, with all members and board members having as their
               primary residence a rooming unit governed by the cooperative.
               Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms that form a single,
ROOMING UNIT:  private residential unit intended to be used primarily for living and sleeping,
               but not for cooking, located within a group living use.
SALVAGE        See "salvage operations", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
OPERATION:     of this title.
SCREENING:     Structures and/or plantings that obscure an area from public view or from view of
               neighboring properties.
SELF-SERVICE   See "self-service storage uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
STORAGE:       Categories", of this title.
SERVICE        See "quick vehicle servicing uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
STATION:       Categories", of this title.
               The distance between a specified object, such as a building, and another point.
SETBACK:       "Setbacks" are usually measured from lot lines to a specified object. Unless
               otherwise indicated, an unspecified setback refers to a building setback.
               A required area on a lot unoccupied by structures above grade, except for
SETBACK AREA:  projections and specific accessory uses or structures allowed in such area under
               the provisions of this title. A "setback area" extends from the grade upward.
SETBACK        The area on a lot between the street-side lot line(s) and the front setback line.
(AREA), FRONT:
               On an interior lot, the rear setback is the area extending from one side lot line
SETBACK        to another side lot line and between the rear setback line and rear lot line. On
(AREA), REAR:  a corner lot, the rear setback is the area extending from the side lot line to
               the front setback line between the rear lot line and rear setback line. On a
               double frontage lot, there is no rear setback.
SETBACK        Any setback area between a side lot line and a side setback line that is not a
(AREA), SIDE:  front setback area or a rear setback area.
SETBACK LINE:  The line beyond which a specified use, object, building or structure shall not
               project, except as specified in this title.
SETBACK LINE,  A line drawn parallel to the street and as far back from the street as specified
FRONT:         for the principal building, front setback.
SETBACK LINE,  A line drawn parallel to the rear lot line and as far forward from the rear lot
REAR:          line as specified for the principal building, rear setback.
SETBACK LINE,  A line drawn parallel to the side lot line and as far from the side lot line as
SIDE:          specified for the principal building, side setback.
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2761.png]
SETBACK,       The mandatory clear distance between a design site line and parking.
PARKING:
SHOPFRONT      A very low wall, that does not include glass, between the display window(s) of a
BASE:          shopfront and the adjacent sidewalk.
               Any woody, perennial, bushy plant that branches into several stems or trunks at
               the base and is smaller than a tree. "Shrubs" are important features in permanent
SHRUB:         landscape planting, being used for formal decorative groups, hedges, screens, and
               background plantings, to which they contribute pattern, color, fragrance, or
               utility.
               A device, array of devices, or structural design feature, the purpose of which is
               to provide for generation of electricity, the collection, storage and
SOLAR ENERGY   distribution of solar energy. Rooftop solar energy systems are considered
SYSTEM:        accessory mechanical structures. Utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy
               systems are considered a principal institutional use. See the definition for
               utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy system for additional information.
SOLAR ENERGY   A solar energy system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof
SYSTEM,        mounted, and the system's footprint is at least one acre in size. Utility-scale
UTILITY- SCALE ground-mounted solar energy systems may be used for both on-site and off-site
GROUND-        consumption of energy. Ground-mounted energy systems with a footprint of less
MOUNTED:       than one acre in size must be accessory to another principal use as an accessory
               mechanical structure.
               A principal or accessory use allowed in a particular zone only upon showing that
               such use in a specified location will comply with all the general and specific
               approval criteria for such a use as specified in this title and as approved by
SPECIAL        the board of adjustment. A "special exception" may also mean an adjustment or
EXCEPTION:     waiver of certain zoning requirements allowed in certain circumstances
               specifically enumerated in this title, subject to compliance with all the general
               and specific approval criteria for such an adjustment or waiver as specified in
               this title and as approved by the board of adjustment.
STACKING       A permanent, durable surface designed to accommodate a motor vehicle waiting for
SPACE:         entry to part of a development or use, such as a loading or unloading area,
               drive-through, car wash, or other auto oriented use.
               The ground level frontage of a building in which there is located a single
               business directly behind the frontage. A building may have more than one
               storefront. The length of the storefront is measured from the outside edge of the
               exterior walls of the building, or if there are multiple storefronts located in a
STOREFRONT:    single building, from the centerline of the wall that separates the business from
               another business, public area, or other area not occupied by the subject
               business. Narrow storefronts are those that are less than or equal to forty feet
               (40') in width. Medium storefronts are those that are greater than forty feet
               (40') and less than or equal to sixty feet (60') in width. Wide storefronts are
               those greater than sixty feet (60') in width.
               The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
STORY:         upper surface of the next floor above. The topmost "story" shall be that
               habitable portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
               floor and the ceiling above.
               A conditioned space that rests primarily underneath the slope of the roof,
               usually having dormer windows. The half story is identified by the “.5" in the
STORY, HALF:   description of maximum height (2.5). A half-story becomes a full story when its
               top wall plates, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are four feet (4')
               or more above the floor of such story.
               A street, the principal function of which is to provide for through traffic and
STREET,        which is designed to carry large volumes of traffic. Arterial streets, as
ARTERIAL:      referenced in this title, are those streets shown on the Iowa City arterial
               street map as provided in chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of
               this title.
STREET,        A street, the principal function of which, is carrying traffic from local streets
COLLECTOR:     to arterial streets.
STREET,        A local street terminating in a turnaround.
CUL-DE-SAC:
STREET, FRONT: Street located along the front design site line.
               The horizontal area of a design site parallel to and along the public right-of-
STREET         way which it borders and which is identified by an officially assigned street
FRONTAGE,      address. On rectangular design sites at a street corner, the principal street
PRINCIPAL:     frontage shall have the narrower width in comparison to the other street
               frontage.
STREET         Manmade objects, other than buildings, which are part of the streetscape.
FURNITURE:     Examples include, but are not limited to, benches, litter containers, planting
               containers, sculptures, and bus shelters.
STREET, LOCAL: A street used primarily for access to abutting property and for moving local
               traffic.
STREET,        A way that is intended to afford a means of access to abutting lots and for
PRIVATE:       moving local traffic. A private street is not owned or controlled by a government
               entity.
STREET,        A right of way, dedicated to and accepted for public use, which affords a means
PUBLIC:        of access to abutting property and a means of vehicular travel. A public street
               is owned or controlled by a government entity.
STREET, SIDE:  Street located along a design site line that is not the front design site line.
STREETSCAPE:   The scene of a street or way composed of natural and manmade elements, including
               buildings, paving, plantings, street furniture and miscellaneous structures.
STREET TREE:   A tree of any species or size planted in open spaces, parkways, sidewalk areas,
               easements, and streets.
STRUCTURAL     Any change in the configuration of the exterior walls, foundation or roof of a
ALTERATION:    building that results in an increase in the area, height or volume of the
               building.
               Anything constructed or installed on the ground or which is attached to something
STRUCTURE:     located on the ground. "Structures" include buildings, radio and TV towers, sheds
               and permanent signs. "Structures" exclude vehicles, sidewalks and paving.
               A building, structure, or use which:
STRUCTURE,     A. Is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to the
ACCESSORY      comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees of the
BUILDING/USE:  principle use;
               B. Is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the property;
               C. Does not include structures, structural features, or activities inconsistent
               with the uses to which they are accessory; and
              D. Except for off-street parking located on a separate design site as approved
               through a special exception, is located on the same design site as the principal
               use or uses to which it is an accessory.
SUBSTANDARD    See definition of Nonconforming Lot.
LOT:
SURFACE        See "surface passenger services", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use
PASSENGER      Categories", of this title.
SERVICES:
               A home football game day informal social gathering that is noncommercial and may
               include eating and drinking beverages (alcoholic or nonalcoholic) as part of the
TAILGATING:    activities. Temporary parking on unimproved surfaces located on private property
               is allowed during tailgate events. No alcohol is sold at a tailgate, nor is any
               admission fee charged, goods sold or given away, nor services provided for a fee.
TANDEM         A parking space deep enough to allow two (2) cars to park, one behind the other.
PARKING:
TOBACCO SALES  See "Retail uses", "Tobacco Sales Oriented" as defined in chapter 4, Article A,
ORIENTED USE:  "Use Categories", of this Title.
TOWNHOUSE      A multi-family dwelling containing not less than three (3) side by side, attached
STYLE          dwelling units, each with its own exterior entrance, and with all dwelling units
APARTMENTS/    located on the same lot.
CONDOMINIUMS:
               An abutting group of lots developed for a use or uses which share common
TRACT:         facilities, e.g., off street parking, loading and driveways. A "tract" shall be
               considered a single lot in the application of the requirements of this title.
               A community service shelter use owned and operated by a nonprofit organization,
               as defined by section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, as amended,
TRANSIENT      providing a temporary residence, for a period of not more than ninety (90) days,
HOUSING:       for persons in need of emergency shelter and temporarily unable to pay for
               housing. (See "community service - shelter", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
               "Use Categories", of this title.)
               Perennial woody plant with a single main stem (the trunk or bole) from which
               branches and twigs extend to form a characteristic crown of foliage. "Trees" are
               important features in permanent landscape planting, being used to define street
TREE:          edges, to lessen heat island effects through shading, and by contributing
               pattern, color and utility. Small trees generally attain a height at maturity of
               up to thirty feet (30'). Large trees generally attain a height at maturity
               greater than thirty feet (30'). See the list of recommended "trees" for Iowa
               City, available through the city forester's office.
TRUCK TERMINAL A warehouse and freight movement use intended to provide storage of truck
FACILITY:      trailers, and for the loading and unloading and temporary storage of goods and
               materials.
UPPER FLOOR:   A floor in a building containing habitable space that is located above the ground
               floor.
UPZONING:      The opposite of downzoning. (See definition of Downzoning.)
USE:           A purpose or activity for which land, structures, or a portion thereof, are
               designed, occupied and maintained.
USE,           See definition of Accessory Building/Use/Structure.
ACCESSORY:
USE,           See definition of Permitted Use.
PERMITTED:
USE,           See definition of Principal Use.
PRINCIPAL:
USE,           See definition of Provisional Use.
PROVISIONAL:
               An assemblage of equipment used for the purpose of changing the strength, volume,
               or configuration of the utility flow from a bulk quantity to smaller quantities
UTILITY        to be used in the local distribution system. "Utility substation facilities"
SUBSTATION     include, but are not limited to, electric substations, gas regulator stations,
FACILITY:      telecommunications switching and relay facilities, and water and sewer pumps or
               lift stations. A "utility substation facility" is classified as a "basic utility
               use" for purposes of this title.
VACATION:      The process by which the city discontinues the use of a street, alley or easement
               as a public way.
               A means of granting a property owner relief from certain provisions of this title
               where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
VARIANCE:      this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
               title shall be observed and substantial justice done. The authority to grant
               "variances" is vested in the board of adjustment pursuant to the code of Iowa, as
               amended.
VEHICLE:       Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported
               or drawn upon a street or highway.
VEHICLE REPAIR See "vehicle repair uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
USE:           of this title.
VEHICLE        A vehicle or portion thereof which is parked in the same position for a period of
STORAGE:       forty eight (48) hours or more.
               Areas that are pedestrian-oriented in nature, with a highly interconnected
WALKABLE       network of streets, where bicycling and walking are viable daily options because
NEIGHBORHOOD:  services, shopping, or food uses are within a short walking distance of most
               dwellings.
               The condition when an area is highly interconnected to other areas and appeals to
WALKABILITY:   pedestrians for recreational walking or for walking to work, transit, errands,
               shopping, or restaurants.
WAREHOUSE AND  See "warehouse and freight movement uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A,
FREIGHT        "Use Categories", of this title.
MOVEMENT USE:
WASTE RELATED  See "waste related uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
USE:           of this title.
WHOLESALE      See "wholesale sales uses", as defined in chapter 4, article A, "Use Categories",
SALES USE:     of this title.
WING:          A structure physically attached to, and smaller in footprint and height to, the
               main body of a building.
YARD/COURTYARD An open area on a lot, which is bounded on at least three (3) sides by the
, INTERIOR:    exterior walls of one or more buildings and is not open toward a street-side lot
               line. An interior courtyard is not a side yard.
               The area on a lot between the street-side lot line(s) and a line drawn parallel
               to and flush with the plane of any building facade of a principal building that
YARD, FRONT:   faces a street-side lot line. On lots with multiple buildings, there is no front
               yard adjacent to buildings that are behind or surrounded by other buildings, such
               that there is no facade directly facing the street.
               On an interior lot, the rear yard is the area extending from one side lot line to
               another side lot line and between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel to
               and flush with the plane of the rear building facade(s) of the principal building
YARD, REAR:    (s) on a lot. On a corner lot, the rear yard is the area extending from the side
               lot line to the front yard line that is opposite the side lot line and between
               the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel to and flush with the plane of any
               building facade(s) of the principal building(s) that faces a rear lot line. On a
               double fronting lot there is no rear yard.
               The area on a lot bounded by any facade of the principal building that faces a
YARD, SIDE:    side lot line and that same side lot line and excluding any area that is front
               yard, rear yard, or interior courtyard.
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2763.png]
ZONING CODE    A staff panel designated by the City Manager to interpret the provisions of this
INTERPRETATION title in such a way as to carry out its intent and purpose.
PANEL:
               The map delineating the boundaries of zoning districts, which, along with the
               zoning text, comprises this title. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4220,
               7-18-2006; Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord. 08-4323, 12-16-2008; Ord. 09-4341, 6-2-
               2009; Ord. 11-4437, 7-5-2011; Ord. 11-4443, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-4446, 10-4-2011;
ZONING MAP:    Ord. 12-4477, 5-1-2012; Ord. 12-4495, 9-18-2012; Ord. 13-4526, 5-14-2013; Ord.
               14-4578, 4-1-2014; Ord. 14-4588, 6-3-2014; Ord. 15-4641, 9-15-2015; Ord. 18-4744,
               4-2-2018; Ord. 19-4779, 2-19-2019; Ord. 20-4817, 1-7-2020; Ord. 20-4820, 3-3-
               2020; Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; Ord. 22-4881, 6-6-2022; Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022;
               Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023; Ord. 23-4914, 11-6-2023; Ord. 23-4917, 11-21-2023; Ord.
               24-4941, 12-10-2024; Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
 
 
ARTICLE B. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9B-1: Definitions
14-9B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in
chapter 3, article B, "Historic District And Conservation District Overlay", of
this title, the following definitions shall apply. The general definitions
contained in
chapter 9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in
chapter 3, article B of this title that are not defined in this section.
   ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT: A term applied to features and components of a
building that indicates that the characteristics of a feature, material or
component contributes to a building's architectural style, unique character or
aesthetic qualities.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: The document that is evidence of approval by
the historic preservation commission or designated historic review body of a
proposal to materially change a historic landmark or property located within a
historic or conservation district. A "certificate of appropriateness" must be
obtained before a regulated permit may be issued.
   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: The document, issued in lieu of a
certificate of appropriateness, that signifies that the owner is incapable of
earning a reasonable return or obtaining beneficial use from a property due to
the regulations of a historic or conservation overlay zone.
   CERTIFICATE OF NO MATERIAL EFFECT: The document, issued in lieu of a
certificate of appropriateness, that signifies that the work contemplated in
the application will have no effect on any significant exterior features of a
historic landmark or property located within a historic or conservation
district. The "certificate of no material effect" evidences approval by the
historic preservation commission of a proposal to make the change or changes
proposed in the application.
   CHANGE IN APPEARANCE: Any alteration, addition, demolition, new construction
or other material change that modifies the visual aspect of the exterior of a
historic landmark or property located within a historic or conservation
district.
   COMMISSION: The Iowa City historic preservation commission, as established
by ordinance in accord with this article.
   CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A property within a conservation or historic district
that is an integral part of the historic context and character of the said
district.
   DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys a structure or building or any
architecturally significant component of a structure or building.
   EXTERIOR FEATURES: The architectural style, general design and arrangement
of the exterior of a building, including the kind and texture of building
material and the type and style of all windows, doors, roof pitch, eaves, trim
and brackets, porches, chimneys, signs and other appurtenant fixtures.
   MATERIAL CHANGE: Any act that adds new materials or otherwise modifies an
exterior feature of a property. Material changes include alterations to the
exterior features of a building or structure, demolition of a building or
structure, demolition of a portion of a building or structure, and new
construction on a property, including construction of any new street access
drives.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES (NRHP): A list of U.S. places of
significance in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and
culture on a national, state, or local level and maintained by the U.S.
department of the interior.
   NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: Any property within a conservation or historic
district that is not listed as a contributing property.
   REGULATED PERMIT: A permit issued by the building official or other official
of the city, according to the provisions of the building code, as amended; this
title, as amended; the house movers' ordinance, as amended; or the
international fire code, as amended.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION: The basic
principles, as listed in the federal code of regulations, for the
rehabilitation of a historic property and its site that provide for a property
to be returned to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes
possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and
features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural,
and cultural value. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006)
ARTICLE C. SIGN DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9C-1: Definitions
14-9C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title, the following
definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in article A of this
chapter shall apply to all terms used in
chapter 5, article B of this title that are not defined in this section.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which, through the use of moving
structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other
automated method, results in movement, or the appearance of movement.
   AWNING SIGN: A building sign placed on the surface of an awning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2765.png]
 
   BALLOON: An inflatable bag filled with gas or hot air and displayed in such
a way as to attract attention to the premises on which it is located.
   BANNER: A strip of flexible material, such as cloth, paper or plastic,
securely fastened on all corners to a building or structure.
   BILLBOARD: An off premises sign on which poster panels or bulletins are
mounted. For purposes of this title, billboard signs are not considered
freestanding signs or monument signs.
   BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to a building or to an appurtenance of a
building in any way.
   CABINET SIGN: A sign constructed like a cabinet with a flat translucent face
and structural and lighting components located within the cabinet.
   CANOPY SIGN: A building sign attached to or in any way incorporated with the
face, underside or roof of a canopy, marquee or any other similar building
projection. Extensions of a flat topmost roof past a building wall are not
considered canopies for purposes of this section.
   CHANGEABLE COPY/CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign, or part of a sign, such as a
reader board, where the copy is easily changed manually or by electronic means
as specified in
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
   COMMON SIGN: A sign that serves two (2) or more uses.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   ELECTRONIC SIGN: A sign that displays a changing message through the use of
an electronically controlled and illuminated medium. An "electronic sign" is
considered an animated sign.
   ENTRANCEWAY SIGN: A nonbuilding sign incorporated into or mounted on the
face of, or affixed above or below an entranceway arch that extends over a
walkway or driveway. Said sign type is intended to identify and direct traffic
to a place, grounds, or parking lot.
   FASCIA SIGN: A single faced building sign parallel to or at an angle of not
more than forty five degrees (45°) from the wall of the building on which it is
mounted. Such signs do not extend more than one foot (1') out from vertical
walls nor more than one foot (1') out at the sign's closest point from
nonvertical walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2767.png]
 
   FLAG: A generally rectangular piece of fabric or vinyl displaying a name,
insignia, logo or emblem.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces firmly
and permanently anchored in or on the ground and not attached to any building
or wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2769.png]
 
   FREESTANDING WIDE BASE SIGN: A freestanding sign in which the uprights or
braces are clad in a permanent material such that the entire base has a
monolithic or columnar line that maintains essentially the same contour.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2771.png]
 
   HAZARDOUS SIGN: A sign which, because of its construction or state of
disrepair, may fall or cause possible injury to passersby, as determined by the
city; a sign which, because of its location, color, illumination or animation,
interferes with, obstructs the view of or is confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device; or a sign which makes use of the words "stop",
"go slow", "caution", "drive in", "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or
character in such a way as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign displaying the name, address, crest, insignia or
trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant of a building or the name of
any building on the premises.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign in which a source of light is used to make the
message readable. An "illuminated sign" need not be an electronic sign.
   INTEGRAL SIGN: A sign carved into stone, concrete or other building material
or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction and made a
part of the building to which it is attached.
   MASONRY WALL SIGN: An identification sign mounted on the face or inset into
a fence or wall constructed of masonry materials. Such identification sign or
set of two (2) signs shall identify one entity or one group of entities, such
as identifying an office research park or industrial park.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A permanent sign, not attached to a building, which is
mounted low to the ground and does not exceed five feet (5') in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2773.png]
 
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign, other than a prohibited sign, that does not
comply with the regulations of the zone in which it is located by reason of
these or any other regulations adopted after the installation of the sign.
   OBSOLETE SIGN: A sign, or any portion of a support for that sign, that
advertises an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a use conducted off the
lot on which the sign is located.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign with the primary purpose of identifying or directing
attention to the lot on which the sign is located.
   PAINTED WALL SIGN: A sign painted directly on an exterior surface of a
building other than the windows.
   PARAPET SIGN: A fascia sign installed on a parapet or a parapet wall.
   PERMITTED SIGN: A sign allowed in the zone in which it is listed, subject to
compliance with the requirements of the sign regulations.
   PLASTIC TRIM CAP LETTERS: A three-dimensional channel letter with a plastic
or acrylic face affixed to the channel with a plastic trim piece.
   POLITICAL SIGN: A sign promoting candidates seeking public office, a
political issue or containing other election information, such as "vote today".
"Political signs" shall not be considered off premises signs.
   PORCH SIGN: A sign that is mounted on a porch parallel to the main facade,
pedestrian-scaled, and intended for viewing from the sidewalk.
   PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not firmly and permanently anchored or secured to
either a building or the ground and not expressly permitted in
chapter 5, article B, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2775.png]
 
   POST SIGN: A sign that is mounted on a porch parallel to the main facade,
pedestrian-scaled, and intended for viewing from the sidewalk.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3692.png]
   POSTER: A temporary sign on a card or sheet of paper, plastic or other
similar material.
   PROHIBITED SIGN: A sign, other than a nonconforming sign, not permitted by
this title.
   PROJECTING SIGN: A building sign extending more than one foot (1') out from
the wall of the building on which it is mounted. Subtypes include:
      Banner: A fabric projecting sign located above the second floor
windowsill and below the bottom of the roofline cornice or roofline if no
cornice exists.
      Storefront: A projecting sign installed on the ground floor street-facing
facade of a building and located below the second floor windowsill.
      Upper Level: A projecting sign made of solid durable materials located
above the second floor windowsill and below the bottom of the roofline cornice
or roofline if no cornice exists.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2777.png]
 
   PUBLIC ART: Any work of art exposed to public view from any street right of
way which does not contain any advertising, commercial symbolism, such as logos
and trademarks, or any representation of a product.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, square, plaza,
pedestrian mall or city owned right of way, or any other public property owned
or controlled by the city and dedicated for public use.
   ROOF SIGN: A sign installed on or above a roof of a building and affixed to
the roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2779.png]
 
   SEASONAL DECORATION: A display, which does not constitute a sign, pertaining
to recognized national, state or local holidays and observances.
   SIGN: Any structure or medium, including its component parts, visible to the
public from a street or public right of way and used or intended to be used to
direct attention to a business, product, service, subject, idea, premises or
thing. "Signs" shall not include buildings or landscaping. The term "sign"
includes, but is not limited to, all reading matter, letters, numerals,
pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks, inscriptions and patterns,
whether affixed to a building or separate from a building. This definition does
not include public art, seasonal decorations and directional symbols on paved
surfaces.
   SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign on which reading material, letters,
numerals, pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks, inscription or
patterns are affixed.
   SIGN WALL: The wall of a building on which a sign is mounted, including
elements of the wall or any member or group of members which defines the
exterior boundaries of the side of the building on which the sign is mounted
and which has a slope of forty five degrees (45°) or greater with the
horizontal plane.
   SPINNER: A device shaped like a propeller and designed to rotate in the wind
to attract attention to the premises on which it is located.
   SWINGING SIGN: A sign that, because of its design, construction, suspension
or attachment, is free to swing or move noticeably because of pressure from the
wind.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Temporary signs are constructed of temporary materials, such
as paper, cardboard, wallboard or plywood, with or without a structural frame,
and are intended for a temporary period of display.
   TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN: A projecting identification sign that shows the
current time and temperature in an electronic, changeable copy format in a
manner similar to the following illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2781.png]
 
   WALL MURAL PAINTED SIGN: An identification sign painted directly on an alley
wall or on a nonstreet-facing building wall that contains the main entrance to
a business and is incorporated into a larger painted mural.
   WINDOW SIGN: A sign affixed to a window, embedded in a window, or hanging
adjacent to a window and obviously intended to be viewed by the public through
the window. This type of sign is designed to be more permanent in nature and is
intended to be displayed for an extended and indeterminate period of time. This
definition does not include merchandise or product displays, posters, temporary
signs painted on windows or other temporary signs. (Ord. 16-4685, 11-15-2016;
amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
ARTICLE D. OUTDOOR LIGHTING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9D-1: Definitions
14-9D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in
chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this title, the
following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in
chapter 9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in
chapter 5, article G of this title that are not defined in this section.
   BULB: The part of a fixture or luminaire that produces light.
   CUTOFF FIXTURE: A luminaire that has a light distribution where the
candlepower does not exceed two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the lamp's rated
initial lumen output at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir, and does
not exceed ten percent (10%) of the lamp's rated initial lumen output at a
vertical angle of eighty degrees (80°) above nadir. This applies to all lateral
angles around the luminaire.
   FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the bulb in a lighting system. It includes
the elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector
(mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.
   FULL CUTOFF FIXTURE: A luminaire that has a light distribution where the
candlepower does not exceed zero percent (0%) of the lamp's rated initial lumen
output at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir, and does not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the lamp's rated initial lumen output at a vertical angle of
eighty degrees (80°) above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the
luminaire.
   FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE: A lighting fixture constructed in such a
manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the bulb or
a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of
the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by a
photometrics test or certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the
light fixture providing this shielding must be permanently affixed.
   GLARE: The sensation produced by a bright light source within the visual
field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are
adapted as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and
visibility; blinding light. The magnitude of glare depends on such factors as
the size, position, brightness of the source, and on the brightness level to
which the eyes are adapted.
   IESNA: The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
   INVENTORY OF LIGHTING: A list of bulbs indicating the bulb type, bulb
wattage, and initial lumens for each bulb and the manufacturer through which
the rated lumens can be determined.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light projected onto a property from a fixture not located
on that property. In some cases, such as with multi- family or mixed-use
development, trespass can result from on site fixtures projecting into
residential portions of the development.
   LUMEN (lm): Measure of brightness of the illumination exiting a bulb, as
provided by the manufacturer.
   LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting unit, including the bulb, the fixture, pole
or armature and other parts.
   NADIR: The vertical line projecting downward to the ground from the center
of the lens of a luminaire.
   NONCUTOFF: A light fixture that does not cut off the upward transmission of
light.
   OUTDOOR LIGHT OUTPUT, TOTAL: The initial total amount of light, measured in
lumens, from all bulbs used in outdoor light fixtures. Includes all lights and
luminous tubing used for display lighting, general illumination, architectural/
accent lighting, and lights used for external illumination of signs, but does
not include lights used to illuminate internally illuminated signs or luminous
tubing used in neon signs. For bulb types that vary in their output as they age
(such as high pressure sodium, fluorescent and metal halide), the initial lumen
output, as defined by the manufacturer, in the value to be considered. (Ord.
05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE E. SENSITIVE LANDS DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9E-1: Definitions
14-9E-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this title, the
following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in
chapter 9, article A of this title shall apply to all terms used in
chapter 5, article I of this title that are not defined in this section.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE, SIGNIFICANT: An archaeological site of prehistoric or
historic significance that is considered by the state historic preservation
officer to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
   BUFFER: An area of land that is located adjacent to a designated sensitive
area and provides a transition area that protects slope stability, attenuates
surface water flows and preserves wildlife habitat and protected wetlands,
stream corridors and woodlands.
   BUFFER, NATURAL: A land area located adjacent to a protected sensitive area
where development activity such as building, grading, or clearing are
prohibited unless otherwise exempt herein.
   COMPENSATORY MITIGATION: Creating a new wetlands or enhancing or expanding
an existing wetland in exchange for allowing development activities to occur
within an existing wetland.
   CONSTRUCTION AREA: The portion of a parcel of land where development
activity, including the temporary storage of heavy equipment, and other
improvements may take place and be located.
   CONSTRUCTION AREA LIMITS: A line delineated on a proposed development plan
or site plan that establishes the no build line around protected sensitive
areas, such as wetlands, streams, steep slopes, and woodlands, and their
required buffers.
   DEVELOPED AREA OF CITY: An area of the city where platted lots abut a
regulated stream as of December 13, 1995, the effective date of the sensitive
areas ordinance.
   DIAMETER, TREE TRUNK: The diameter of a tree trunk measured at four and one-
half feet (4.5') aboveground; if on a slope, measured from the high side of the
slope. In the case of a tree with multiple trunks, the diameter shall be the
average of the diameters of all the trunks.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of untreated surface water into a wetland
from a developed or developing property through the use of an underground pipe,
culvert, drainage tile, ditch, swale, channel or other means.
   FLOOD EVENT, 100-YEAR: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, or which on the
average will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100)
years.
   FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a
result of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 100-year floodplain is
the area of land susceptible to being inundated by a 100-year flood event.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters so that confinement of floodwaters to the floodway area
will not result in substantially higher flood elevation. Where floodway data
has been provided in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to
define the floodway limits.
   FULLY HYDRIC SOILS: Soils susceptible to water saturation, and designated as
fully hydric soils by the USDA soil conservation service, or its successor, as
of December 1993.
   GRADING: Any excavating or filling or a combination thereof, including
compaction.
   GROVE OF TREES: Ten (10) or more individual trees having a diameter of at
least twelve inches (12"), and whose combined canopies cover at least fifty
percent (50%) of the area encompassed by the trees.
   HISTORIC OBJECT: An artifact greater than one hundred (100) years old.
   MITIGATION: The process of avoiding, minimizing, rectifying, reducing, or
compensating for losses or potential losses to an environmental or sensitive
feature due to development activity. For example, a wetland mitigation plan is
used to illustrate the methods that will be employed to avoid, minimize,
rectify, or reduce the impacts of development activity on a protected wetland.
When impacts on a protected wetland are unavoidable, a wetland mitigation plan
will describe the methods of compensating for any losses.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: A line on the bank of a watercourse established by
the regular presence and action of surface water and indicated by physical
characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank, shelving,
changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the
presence of litter and debris, or by other appropriate means that consider the
characteristics of the surrounding area. The ordinary high water mark defines
the bed of a watercourse.
   PRAIRIE REMNANT: Prairie areas that have remained relatively untouched on
undeveloped, untilled portions of properties and contain primarily a mixture of
native warm season grasses interspersed with native flowering plants. Known
extant prairie remnants are identified on the Iowa City sensitive areas
inventory map - phase I.
   PREHISTORY: Relating to or existing in times antedating written history
(prior to approximately 1700 AD) in Iowa City.
   SENSITIVE AREAS CONSERVATION TRACT: A separate tract which protects
sensitive areas and associated buffers within planned developments,
subdivisions and building site plans; held separately from buildable lots by an
incorporated homeowners' association or a nonprofit conservation organization,
or dedicated to the city.
   SENSITIVE AREAS DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan required to be submitted and
approved in conjunction with a level I or level II sensitive areas review that
delineates construction area limits and designates protected sensitive areas
and associated buffers within a planned development.
   SENSITIVE AREAS INVENTORY MAP - PHASE I: The map of the Iowa City service
area with designations of potential environmentally sensitive areas, such as
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, hydric soils, prairie remnants
and geological, historical and archaeological features.
   SENSITIVE AREAS, PROTECTED: Portions of a parcel of land containing
environmentally sensitive features that are designated on an approved sensitive
areas site plan or a sensitive areas development plan and where no development
activity is allowed.
   SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW, LEVEL I: An administrative review of a sensitive
areas development plan required prior to any development activity, which is not
otherwise exempted, on property that contains any regulated sensitive feature
as specified in
chapter 5, article I of this title, but for which a level II sensitive areas
review is not required.
   SENSITIVE AREAS REVIEW, LEVEL II: A planned development rezoning that is
required prior to any development activity that is not otherwise exempted, on
any tract of land that contains regulated sensitive features as specified in
chapter 5, article I of this title. Said rezoning requires the approval of a
sensitive areas development plan, which delineates construction area limits and
designates protected sensitive areas and their associated buffers on said
tract.
   SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, either naturally occurring or altered,
with a vertical rise of at least ten feet (10'), and which is not otherwise
approved by the city, such as city approval of a grading plan, prior to
December 13, 1995.
   SLOPE, ALTERED PROTECTED: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper
created by human activity such as cutting or filling, which activity has
occurred prior to December 13, 1995, and which slope is not otherwise approved
by the city.
   SLOPE, CRITICAL: A slope of twenty five percent (25%), but less than forty
percent (40%).
   SLOPE, PERCENT OF: The slope of a designated area determined by dividing the
horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope and
converting the resulting figure into a percentage value.
   SLOPE, PROTECTED: Any slope of forty percent (40%) or steeper.
   SLOPE, STEEP: A slope of eighteen percent (18%), but less than twenty five
percent (25%).
   SLOPES, REGULATED: Slopes defined herein as "steep" (18 to 24 percent),
"critical" (25 to 39 percent), and "protected" (40+ percent).
   STREAM CORRIDOR, REGULATED: Floodways designated on either the current
federal emergency management agency flood boundary and floodway maps for Iowa
City and Johnson County or the Iowa City (1 inch = 100 feet scale) flood
boundary and floodway maps and watercourses, such as a river, stream or
drainageway, which are shown in blue (the blue line) on the current U.S.
geological survey quadrangle maps and have a bed and bank defined by an
"ordinary high water mark", as defined in this title and verified in the field
by a qualified professional, and a definite direction of flow, either
continuously or intermittently. In cases where no floodway is delineated, the
blue line will serve as the centerline within a thirty foot (30') wide stream
corridor.
   TREE, FOREST: Any tree two inches (2") in diameter or greater, and included
on the list of forest trees approved by the city.
   WETLAND SPECIALIST: An individual certified as a "wetland specialist" by the
society of wetland scientists, or its successor, or a person who can
demonstrate to the city that he or she has expertise in wetland areas which may
include delineation, mitigation and evaluation.
   WETLAND/WETLAND AREAS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. "Wetlands" generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. For the purposes hereof,
"wetland" shall mean a jurisdictional wetland that is regulated by the U.S.
army corps of engineers, or its successor. Determination of jurisdictional
wetlands shall be made either by the corps or its successor or by a wetland
specialist and accepted by the corps or its successor.
   WOODED AREAS: Includes woodlands or "groves of trees", as defined in this
article.
   WOODLAND CLEARING: The destruction or removal of trees within regulated
woodlands by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means, such that the
clearing results in a total opening in the woodland canopy of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or more.
   WOODLAND/WOODLAND AREA: Any tract of land with a contiguous wooded area not
less than two (2) acres and containing not less than two hundred (200) forest
trees per acre. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 06-4245, 12-12-2006; Ord.
10-4398, 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE F. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9F-1: Definitions
14-9F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in
chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title, the
following definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in article
A of this chapter shall apply to all terms used in
chapter 5, article J of this title that are not defined in this section.
   BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building that has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides (see definition of Lowest Floor).
   CLASS 1 CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that must remain accessible during
the 0.2% flood event because they are the base of operations for emergency
responders, are particularly difficult to evacuate during a flood event, or
facilities that provide services essential to the life, health, and safety of
the community. Class 1 critical facilities include police and fire stations,
emergency medical centers, communication centers, hospitals, jails, nursing
homes, and other residential uses for persons with limited mobility and/or
dependency upon life sustaining medical equipment.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES: Structures that store public records; museums and
libraries; schools; and other buildings that store rare and/or valuable items
and information that sustain the history and public records of a community.
These structures are not expected to remain accessible or functioning during a
flood event, though in many instances their functions must resume as soon as
possible after a flood event. Critical facilities also include public
infrastructure such as water distribution and wastewater treatment facilities,
which are expected to remain functioning during a flood event although they may
be temporarily inaccessible or accessible only by watercraft during a flood
event.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any humanmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the placement of manufactured housing, buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, streambank erosion control measures,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. Development is
considered to commence with either the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory built home on a foundation.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURAL WORKS: Barriers or storage areas constructed to
control floodwater, modify or redirect a channel.
   FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation which floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 1%
flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters with a one percent (1%)
likelihood of occurring in any given year. The 0.2% flood elevation is the
elevation of floodwaters with a two-tenths percent (0.2%) likelihood of
occurring in any given year. In areas of shallow flooding, there is a one
percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an elevation specified on
the flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD EVENT:
      500-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths
percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred
(500) years.
      100-Year Flood Event: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100)
years.
      1% Annual Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (formerly known as
the 100-year flood event).
      0.2% Annual Flood Event: The predicted level of flooding with a two-
tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(formerly known as the 500-year flood event).
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Land that is shaded and identified as "AE", "X" or "AH"
on the flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD HAZARD ELEVATION: In AE zones, the elevation of the 0.2% flood as
profiled in the flood insurance study for Johnson County, Iowa. In areas of
shallow flooding, the elevation of the flood as illustrated on the flood
insurance rate map.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: A study initiated, funded and published by the
federal insurance administration for the purpose of evaluating, in detail, the
existence and severity of flood hazards, providing the city with the necessary
information for adopting a floodplain management program and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
   FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a
result of a specific frequency flood. For instance, the 1% floodplain is the
area of land that, in any given year, has a one percent (1%) likelihood of
flooding. The 0.2% floodplain is the area of land that, in any given year, has
a two-tenths percent (0.2%) likelihood of flooding. In areas of shallow
flooding, there is a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to a
specified elevation, but a clearly defined channel does not exist, and the path
of flooding is unpredictable.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damages and for promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters so that confinement of floodwaters to the floodway area
will not result in substantially higher flood elevation.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway,
which can be filled, leveed or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood elevations.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building, including
a basement, except when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
14-5J-7E of this title; and
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses, such as building access, parking or
storage; and
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the flood hazard elevation; and
   D.   The floor is not below grade on all sides.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Any structure designed for residential use which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a
building site. For the purposes of
chapter 5, article J, "Floodplain Management Standards", of this title,
manufactured housing includes factory built homes, mobile homes, manufactured
homes and modular homes and also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured housing lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION OF NEW BUILDINGS, MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS: Those
structures or development that began construction after May 2, 1977.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SHALLOW FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Areas of special flood hazards having shallow
water depths and/or unpredictable flow paths between one and three feet (3'),
and with water surface elevations determined.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or installed on the ground or attached to
the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
manufactured housing, storage tanks and similar.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as established by an
appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is greater.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure that satisfies either
of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the assessed or market value as
established by an appraisal paid for at the owner's expense, whichever is
greater, of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started
or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use.
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after May 2, 1977,
shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%). (Ord.
10-4414, 11-16-2010)
ARTICLE G. SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (SWECS) DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-9G-1: Definitions
14-9G-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in subsection
14-4C-2Y, "Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems", of this title the following
definitions shall apply. The general definitions contained in article A of this
chapter shall apply to all terms used in said subsection that are not defined
below.
   HUB HEIGHT: The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation
to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
   OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to utility distribution
and transmission facilities or to any building or structure that is connected.
   PRIVATE WIND GENERATOR: An electricity generating apparatus, whose primary
purpose is to produce electricity for use on site, consisting of one wind
turbine per parcel, with a generating capacity no larger than ten (10)
kilowatts.
   SHADOW FLICKER: Changing light intensity caused by sunlight passing through
the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SWECS): A wind energy conversion system
which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to ten (10) kilowatts for
residential uses and up to one hundred (100) kilowatts for nonresidential uses
and which is accessory to a principal use on the same property. A system is
considered a SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for the use or
uses on the subject property, except that when a property on which the system
is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company,
excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on site use may
be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5)
of the Iowa administrative code, as amended.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: A SWECS which is
securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in order to achieve
desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or
attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the principal
building.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, FREESTANDING: A SWECS which is elevated
by means of a monopole tower only and is not located on another supporting
structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed
concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other nonmonopole style towers shall not meet
this definition.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, HORIZONTAL AXIS: A small wind energy
conversion system that has blades which rotate through a horizontal plane, as
shown in the illustration below.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, VERTICAL AXIS: A small wind energy
conversion system that has blades which rotate through a vertical plane, as
shown in the illustration below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2783.png]
 
   TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT: The height above grade to a blade tip at its highest
point of extension.
   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that
elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the
foundation, base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in
such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or
electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
   WIND TURBINE GENERATOR: The component of a wind energy conversion system
that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy. (Ord.
12-4497, 10-2-2012)
TITLE 15
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-1-1: Short Title
15-1-2: Purpose
15-1-3: Definitions
15-1-4: Establishment Of Control
15-1-5: Issuance Of Building Permits Restricted
15-1-6: Development Activity Restricted
15-1-7: City's Right To Install Improvements
15-1-8: Exceptions
15-1-9: Selling Before Approval; Penalties
15-1-10: Penalties Generally
15-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as the
SUBDIVISION CODE. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is intended to encourage orderly community development and provide
for the regulation and control of the extension of public improvements, public
services and utilities, the improvement of land and the design of subdivisions
consistent with the approved comprehensive plan, as amended. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-
26-2008)
15-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
   ALLEY: An open public way intended for use as a means of vehicular access to
abutting property.
   BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT, MAJOR: The reconfiguration of the boundary line
between abutting tracts, lots or parcels that results in the conveyance of one
thousand (1,000) square feet of land or greater. Major boundary line
adjustments shall be subject to the establishment of control guidelines in
subsection
15-1-4D.
   BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT, MINOR: The reconfiguration of the boundary line
between abutting tracts, lots or parcels that results in conveyance of less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of land.
   COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city.
   DEFICIENCY: An error on or omission from plat specifications and/or other
supporting documents required as part of the subdivision approval process
including, but not limited to:
   A.   Missing or mislabeled easements;
   B.   Inaccurate measurements;
   C.   Missing or inaccurate stormwater calculations;
   D.   Mislabeled symbol markings in legends;
   E.   Inaccurate street cross sections;
   F.   Building lots that do not meet minimum zoning standards;
   G.   Or similar.
   DIVISION: Dividing a tract, lot or parcel of land into two (2) portions by
conveyance or for tax purposes. A minor boundary line adjustment, major
boundary line adjustment, or the conveyance of an easement, other than a public
highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the purposes of this
title.
   LOT: A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat.
   OFF SITE COSTS: The costs incurred by a developer in constructing,
improving, or otherwise extending public improvements from existing public
improvements through or along property not owned by said developer to the
boundaries of property under development and which improvements are capable of
serving other properties.
   OUTLOT: A portion of a platted subdivision or other parcel of land not
intended by its owner for immediate development. An outlot may also be a tract
or parcel of land within the subdivision intended for shared use by the
residents of the subdivision or by the public, e.g., public or private open
spaces and/or walkways.
   PARCEL: A part of a tract of land.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: The principal structures, works, component parts and
accessories of public infrastructure that become part of, are placed upon, or
affixed to real estate, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Sanitary sewers;
   B.   Storm sewers, tile lines or pipes and drainage swales;
   C.   Bridges and culverts;
   D.   Streets, trails, and sidewalks;
   E.   Water mains;
   F.   Stormwater management facilities;
   G.   Public open space improvements.
   STREET: A public or private street as defined in this title.
   STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, the principal function of which is to provide
for through traffic and which is designed to carry large volumes of traffic.
"Arterial streets", as referenced in this title, are those streets shown on the
Johnson County council of governments (JCCOG) arterial street plan, as amended.
   STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, the principal function of which, is carrying
traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street terminating in a turnaround.
   STREET, LOCAL: A street used primarily for access to abutting property and
for moving local traffic.
   STREET, LOOP: A local street with two (2) intersections with another street
in an alignment roughly in the shape of a "U".
   STREET, PRIVATE: A privately owned way that is intended to afford a means of
access to abutting property and for moving local traffic.
   STREET, PUBLIC: A right of way dedicated to and accepted for public use,
which affords a means of access to abutting property and a means of vehicular
travel. A public street is owned or controlled by a government entity.
   SUBDIVISION: Division of a tract, lot or parcel of land into three (3) or
more lots.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT: The graphical representation of a subdivision of land,
prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for
the county where the land is located.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT, MAJOR: A subdivision plat that involves the construction
of one or more new streets, selective access drives or street extensions.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT, MINOR: A subdivision plat that does not involve the
construction or extension of streets. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord. 22-
4882, 6-21-2022)
15-1-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROL:
   A.   Any plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the city
under the code of Iowa, as amended, shall be certified as approved by the mayor
and city clerk and the certification affixed to the plat or replat only after
approval by a resolution of the city council as set forth in this title.
   B.   Pursuant to section 354.9, code of Iowa, as amended, all subdivisions
located within two (2) miles of the city's corporate boundaries shall be
subject to city review and approval, except for those areas exempt from such
review pursuant to the Johnson County/Iowa City fringe area agreement.
   C.   Any division of a tract, lot or parcel shall be administratively
reviewed and approved by the city manager or designee for compliance with the
zoning and subdivision codes. Prior to recording, a division shall be certified
as approved by the city manager or designee.
   D.   Any major boundary line adjustment shall be administratively reviewed
and approved by the City Manager or designee for compliance with the zoning and
subdivision codes. Prior to recording, a division shall be certified as
approved by the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord.
22-4882, 6-21-2022)
15-1-5: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Where a subdivision is required, the city shall not issue a building
permit for construction on any lot, parcel or tract unless and until:
      1.   A final subdivision plat has been approved and recorded; and
      2.   The city approves subdivision erosion control measures in accordance
with this title; and
      3.   The city accepts the public improvements as specified herein, with
the exception of sidewalks and stormwater management facilities, said
exceptions being allowed after building construction has commenced as set forth
herein.
   B.   If the subdivider desires a building permit prior to installing the
improvements, the owner must deposit with the city finance department an escrow
equal to the cost of improvements plus ten percent (10%) thereof as specified
in subsection
15-2-3C9 of this title.
   C.   No building permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any division unless such division has been approved as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-6: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY RESTRICTED:
   A.   No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas
as described in title 17, chapter 8, "Grading Ordinance", of this code without
first obtaining a grading permit from the building official.
   B.   No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas
as described in section
17-8-15, "Construction Site Erosion And Sediment Control", of this code without
first obtaining a construction site runoff (CSR) permit from the city.
   C.   Unless specifically exempted, an application for sensitive areas review
must be submitted to and approved by the city prior to woodland clearing,
grading or any development activity on tracts of land or portions of tracts of
land where any regulated sensitive features exist, as specified in title 14,
chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of this code. A sensitive
areas review may occur concurrently with subdivision review as set forth in
this title.
   D.   No public improvements shall be installed without approval of
construction plans by the city engineer or designee. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-7: CITY'S RIGHT TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   If the subdivider, its assigns or successors in interest, sell or
convey lots in a subdivision without constructing or installing the public
improvements, the city shall have the right to install and construct such
improvements. The costs of such improvements shall be a lien and charge against
all the lots in the subdivision under the provisions of the code of Iowa, as
amended, except the cost of installing sidewalks which shall be a lien only
against the lot or lots abutting or in front of which sidewalks are installed.
The cost of such improvements need not meet the requirements of notice, benefit
or value as provided by state law for assessing such improvements. The
requirement to construct such improvements is and shall remain a lien from the
date of final plat approval until properly released by the city.
   B.   When required improvements have been installed to the satisfaction of
the city, the city will, upon request, promptly issue to the subdivider, for
recording in the county recorder's office, a good and sufficient release to
various lots in such subdivisions so that this section will not constitute a
cloud upon the title of the lots in the subdivision. However, with regard to
the subdivider's obligation to construct stormwater management facilities, the
provisions of subsections B1 and B2 of this section, apply.
      1.   With respect to a subdivider's obligation to construct stormwater
management facilities, the city shall provide a partial release for the
development from any liens or clouds on title to the development by reason of
such stormwater management obligations, provided the city engineer certifies
that the following conditions and/or events have occurred:
         a.   The facilities have been substantially completed;
         b.   An escrow amount has been established with the city in an amount
approved by the city engineer, to which the city's lien should attach
immediately upon execution or recording of the partial release.
      2.   The city agrees to issue a total release for the facilities upon
certification by the city engineer, in writing, that all of the following
events and/or conditions have been substantially completed:
         a.   Permanent ground cover is established and mowable;
         b.   Erosion and sedimentation are controlled in conformance with the
approved plans and specifications;
         c.   The facilities are complete;
         d.   All land within the tributary area in the development, or a
lesser amount of land as approved by the city engineer, has been developed.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-8: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Modifications Of Requirements:
      1.   Upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or on its
own motion, the city council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of
chapter 3, "Design Standards And Required Improvements", of this title,
provided one of the following qualifying circumstances are met:
         a.   If the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the
requirements of chapter 3 of this title would result in extraordinary hardship
because of excessive costs due to nonself-inflicted conditions; and if the
subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of
chapter 3 of this title would conflict with the objectives of these subdivision
regulations; or
         b.   If a subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the
requirements of chapter 3 of this title would result in subdivision design that
would compromise public health or safety, or could result in the substantial
degradation of natural features even after application of appropriate
provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features",
of this code.
      2.   City council may act to vary, modify or waive a requirement only if
it finds that the public safety and interest is protected and that such
variance, modification, or waiver will not hinder development of neighboring
properties and that the variance, modification or waiver will not nullify the
intent or purposes of this title or of other titles of this code.
   B.   City Council Action: The city council must approve any variance,
modification, or waiver of the general requirements set forth in this title and
must note this approval in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-9: SELLING BEFORE APPROVAL; PENALTIES:
   A.   Except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final
subdivision approval, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to agree
to transfer or sell or to transfer or sell any land which forms a part of a
subdivision requiring city council approval under this title before city
council grants final subdivision approval. Each such agreement, transfer or
sale shall be deemed a separate violation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to agree to or attempt
to transfer or sell, or to transfer or sell any division which requires
approval under this title without first having obtained approval by the city.
Each such attempt, agreement, transfer or sale shall be deemed a separate
violation.
   C.   In addition to the foregoing, the city may institute injunctive,
mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any pending sale
or transfer or to prevent any further sale or transfer in violation of this
title. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-1-10: PENALTIES GENERALLY:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code and shall be subject to the penalties specified in
subsection
1-4-2D of this code, except for environmental infractions, which shall be
subject to the penalty for same as specified in subsection
1-4-2B2 of this code, as amended. Each day that a violation occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense, and civil and/or criminal
penalties shall be computed accordingly. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
CHAPTER 2
PLATS AND PLATTING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
15-2-1: Concept Plan
15-2-2: Preliminary Plat
15-2-3: Final Plat
15-2-1: CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   Applicability: Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within
the corporate limits of the city or within two (2) miles thereof wishes to make
a subdivision of the same, the owner or the owner's representative shall submit
a concept plan to the department of planning and community development for
review prior to submission of a preliminary plat.
   B.   Submission Requirements: The concept plan must include the following
information:
      1.   The proposed layout of streets, lots, location of stormwater
facilities, and open space.
      2.   General topography, based on existing topographic maps or other
resources. The property is not required to be surveyed at the concept plan
stage.
      3.   Approximate footprints of any existing aboveground manmade features
located on the subject property, including buildings and other structures,
streets, sidewalks, etc.
      4.   Surrounding land uses and approximate location of building
footprints on abutting properties.
      5.   Sensitive features, including streams, wooded areas, known wetlands
or potential wetlands, known archeological sites, etc.
      6.   Other necessary information pertaining to the existing conditions of
the property, as requested by the city.
   C.   Review Of Concept Plan:
      1.   Upon receipt of a concept plan the department of neighborhood and
development services shall review the concept plan in the context of the
standards of this title, other requirements of this code, and comprehensive
plan policies, and will have the discretion to solicit comments from other city
departments.
      2.   The department of neighborhood and development services will provide
general written comments to the applicant within twenty (20) business days of
receipt of the concept plan based on the information submitted by the
applicant. These comments are intended to provide guidance to the applicant in
preparing the preliminary plat and are not to be construed as comprehensive
with regard to compliance with this code.
      3.   The preliminary plat shall not be filed until said written comments
regarding the concept plan are provided to the applicant. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-
2008; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
15-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Submission Required; Waiver:
      1.   After conferring with the department of neighborhood and development
services on the concept plan, the owner or owner's representative shall submit
to the same department a preliminary plat and supporting materials on
application forms as provided by the City for consideration. This submission
must include accurate and complete information as set forth in subsection B of
this section.
      2.   The city manager or designee(s) will check the application for
accuracy and completeness. A "complete application" shall mean the following:
         a.   A plat with accurate measurements and dimensions and easements
identified; and
         b.   All information as specified in subsection B of this section, has
been submitted.
      3.   The applicant will be notified of deficiencies and/or discrepancies
or if an application is incomplete. If an application is found to be
incomplete, the city will inform the applicant and reserves the right to
discontinue staff review until a complete and accurate application is filed.
The start date for any applicable time limitations for the application under
review will be the date when a complete application is submitted.
      4.   The city may waive submission of the preliminary plat if the final
plat includes all the requirements of the preliminary plat.
   B.   Plat Specifications And Accompanying Information:
      1.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to
fifty feet (1" = 50'); however, if the resultant drawing would be larger than
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), the plat shall be
submitted at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'). In addition,
a digital version of the plat must be submitted as per city specifications.
Each plat must include the following information:
         a.   Legal description, acreage and name of proposed subdivision.
         b.   Name(s) and address(es) of owner(s) and subdivider.
         c.   Names of the persons who prepared the plat, owner's attorney,
representative or agent, if any, and date of preparation.
         d.   North point and graphic scale.
         e.   Contours at five foot (5') intervals or less.
         f.   Locations of existing lot lines, streets, public utilities, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainpipes, culverts, watercourses,
bridges, railroads, buildings, stormwater detention facilities and any other
public improvements in the proposed subdivision.
         g.   The existing streets and city utilities on adjoining properties.
         h.   Layout of proposed blocks (if used) and lots, including the
dimensions of each, and the lot and block number in numerical order. For lots
where the lot width is different from the lot frontage, the lot width must be
indicated on the plat.
         i.   Location of any proposed outlot(s), identified with progressive
letter designations, and the purpose of said outlot(s) clearly specified on the
plat.
         j.   Proposed location of clustered mailboxes.
         k.   Location and widths, other dimensions and names of the proposed
streets, alleys, roads, utility and other easements, parks and other open
spaces or reserved areas.
         l.   Grades of proposed streets and alleys.
         m.   A cross section of the proposed streets showing the roadway
locations, the type of curb and gutter, the paving and sidewalks to be
installed.
         n.   The proposed layout and size of water mains and sanitary sewers.
         o.   Proposal for drainage of the land, including proposed storm
sewers, ditches, swales, bioswales, rain gardens, culverts, bridges, stormwater
management facilities and other structures.
         p.   A signature block for endorsement by the city clerk certifying
the city council's approval of the plat.
         q.   Where the area is subject to Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones And
Standards), the following shall be identified on the preliminary plat:
            (1)   Proposed design sites (if used), including the dimensions of
each. For design sites where the design site width is different from the design
site frontage, the design site width must be indicated on the plat.
            (2)   Proposed thoroughfare types (
14-2H-9) and the dimensions for each street, sidewalk, alley, or passage.
            (3)   Proposed civic space types (
14-2H-5) for each public or private civic space.
            (4)   Proposed building types (
14-2H-6) for each lot and design site.
            (5)   Notation that all stubs are to connect with future
thoroughfares on adjoining property and shall be designed to appropriately
transition, and that that specified civic space and building types may be
substituted with other civic space and building types in compliance with
Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones And Standards) during the site plan or building
permit process.
      2.   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following
information:
         a.   A location map with north point showing an outline of the area to
be subdivided.
         b.   A grading plan, including proposed methods for the prevention and
control of soil erosion, pursuant to the grading ordinance, title 17, chapter 8
of this code.
         c.   If access to state routes is proposed, the plat must be submitted
to the Iowa department of transportation for review. Comments from the Iowa
department of transportation must be submitted with the proposed plat.
         d.   For properties containing regulated sensitive features as
specified in title 14, chapter 5, article I of this code, a sensitive areas
development plan as set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I of this code.
   C.   Fees: A fee shall be paid at the time of preliminary plat application
or any combination of preliminary plats and/or plans are applied for, in the
amount established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Review Of Plat; Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   The department of neighborhood and development services shall
distribute said copies to the appropriate city departments for review as
designated by the city manager.
      2.   Said designee(s) shall examine the plat and application to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this title, other relevant provisions of
this code, comprehensive plan policies and with state law. Upon completion of
examination, the department of neighborhood and development services shall
forward a written report, including recommendations, to the planning and zoning
commission. No plat shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission
with more than six (6) deficiencies.
      3.   The commission shall study the revised preliminary plat, review the
application of the owner and review the report from the department of
neighborhood and development services.
      4.   The commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the plat
within forty five (45) calendar days of the date the city receives a complete
application, or the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved by the
commission. The owner or owner's representative may, however, agree to an
extension of time.
      5.   Following staff evaluation, the owner or owner’s representative
shall submit copies of the revised preliminary plat as requested by the city
with the signatures of the surveyor and the respective utility companies to the
city clerk.
      6.   After receipt of the recommendation of the commission or after the
time of any extension has passed, the city council shall, by resolution,
approve or disapprove the preliminary plat.
   E.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a preliminary plat by the city council
does not constitute approval of the subdivision but merely authorizes the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. In the event the
city council approves the preliminary plat and the final plat submitted does
not materially and substantially deviate from the preliminary plat and if
inspection by the city reveals that all plans and specifications for
construction of improvements, as required by the city, have been met, the final
plat shall be approved by the city council. Approval of the preliminary plat
shall be effective for a period of twenty four (24) months unless, upon written
request of the owner or subdivider, the city council, by resolution, grants an
extension of time. If the final plat is not filed within twenty four (24)
months, all previous actions of the city council with respect to the plat shall
be deemed null and void. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-
2021)
15-2-3: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission Required:
      1.   After approval of a preliminary plat or if the requirement for
preliminary plat has been waived by the city council, the owner or owner's
representative shall file with the department of neighborhood and development
services an application for final plat on a form provided by the city, along
with the final plat and supporting materials set forth below. Said final plat
must be submitted to the city clerk within twenty four (24) months of approval
of the preliminary plat, unless an extension has been approved by the city
council. This submission must include accurate and complete information as set
forth in subsections B and C of this section.
      2.   The department of neighborhood and development services will check
the application for accuracy and completeness. A "complete application" shall
mean the following:
         a.   A final plat with accurate measurements and dimensions, and with
easements correctly identified;
         b.   An accurate legal description;
         c.   All required legal documents and accompanying instruments as
specified in subsections B and C of this section;
         d.   Construction plans according to the specifications of the city
engineer.
      3.   The applicant will be notified of deficiencies and/or discrepancies
or if an application is incomplete. If an application is found to be
incomplete, the city will inform the applicant and reserves the right to
discontinue staff review until a complete and accurate application is filed.
The start date for any applicable time limitations for the application under
review will be the date when a complete application is submitted.
      4.   Upon approval by the city, a final plat may include only a portion
of the development illustrated on the preliminary plat if that portion can
function as a separate development, including access and utilities, and if no
essential public infrastructure extensions are delayed. Whether or not said
infrastructure is essential in nature shall be determined by the city.
      5.   The applicant shall note any variations from the approved
preliminary plat. Requests for minor changes that do not constitute substantive
changes may be approved administratively without requiring an amendment to the
preliminary plat. Substantive changes, including, but not limited to, the
layout and location of streets, lots, and outlots, changes to the proposed uses
of the various lots and outlots, and other similar changes that would result in
a substantive change to the character of the subdivision may result in the
necessity to file an amended preliminary plat.
   B.   Specifications: The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
      1.   The plat shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" =
50'); provided, however, if the resultant drawing would be of larger dimension
than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), the plat shall be
submitted at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
      2.   The final plat shall be submitted showing the following information:
         a.   Accurate property boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or
angular dimensions, which provide a land survey of the tract, closing with an
error of not more than one foot (1') in ten thousand feet (10,000').
         b.   Accurate references to known permanent monuments, giving the
bearing and distance from some corner of a lot or block in the city to some
corner of the congressional division of which the city or the addition thereto
is a part.
         c.   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the property boundaries of the tract.
         d.   Accurate legal description of the property boundaries.
         e.   Street names and street right of way widths.
         f.   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plat.
         g.   Street centerlines with accurate dimensions in feet and one-
hundredths of feet with bearings or angular dimensions to street, alley and lot
lines.
         h.   Lot numbers and lot line dimensions. For lots where the lot width
is different from the lot frontage, the lot width must be indicated on the
plat.
         i.   Block numbers, if used.
         j.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public, semipublic or community use.
         k.   Location, type, material and size of all markers.
         l.   Name and street address of the owner and subdivider.
         m.   Name and street address of owner's or subdivider's attorney,
names of persons who prepared the plat and the date of preparation.
         n.   North point, scale and date.
         o.   Certification of the accuracy of the plat by a registered land
surveyor of the state.
         p.   Location and width of easements for utilities.
         q.   Certification by the utility companies that utility easements are
properly placed for the installation of utilities.
         r.   A signature block for endorsement by the city clerk certifying
the city council's approval of the plat.
         s.   A note on the plat stating:
Notes on this plat are not intended to create any vested private interest in
any stated use restriction or covenant or create any third party beneficiaries
to any noted use restriction or covenant.
      3.   Once the final subdivision plat has been approved by the city
council, a final copy of the digital version of the plat shall be submitted to
the department of public works. Said final digital copy shall be compatible
with the Johnson County geographic information system and city of Iowa City
mapping system. Specific formats, procedures, and methods needed to meet this
requirement will be updated as changes in technology occur.
   C.   Accompanying Documents: The final plat shall also be accompanied by the
following documents:
      1.   Owner's Statement: An acknowledged statement from the owner and the
owner's spouse, if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the plat is with
their free consent and is in accordance with the desires of the proprietor and
the proprietor's spouse. This statement may include the dedication to the
public.
      2.   Dedications: Dedication of streets and other public property,
including perpetual easements for the installation, operation and maintenance
of city utilities.
      3.   Mortgage Holder's Or Lien Holder's Statement: An acknowledged
statement from mortgage holders or lien holders that the plat is prepared with
their free consent and in accordance with their desire, as well as a release of
mortgage for any areas dedicated to the public.
      4.   Encumbrance Certificates: If there is no consent from the mortgage
holders or lien holders as specified in subsection C3 of this section, and if
the land being platted is encumbered in the manner set out in the code of Iowa,
as amended, a certificate shall be filed with the Johnson County recorder
showing an encumbrance bond in an amount double the amount of the encumbrance
and approved by the recorder and clerk of the district court. The bond shall
run to the county for the benefit of the purchasers of the land subdivided.
      5.   Attorney's Opinion: An opinion from an attorney at law showing that
the fee title is in the owner and that the land platted is free from
encumbrance or if encumbered, listing the encumbrances and the bonds securing
the encumbrances.
      6.   Construction Plans: A complete set of construction plans for all
public improvements, meeting city specifications, must be submitted to the city
engineer's office.
      7.   County Treasurer's Certificate: A certified statement from the
county treasurer that the land being platted is free from taxes.
      8.   County Auditor's Certificate: A certified statement from the county
auditor approving of the name or title of the subdivision as succinct and
unique to Johnson County.
      9.   Subdivider's Agreement:
         a.   An agreement executed by the subdivider which agrees, as a
covenant running with the land, that the city shall not issue a building permit
for any lot in the subdivision until the subdivider installs the public
improvements, except sidewalks, according to plans and specifications approved
by the city engineer and until the city engineer approves subdivision erosion
control measures. If the subdivider desires a building permit prior to
installing the improvements, the owner must deposit with the city finance
department an escrow equal to the cost of improvements plus ten percent (10%)
thereof in cash or an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city in a
form approved by the city attorney. At the city's discretion, this escrow may
be divided by the number of lots in the subdivision and collected on a per lot
basis prior to the issuance of a building permit. Subdivider must further
agree, as a covenant running with the land, that subdivider will install
sidewalks abutting each lot in the subdivision as set forth in this title, that
the obligation to install the sidewalks remains a lien on the lots abutting the
sidewalk until released by the city and that, in the event subdivider fails to
install the sidewalks, the city may install the sidewalks and assess the total
cost against the property without meeting the requirements of notice, benefit
or value required by state law for assessing improvements.
         b.   The subdivider's agreement shall state that the subdivider,
including its grantees, assignees and successors in interest, agrees that
public services, including, but not limited to, street maintenance, snow and
ice removal and solid waste collection, will not be extended to such
subdivision until the pavement is completed and accepted by the city council by
resolution.
         c.   The subdivider's agreement shall state:
Plat notes and surveyor's notes on plats serve to provide notice of how a
subdivision is expected to develop. Said notes are not intended to create any
vested private interest in any stated use restriction or covenant, or create
any third party beneficiaries to any noted use restriction or covenant. The
City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, subject to any applicable
public notice and approval process required by law, to alter or amend any plat
note, or to sell or vacate any right-of-way, street, alley, park, easement,
open area or other land set apart and dedicated for public use within the plat.
The City further reserves the right, upon request of the owner or successor in
interest, to vacate the plat and/or relocate any easement, alter lot boundaries
or allow said land to be replatted subject to any applicable public notice and
approval process required by law.
         d.   The subdivider's agreement may include other conditions peculiar
to the subdivision as allowed by law.
      10.   Iowa Department Of Transportation Permits: Approved IDOT permits
must be submitted, if required.
      11.   Neighborhood Plan: Where subject to Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones
And Standards), a neighborhood plan shall be submitted that complies with the
standards in
14-2H-1E (Neighborhood Plan) and includes the full geographic scope of the area
being platted.
   D.   Review; Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   Upon the filing of the final plat as set forth above, the department
of neighborhood and development services shall distribute copies of the final
plat and the application to the appropriate city departments for review as
designated by the city manager.
      2.   Said designee(s) shall examine the application, the plat, the
construction plans, and the legal documents to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this code, state law, and the preliminary plat.
      3.   The costs of engineering examination of final plat and construction
plans shall be paid by the subdivider and shall be the actual costs of the
engineering examination and review as incurred by the city.
      4.   Upon completion of said review staff shall recommend approval or
disapproval of the plat within forty five (45) calendar days of the date the
city received a complete application, or the final plat shall be deemed to be
approved by the staff. The owner or subdivider may, however, agree in writing,
to an extension of time.
      5.   Following staff evaluation, the owner or owner's representative
shall submit copies of the revised final plat as requested by the city with the
signatures of the surveyor and the respective utility companies to the city
clerk.
      6.   After receipt of the recommendation of the staff or after the time
of any extension, the city council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove
the final plat. The city council must take action on the final plat within
sixty (60) calendar days of submission of a complete application for a final
plat to the city clerk. If the city council does not approve or disapprove the
plat within sixty (60) calendar days, the final plat shall be deemed approved.
The owner or subdivider may, however, agree in writing, to an extension of
time. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
15-3-1: General Requirements
15-3-2: Streets And Circulation
15-3-3: Sidewalks, Trails, And Pedestrian Connections
15-3-4: Layout Of Blocks And Lots
15-3-5: Neighborhood Open Space Requirements
15-3-6: Energy And Communications Distribution Systems
15-3-7: Sanitary Sewers
15-3-8: Stormwater Management
15-3-9: Water Systems
15-3-10: Clustered Mailboxes
15-3-11: Markers
15-3-12: Specifications
15-3-13: Inspections
15-3-14: Off Site Costs For Public Improvements
15-3-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Design of the subdivision shall comply with the standards of this
chapter, provide for the orderly growth and development of the city,
demonstrate consistency with the Iowa City comprehensive plan and any specific
adopted district plans, and take into consideration the natural features of the
site and patterns of adjacent development.
   B.   The subdivider of property shall be responsible for constructing all
public improvements associated with the proposed subdivision according to this
code, unless exempted from such requirements according to the provisions
herein.
   C.   "Public improvements", as defined in this title, shall be constructed
and installed according to the standards established by the city. Copies of
said standards are on file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 08-4313,
8-26-2008)
15-3-2: STREETS AND CIRCULATION:
   A.   Connectivity Of Streets, Sidewalks, And Trails: Subdivisions shall
provide for continuation and extension of arterial, collector and local
streets, sidewalks and trails in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Arterial streets must be located and extended in general accordance
with the metropolitan planning organization of Johnson County arterial street
plan and Iowa City comprehensive plan.
      2.   All streets, sidewalks, and trails should connect to other streets,
sidewalks, and trails within the development, and to the property line to
provide for their extension to adjacent properties. Each subdivision must
contribute to the larger interconnected street pattern of the city to ensure
street connectivity between neighborhoods, multiple travel routes resulting in
the diffusion and distribution of traffic, efficient routes for public and
emergency services, and to provide direct and continuous vehicular and
pedestrian travel routes to neighborhood destinations.
      3.   The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and
orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to meet the needs of the
present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern and
allow that pattern to continue through adjacent properties; and to respect
natural features and topography.
      4.   Use of cul-de-sacs and other roadways with a single point of access
should be avoided. Cul-de-sacs will be considered where it can be clearly
demonstrated that environmental constraints, existing development, access
limitations along arterial streets, or other unusual features prevent the
extension of the street to the property line or to interconnect with other
streets within or abutting the subdivision.
      5.   Where the area is subject to Article 14-2H (Zones And Standards),
thoroughfares are to create walkable neighborhoods with redundant routes for
vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation. The arrangement of thoroughfares
shall provide for the alignment and continuation of existing or proposed
thoroughfares into adjoining lands where the adjoining lands are undeveloped
and intended for future development, or where the adjoining lands are
undeveloped and include opportunities for such connections.
         a.   Thoroughfare rights-of-way shall be extended to or along
adjoining property boundaries to provide a roadway connection or thoroughfare
stub for development, in compliance with
15-3-4 (Layout Of Blocks And Lots), for each direction (north, south, east, and
west) in which development abuts vacant land.
         b.   All stubs for thoroughfares are to connect with future
thoroughfares on adjoining property and be designed to transition
appropriately.
   B.   Minimum Access Standards: Adequate street access to an area or
neighborhood is required as part of subdivision approval or prior to the
approval of additional subdivision lots. The standards in this subsection are
intended as minimum standards in areas where connectivity is limited by
topography, previous development patterns, or other unusual features and shall
not be used as a means of circumventing the street connectivity standards set
forth in subsection A of this section. The following guidelines will be used by
the city in determining whether additional street access is a prerequisite to
additional lots or developable parcels being approved by the city.
      1.   Additional access may be required if a proposed development will
result in any portion of a street that provides a single means of access to an
area being overburdened with traffic. "Overburdened" shall be defined as a
projected volume which exceeds the midpoint design volume as follows:
         a.   Local street: Five hundred (500) vehicles per day.
         b.   Collector street: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) vehicles per
day.
      2.   Projected traffic volumes shall be determined by using the most
recent average daily traffic count when available, and adding it to projected
traffic generation as determined by the city. In the absence of a recent
traffic count, projected traffic volumes shall be calculated by using projected
traffic generation for both existing and proposed development.
      3.   Additional means of access may also be required if any of the
following conditions exist or will exist if additional lots or developable
parcels are approved:
         a.   There are physical features that may increase the probability of
blockages along the single means of access to the development. These physical
features include, but are not limited to: slopes eight percent (8%) or greater;
floodplains as designated by the federal emergency management agency; a bridged
or culverted roadway; trees adjacent to the roadway with trunk diameter greater
than four inches (4"); a grade separated highway; or a railroad.
         b.   The existing access is insufficient to provide efficient, safe,
and/or cost effective routes for the provision of public and emergency services
for the proposed development.
         c.   The street, which provides a single means of access to the area,
is a local or collector street along which there are existing or proposed
facilities that may increase the probability of pedestrian-motor vehicle
conflicts. These facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, daycare
centers and parks.
         d.   There are land uses located along the subject street that serve
special populations, which may increase the volume of emergency vehicle trips.
These uses include, but are not limited to, adult daycares, facilities serving
elderly persons, or persons with disabilities.
      4.   For a situation requiring additional means of access based on the
above criteria, a single means of access may be permitted as a temporary
condition. A temporary condition is one in which there is secured, written
assurance from the private subdivider that the road, which will provide the
necessary access, will be constructed within three (3) years of development or,
alternatively, said access is scheduled for construction no later than the
third year of the then current capital improvements program of the city.
   C.   Street Types:
      1.   
Table 15-1, "Standards For Street Rights Of Way", of this section provides a
summary of various street types. The information in this table is intended to
provide guidance for the design of the street network within a subdivision,
except for those subdivisions regulated by Article 14-2H (Form- Based Zones And
Standards). When designing a subdivision, street types should be chosen based
on the intended function of the street and anticipated level of traffic. The
city will review the proposed streets and determine the appropriate street type
based on the factors set forth in this section.
      2.   Where a subdivision is regulated by Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones
And Standards), streets shall meet the following thoroughfare standards.
         a.   Thoroughfares shall conform with allowed thoroughfare types and
shall comply with
14-2H-9 (Thoroughfare Type Standards).
         b.   Thoroughfares that pass from one Form-Based Zone to another may
transition in their streetscape along the thoroughfare's edges. For example, a
thoroughfare in a more urban zone (e.g.,T4 Main Street) with commercial uses
may have wide sidewalks with trees that transitions to narrower sidewalks with
a planting strip in a less urban zone (e.g., T4 Neighborhood Medium) with
residential uses.
         c.   Thoroughfares shall substantially comply with the Form-Based Code
Future Land Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan. Variations from the Future Land
Use Map may be approved for thoroughfares where sensitive areas are present, or
where the following standards are met:
            (1)   Thoroughfare types may be substituted with other thoroughfare
types allowed by the zone, except for the following streets: South Gilbert
Street, Sand Road SE, McCollister Boulevard, Sycamore Street, Sycamore Street
SE, and Lehman Avenue.
            (2)   The alignment of thoroughfares may change where connections
to existing street stubs are retained, the new alignment complies with
15-3-4 (Layout Of Blocks And Lots), and single-loaded streets continue to abut
civic or open space.
            (3)   A Passage (
14-2H-9L) may replace another thoroughfare type shown on the Form-Based Code
Future Land Use Map where all affected design sites retain direct street or
alley access. A passage may be removed or replaced by another thoroughfare type
where all abutting design site(s) retain direct street access.
            (4)   An alley (
14-2H-9K) may be added in compliance with
15-3-4 (Layout Of Blocks And Lots). An alley may be removed from locations
identified on the Form-Based Code Future Land Use Map where the alley is not in
a T4MS zone and all design sites abutting the alley have direct street access
to a street other than the following: McCollister Boulevard and South Gilbert
Street.
   D.   Dedication Of Right Of Way: Land shall be dedicated to the city for all
public street rights of way within the development and for any public street
right of way that is needed for streets that abut or will abut the development.
TABLE 15-1:   STANDARDS FOR STREET RIGHTS OF WAY
 Minimum Right Pavement Number Travel Parking Maximum Grade Sidewalk Width
 Of Way Width  Width    Lanes
            Minimum Right Pavement  Number             Maximum      Sidewalk
            Of Way Width  Width     Travel   Parking   Grade        Width
                                    Lanes
Residential
alley/rear  20 feet       16 feet   2        No        12 percent   n/a
lane
Commercial  20 feet       20 feet/
alley/rear  minimum/      varies    2        No        10 percent   n/a
lane        varies
            100 feet                                                4 feet
Loop        minimum/      22 feet   1 shared Yes, on 1 10 percent   residential
street1     varies                           side                   side of
                                                                    street only
Low volume  50 feet       22 feet   1 shared Yes, on 1 10 percent   4 feet both
cul-de-sac2                                  side                   sides
Cul-de-sac  60 feet       26 or 28  2        Yes3      10 percent   5 feet both
                          feet                                      sides
Local                     26 or 28                                  5 feet both
residential 60 feet       feet      2        Yes3      12 percent   sides
street
Local
commercial/ 60 feet       28 feet   2        Yes       8 percent    5 feet both
industrial                                                          sides
street
                                                       10 percent
                                                       for
Collector                                              residential;
street (all 66 feet       31 feet   2        Yes       8 percent    5 feet both
land uses)                                             for          sides
                                                       commercial
                                                       or
                                                       industrial
Collector                                                           5 feet both
street with 66 feet       34 feet   2        No        8 percent    sides
bike lanes
2 lane      100 feet                                                8 feet one
arterial    minimum       31 feet   2        No        8 percent    side/5 feet
street                                                              one side
Arterial    100 feet                                                8 feet one
street with minimum       34 feet   2        No        8 percent    side/5 feet
bike lanes                                                          one side
                          54 feet/
4 lane                    varies                                    8 feet one
arterial    100 feet      depending 4        No        8 percent    side/5 feet
street      minimum       if median                                 one side
                          is
                          included
                          Varies,
            100 feet      based on
            minimum; more number of
Arterial    may be        lanes and                                 8 feet one
street with required      whether   2        Yes       8 percent    side/5 feet
parking     depending on  parking                                   one side
            parking       is
            configuration parallel
                          or angled
                          46 feet/
3 lane                    varies                                    8 feet one
arterial    100 feet      depending 3        No        8 percent    side/5 feet
street      minimum       if median                                 one side
                          is
                          included
 
Notes:
   1.   Loop streets provide access for 12 or fewer dwellings.
   2.   Low volume cul-de-sacs provide access to 10 or fewer single-family
dwellings.
   3.   For residential streets with less than 28 feet of pavement width,
parking is restricted to one side.
   E.   Measurements And Construction Standards:
      1.   All right of way improvements must be designed and constructed
according to the design and construction standards established by the city.
Said standards are on file in the office of the city engineer.
      2.   All street widths shall be measured back of curb to back of curb.
      3.   The minimum outside radius of the pavement of cul-de-sac bulbs and
loop streets is thirty nine feet (39'). A center median is required at the
center of the cul-de-sac bulb with a minimum radius of eleven feet (11'). For
loop streets a median is also required with a minimum width of thirty feet
(30'). In residential areas, center medians for cul-de-sacs and loop streets
are required to be landscaped to at least the S1 standard as described in title
14, chapter 5, article F, "Screening And Buffering Standards", of this code.
The subdivider's agreement shall designate and set forth procedures for
property owners or a homeowners' association to maintain the landscaped area
within the center median of loop streets and cul-de-sacs. Said instrument shall
provide that if said services are not provided as required therein, the city
shall have the right to perform said services, and the cost thereof shall be a
lien and charge against all of the subject lots.
   F.   Street Intersections:
      1.   A maximum of four (4) legs are allowed at any one intersection.
      2.   The distance between street intersections must be at least one
hundred twenty five feet (125') centerline to centerline.
      3.   Intersections of street centerlines shall be between eighty degrees
(80°) and one hundred degrees (100°).
      4.   Corner lots abutting on an arterial or collector street shall have a
minimum radius of fifteen feet (15') at the intersection.
      5.   Dead end streets and alleys are not permitted except at subdivision
boundaries abutting undeveloped areas. In such cases a temporary fire apparatus
accommodating turnaround may be required and, if required, must be constructed
to city specifications.
   G.   Traffic Calming Features:
      1.   The street network, block length, and layout of lots should be
designed in a manner that discourages speeding traffic and unsafe driving
behavior.
      2.   In order to minimize the potential for speeding traffic and create a
safer environment for pedestrians and bicycles, the city may also, in cases
where it is warranted, require traffic calming features to be designed into the
subdivision. These features may include, but are not limited to, discontinuous
streets, curb extensions, raised crosswalks, medians, or traffic circles.
   H.   Street Names: The city reserves the right to deny the use of street
names that are not in the public interest. Street names must be consistent with
the following standards, unless an exception is approved by the city:
      1.   In order to ensure safe and efficient provision of public and
emergency services, each proposed street name shall be distinct from other
street names within the larger metropolitan area;
      2.   Street names that are overly lengthy, difficult to pronounce, or
that may be considered inappropriate or unappealing shall be avoided;
      3.   For new streets, the following rules apply:
         a.   The term "street", should be used for a nondead end roadway
aligned in a north-south direction;
         b.   The term "avenue" should be used for a nondead end roadway
aligned in an east-west direction;
         c.   The term "boulevard", "road", or "drive" may be used for a
roadway that is aligned neither in a north-south nor east-west direction, but
which changes direction or meanders;
         d.   The terms "lane", "court", "circle", "place" should be used for
cul-de-sacs or low volume loop streets.
      4.   Cul-de-sacs or low volume loop streets may use the same name as the
roadway with which it intersects. For example, a cul-de-sac that intersects
with Rose Avenue may be named "Rose Court". However, if more than one cul-de-
sac or loop street intersects with Rose Avenue, an additional "Rose" name may
not be used.
      5.   Similar names may not be used for streets that are in different
locations within the city. For example, the name "Rose Drive" may not be used
in one neighborhood if there is already a "Rose Avenue" in a different
neighborhood.
   I.   Private Streets:
      1.   Private streets in single-family residential areas are not allowed.
      2.   Requests for private streets in multi-family, commercial, and
industrial areas will be considered, provided that connectivity to adjacent
properties is not needed and the responsibilities for maintenance, snow
removal, garbage service, and street sweeping is clearly established according
to the provisions of subsection I3 of this section.
      3.   If private streets are approved, the subdivider must submit a
legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be followed for
maintaining private streets and providing garbage service, snow removal, street
sweeping, and for financing these services. Such costs shall be shared by all
owners of property located within the subdivision, or designated portion
thereof, through the use of an owners' association or other entity satisfactory
to the city. Said instrument shall provide that if said services are not
provided as required therein, the city shall have the right to perform said
services, and the cost thereof shall be a lien and charge against all of the
owners of lots so designated in the subdivision.
   J.   Cost Sharing For Pavement Overwidth: In the event arterial or collector
streets are required in a subdivision, the city shall pay for the excess
pavement required over that required for a twenty eight foot (28') wide local
street. The city engineer shall calculate the excess cost. Such cost sharing
shall be according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment
for pavement overwidth by the city shall be pursuant to state law.
   K.   Cost Sharing For Street Upgrades:
      1.   At the discretion of the city, subdivisions may be approved that
access existing public streets that do not meet city standards, provided the
subdivider contributes toward the future reconstruction cost of bringing the
segment of the subject street that abuts the subject property to city
standards. When determining whether such an approval will be granted, the city
will evaluate the street based on factors such as roadway surface, sight
distance, anticipated traffic levels, and pedestrian/bicycle facilities. If the
city permits a development to access a street that does not meet city
standards, the subdivider shall contribute to the cost as follows:
         a.   Local Streets: Local streets are streets that serve as access to
property and carry insignificant amounts of through traffic. Therefore, the
subdivider shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of upgrading a
local street to city standards for that segment of the street that abuts the
subject property. If the subdivider controls land on only one side of a local
street, they will be required to contribute fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
upgrading the subject street segment to city standards. The city will expect
the subdivider of property on the other side of the street to contribute the
other fifty percent (50%) of the costs at such time as that land is subdivided/
developed. Costs to reconstruct the street will be determined by the city
engineer.
         b.   Collector Streets: Collector streets are streets that collect
traffic from a subdivision or neighborhood, and direct it to and from the
arterial street. The function of a collector street is fifty percent (50%)
access to property, and fifty percent (50%) through traffic. Therefore, the
subdivider will be required to contribute fifty percent (50%) of the cost to
upgrade a collector street to city standards for that segment of the street
that abuts the subject property, with the city contributing the other fifty
percent (50%). If a subdivider controls land on only one side of the collector
street, they will be required to contribute twenty five percent (25%) of the
total cost for the subject street segment. The city will expect the subdivider
on the other side of the collector street to contribute the other twenty five
percent (25%) of the cost at such time as that land is subdivided/developed.
Costs to reconstruct the street to city standards will be determined by the
city engineer.
         c.   Arterial Streets: Arterial streets have the primary function of
carrying traffic through and between neighborhoods. The function of an arterial
street is twenty five percent (25%) access to property, and seventy five
percent (75%) through traffic. Therefore, the subdivider will be required to
contribute twenty five percent (25%) of the cost to upgrade an arterial street
to city standards for that segment of the street that abuts the subject
property, with the city contributing the other seventy five percent (75%). If a
subdivider controls land on only one side of the arterial street, they will be
required to contribute 12.5 percent of the total cost of the subject street
segment. The city will expect the subdivider on the other side of the arterial
street to contribute the other 12.5 percent of the cost at such time as that
land is subdivided/developed. Costs to reconstruct the street to city standards
will be determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord.
21-4866, 11-16-2021)
15-3-3: SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, AND PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS:
Public sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed in
the public right of way according to the following standards:
   A.   Sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian connections shall be constructed
according to city standards. Said standards are on file in the office of the
city engineer.
   B.   Five foot (5') wide concrete sidewalks must be constructed along both
sides of all local and collector streets, except for connections to existing
sidewalks as provided in subsection D of this section. For low volume and loop
streets, as described in
table 15-1 of section
15-3-2 of this chapter, the required sidewalk width may be reduced to four feet
(4').
   C.   Along arterial streets, a five foot (5') sidewalk is required on one
side of the street and an eight foot (8') sidewalk on the other side, except as
allowed in subsection D of this section. The city will determine on which side
of the street the eight foot (8') sidewalk will be placed. When an eight foot
(8') sidewalk is required, the city, at its discretion, will either pay for the
excess pavement required for the developer to install an eight foot (8')
sidewalk rather than a five foot (5') sidewalk, or collect the estimated cost
of the five foot (5') sidewalk from the developer and apply said cost to
construction of an eight foot (8') sidewalk by the city. Any payment of excess
pavement costs by the city shall be pursuant to state law.
   D.   In cases where the proposed sidewalk provides a connection between
existing sidewalks that are less than the required width, the proposed sidewalk
may be constructed to match the width of the adjacent sidewalks. However, this
modification is not allowed in cases where one end of the proposed sidewalk
will provide a connection to future sidewalks for new development. In such a
case, the sidewalk should be tapered to provide a transition between differing
sidewalk widths. The city will determine where along the street the transition
should occur.
   E.   All sidewalks and trails must connect to other sidewalks and trails
within the development and to the property line to provide for their extension
to adjacent properties.
   F.   The subdivider will be responsible for the construction of a public
sidewalk along the frontage of private open space, public open space required
to be dedicated to the city according to title 14, chapter 5, article K,
"Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this code and along the frontage of
other outlots as necessary for a continuous sidewalk system to be created.
   G.   In residential subdivisions, blocks longer than six hundred feet (600')
must have midblock pedestrian connections between adjacent streets, unless said
connection is deemed to be unnecessary and is waived by the city. At the time
of subdivision, these connections must be platted as minimum fifteen foot (15')
wide easements; if the connecting sidewalk is greater than five feet (5') in
width, the easement must be at least twenty feet (20') wide. Within this
easement a sidewalk must be constructed to city standards that is equal in
width to the sidewalks to which it provides a connection. If the midblock
sidewalk connects to sidewalks of two (2) different widths, the midblock
sidewalk must be equal in width to the wider sidewalk. The area and sidewalk
within the pedestrian easement must be maintained by adjacent property owners
according to the subdivider's agreement in a manner similar to maintenance
requirements for public sidewalks.
   H.   Where a trail extension, as identified in the comprehensive plan or an
adopted trails plan, is located on the subject property, the city may require
an easement or alternatively, may require dedication of an outlot for the
trail. Construction of the trail or portion of a trail may also be required in
instances where said trail or portion of a trail primarily serves the needs of
the proposed subdivision/development. In this situation, the trail will be
treated as a public improvement. Dedication of land for a trail extension shall
count toward the open space requirement for the development, provided said land
is consistent with the standards for open space as set forth in title 14,
chapter 5, article K of this code and provided said land dedication is
acceptable to the city. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-4: LAYOUT OF BLOCKS AND LOTS:
   A.   Blocks:
      1.   Blocks should be limited in size and be laid out in a pattern that
ensures the connectivity of streets, provides for efficient provision of public
and safety services, and establishes efficient and logical routes between
residences and nonresidential destinations and public gathering places.
      2.   Block Lengths:
         a.   Except as required by Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones And
Standards), to provide multiple travel routes within and between neighborhoods,
block faces along local and collector streets should range between three
hundred (300) and six hundred feet (600') in length and for residential
subdivisions have a width sufficient to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots.
Longer block faces may be allowed in cases of large lot commercial, industrial,
or rural residential development, or where topography, water features, or
existing development prevents shorter block lengths, although midblock
pedestrian connections may be required (see section 15-3-3 of this chapter).
Block faces are measured from centerline to centerline.
         b.   Where the area is subject to Article 14-2H (Form-Based Zones And
Standards), the block network shall substantially comply with the Form-Based
Code Future Land Use Map in the Comprehensive Plan and shall meet the following
standards:
            (1)   Individual block lengths and the total block perimeter shall
comply with the standards in
Table 15-3-4A-1 (Block Size Standards). Where a block contains multiple Form-
Based Zones, the most intense zone is to be used to establish the standards for
block size. Blocks may exceed the maximum allowed length if a compliant passage
(
14-2H-9L) is provided to break up the block.
Table 15-3-4A-1: Block Size Standards
Zone Length (max.) Length (max.) With Perimeter Length Perimeter Length With
                   Passage1                            Passage1
Table 15-3-4A-1: Block Size Standards
Zone  Length (max.) Length (max.) With Perimeter Length Perimeter Length With
                    Passage1                            Passage1
T3 NE 500' max.     800' max.          1,600' max.      2,200' max.
T3 NG 500' max.     800' max.          1,600' max.      2,200' max.
T4 NS 360' max.     600' max.          1,440' max.      1,950' max.
T4 NM 360' max.     600' max.          1,440' max.      1,950' max.
T4 MS 360' max.     500' max.          1,440' max.      1,750' max.
1   In compliance with the standards for a passage in sub-section
14-2H-9L (Passage).
2   Adjustment to block size standards may be requested according to the
approval criteria and procedures for adjustments contained in
15-3-4A-5.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3696.png]
Key: _ . . _  Block Perimeter _ . . _ Design Site
         (2)   Blocks shall be a minimum width to result in two (2) halves of
developable design sites in compliance with the minimum design site depth
standards of the allowed building types in the Form-Based Zone. When the zone
has a range of minimum design site depths, the applicant may show the shortest
minimum design site depth with an acknowledgement that the selected depth may
not accommodate the full range of building types allowed by the zone. A single
half is allowed when adjoining an existing half-block.
         (3)   The size, shape, length, location, and design of blocks may vary
from the Future Land Use Map where required to accommodate sensitive areas, or
where the variation complies maintains street connectivity, complies with
Table 15-3-4A-1 (Block Size Standards, minimizes changes to Form-Based Zones on
each block, and adjusts all blocks affected by the proposed change(s). Where
this affects the location, shape, or design of civic space, the variation shall
maintain civic space of a similar size in a nearby location within the
subdivision.
      3.   Block faces along arterial streets should be at least six hundred
feet (600') in length. Intersecting collector streets should be spaced in a
manner that provides adequate connectivity between neighborhoods, but also
maintains the capacity of the street for the safe and efficient movement of
traffic. Longer block faces may be required along high capacity or higher speed
arterial streets where the interests in moving traffic outweigh the
connectivity between areas of development. The city may approve shorter block
faces in high density commercial areas or other areas with high pedestrian
counts.
      4.   Cul-de-sacs may not exceed nine hundred feet (900') in length. The
length of a cul-de-sac is measured from the centerline of the street from which
it commences to the center of the bulb.
      5.   Adjustments To Block Size Standards:
         a.   The individual block lengths and the total block perimeter
standards of each zone in this section may be adjusted as part of the
subdivision process. In considering an adjustment, the Director of Neighborhood
and Development Services shall find that the proposed adjustment meets the
following criteria:
            (1)   Demonstrates that one or more of the following special
circumstances apply to the property, which make it impractical to comply with
the block size standards:
               (A)   The adjustment is needed to avoid a regulated sensitive
area.
               (B)   The adjustment is needed to reduce the amount of grading
needed due to the property's existing topography.
               (C)   The adjustment is needed because the alignment of an
existing street that must be extended creates a configuration that makes
compliance impractical.
               (D)   The adjustment is needed because the abutting neighborhood
is designed with longer blocks that impact the proposed development. The new
blocks abutting the existing longer blocks cannot accommodate new streets and
pedestrian passages are infeasible.
               (E)   The adjustment is needed because a single-loaded street or
passage has been determined to be undesirable for the block to protect the
sensitive nature of public parkland.
               (F)   The adjustment is needed because visibility and access to
public parks, civic uses, and natural open spaces are provided through other
means besides a single-loaded street.
            (2)   The adjustment will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the
vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located.
            (3)   The adjustment requested is in conformity with the intent and
purpose of the regulation modified.
            (4)   The requested adjustment complies with other applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws, and regulations.
   B.   Lots:
      1.   Lots must be platted in a manner that will allow development that
meets all requirements of title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. Lots and
design sites must be of sufficient size to accommodate an adequate buildable
area and area for required setbacks, off street parking, and service facilities
required by the type of use and development anticipated.
      2.   Lots with multiple frontages must be platted large enough to
accommodate front setback requirements along street side lot lines.
      3.   If a property with frontage along an arterial street is proposed to
be subdivided, developed or redeveloped for any multi-family, group living,
commercial, institutional or industrial use, a cross access easement must be
provided by the property owner to all adjoining properties that front on the
same arterial street that are or may be developed as multi-family, group
living, commercial, institutional use, or industrial uses according to the
cross access standards set forth in section
14-5C-7 of this code.
      4.   In residential areas, double and triple frontage lots shall be
avoided. Where such lots are necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography, land features, or access restrictions, the following standards
apply:
         a.   Lots with multiple frontages shall be one hundred twenty five
percent (125%) of the required lot area for the zone in which the lot is
located. The additional required lot area shall be used to increase the depth
of the lot between street frontages. Corner lots with only two (2) frontages
are exempt from this requirement, however, said corner lots should be platted
with enough land area to accommodate the required front setback area along both
frontages.
         b.   Double and triple frontage lots where dwellings will have side or
rear building facades oriented toward an arterial street shall provide a
minimum twenty foot (20') wide landscaped buffer area along the arterial street
frontage. The buffer area shall be planted with a mixture of coniferous and
deciduous vegetation approved by the city forester. The vegetation shall be
required along with other public improvements for the property. Lots where
dwellings will have front building facades oriented toward an arterial street
are exempt from this requirement. If a buffer area was required during
subdivision, no solid fences will be allowed within this buffer area. This
restriction must be noted in the subdivider's agreement and on the plat. On
corner lots, the landscaping within the buffer must be planted and maintained
to comply with intersection visibility standards.
      5.   Side lot lines shall approximate right angles to straight street
lines or be approximately radial to curved street lines, except where a
variation will provide a better street and lot layout. For purposes of this
subsection, "approximate right angles" means angles between eighty degrees
(80°) and one hundred degrees (100°).
      6.   Residential lots shall not be designed with irregular shapes such as
a flag or panhandle shape where the structure on the lot may be hidden from the
street behind another structure.
      7.   In residential subdivisions, lots must be arranged to allow easy
access to public open space. The subdivision layout should be designed so that
the location and access to public open space is readily apparent to the public.
Subdivision layouts where public open space is surrounded by private lots that
back up to the public open space are discouraged. Techniques, such as single
loaded streets along park edges or along segments of park edges and well marked
trail easements are to be utilized to satisfy this requirement.
   C.   Provisions To Minimize The Effect Of Highway Noise: Subdivisions
adjacent to or within three hundred feet (300') of the Interstate 80 and/or the
Highway 218 rights of way shall comply with the following provisions, intended
to reduce the effect of highway noise on residential areas:
      1.   Any portion of a residential lot that is within three hundred feet
(300') of the Interstate 80 or Highway 218 right of way shall be identified as
a noise buffer, and no residential structure will be permitted within this
three hundred foot (300') buffer area. The buffer area shall be planted with a
mixture of coniferous and deciduous vegetation approved by the city forester.
The vegetation shall be required along with other public improvements for the
property. Existing trees and vegetation may be used to comply with this
requirement as approved by the city forester. Accessory structures and yards
are permitted within the three hundred foot (300') buffer area provided the
required vegetative buffer is maintained.
      2.   The three hundred foot (300') buffer for residential structures may
be reduced with approval by the city if the subdivider constructs an earthen
berm, decorative wall, or other similar structure and demonstrates that the
highway noise just outside the proposed residential structures will be no more
than sixty (60) dB.
      3.   The three hundred foot (300') buffer for residential structures may
also be reduced with approval by the city if the subdivider demonstrates that
existing topography results in highway noise being no more than sixty (60) dB
just outside the proposed residential structures.  (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008;
amd. Ord. 21-4866, 11-16-2021; Ord. 25-4953, 5-6-2025)
15-3-5: NEIGHBORHOOD OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Intent And Purpose: The neighborhood open space requirements are
intended to ensure provision of adequate usable neighborhood open space, parks
and recreation facilities in a manner that is consistent with the parks master
plan, as amended, by using a fair and reasonably calculable method to equitably
apportion the costs of acquiring and/or developing land for those purposes.
Active, usable neighborhood open space includes pedestrian/bicycle trails
preferably located within natural greenway systems, private open space that is
publicly accessible, and neighborhood parks that serve nearby residents.
   B.   Dedication Of Land Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Of Land Required: The
dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the preliminary subdivision
plat. As a condition of approval for preliminary plats containing residential
uses, the applicant shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu of land, or a
combination thereof, for park, greenway, recreational and open space purposes,
as determined by the city and in accordance with the provisions of title 14,
chapter 5, article K, "Neighborhood Open Space Requirements", of this code.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008; amd. Ord. 25-4965, 9-2-2025)
15-3-6: ENERGY AND COMMUNICATIONS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Extension of energy distribution lines and communication distribution
systems necessary to furnish permanent electric service and communication
system service to new development within a new subdivision shall be made
underground from existing systems according to the provisions set forth in
title 16, chapter 2, "Public Utilities And Use Of City Right Of Way", of this
code.
   B.   The applicant shall provide all easements necessary for access to
streetlights, to allow energy and communication system services for the
subdivision, and the easements shall be included as part of the plat of the
subdivision.
   C.   In new subdivisions, the electric public utility company shall provide
underground wiring to the pole sites for appropriate streetlights as determined
by the city manager or designee.
   D.   In subdivisions approved after the effective date of Ordinance 23-4893,
no restrictive covenant shall be adopted or enforced against properties within
said subdivision that attempt to impose unreasonable restrictions on the use of
solar collectors, as defined by Iowa Code Chapter 564A. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-
2008; amd. Ord. 23-4893, 1-24-2023)
15-3-7: SANITARY SEWERS:
   A.   The subdivider shall provide a complete sanitary sewer system,
including stubs, for each lot which shall connect with a sanitary sewer outlet
approved by the city engineer as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, "City
Utilities", of this code. The sanitary sewer in each defined drainage area
shall extend to the subdivision boundaries and beyond, as necessary to provide
for the extension of the sanitary sewer to adjacent property, as determined by
the city.
   B.   Project specific tap-on fees may apply as set forth in title 16,
chapter 3, article B, "Project Specific Tap-On Fees", of this code.
   C.   If the city requires a sanitary sewer to be greater in size than that
needed to service the subdivision itself, the city may share in the expense
thereof on a pro rata basis. Such cost sharing shall be according to the
procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment of excess costs by the
city shall be pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-8: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
The developer shall provide the subdivision with adequate drains, ditches,
culverts, complete bridges, storm sewers, intakes and manholes to provide for
the collection, management, and removal of all surface waters as set forth in
title 16, chapter 3, article G, "Stormwater Collection, Discharge And Runoff",
of this code. These improvements shall extend to the boundaries of the
subdivision and beyond, as necessary to provide for extension by adjoining
properties, as determined by the city. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-9: WATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   The developer shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main
supply system as set forth in title 16, chapter 3, "City Utilities", of this
code, including hydrants, valves and all other appurtenances, which shall be
extended into and through the subdivision to the boundary lines and beyond as
may be necessary to provide for extension by adjoining properties, as
determined by the city. The system shall provide for a water connection for
lots and shall be connected to the city water system.
   B.   If city requires a water main to be greater in size than that needed to
service the subdivision itself, the city may share in the expense thereof on a
pro rata basis. Such cost sharing shall be according to the procedure set forth
by the city manager. Any payment of excess costs by the city shall be pursuant
to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-10: CLUSTERED MAILBOXES:
   A.   All new residential or commercial developments platted after the
effective date of these regulations that receive curbside delivery of mail
shall have clustered mailboxes, unless an exception is approved by the United
States postal service. The location of mailbox clusters shall be noted on the
plat. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
   B.   Mailbox clusters serving residential developments shall be conveniently
located for residents. Unless otherwise approved by the city, mailbox clusters
shall be located in an outlot maintained by the homeowners' association.
Mailboxes should be located in a manner that provides safe access for
residents, e.g., does not require residents to cross heavily trafficked
streets. Driveways shall be allowed no closer than twelve feet (12') from the
location of a clustered mailbox as measured along the curb line of the fronting
street. Mailboxes must be located in a manner that will not violate the city's
intersection visibility standards. Locations and design must be approved by the
city and the United States postal service. Depending on the size and location
of the clustered mailbox, the city may require a vehicular pull over lane built
to city specifications.
   C.   Mailbox clusters shall be located on a concrete pad built to city
specifications. To provide for pedestrian access, a five foot (5') wide
concrete sidewalk shall be provided from the mailbox cluster to the adjacent
public street and sidewalk. An accessible route shall be provided according to
ADA standards for accessible design. In situations where there are a large
number of mailboxes, the cluster site should be designed and located as an
attractive and integrated component of the neighborhood (e.g., covering or
shade structure, landscaping, setbacks, parking or vehicle access) in order to
ensure that it does not detract from properties immediately adjacent to it. The
cost of installation, including, but not limited to, box units and concrete pad
and sidewalk access shall be borne by the developer, and subsequent maintenance
shall be the responsibility of the homeowners' association and/or the United
States postal service. (Ord. 14-4572, 3-4-2014)
15-3-11: MARKERS:
An iron rod meeting specifications of state code shall be placed as follows:
   A.   At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
subdivision.
   B.   At block and lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot
boundaries.
   C.   At the beginning and ending points of curves and at lot lines
intersecting the curves. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-12: SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   The type of construction, the materials, the methods and standards of
subdivision improvements shall be according to city standards. Said standards
are on file in the office of the city engineer.
   B.   Construction plans and specifications, including plans for subdivision
erosion control measures, shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval
prior to construction. Construction shall not commence until the city engineer
approves the plans and specifications.
   C.   If the infrastructure and/or grading cannot be designed to comply with
city standards a new preliminary plat may be required at the discretion of the
city.
   D.   Record of construction drawings must be submitted in hard copy and in
digital form before public improvements will be accepted by the city. (Ord. 08-
4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The city engineer or designee shall inspect the installation of all
public improvements in new subdivisions to ensure compliance with the
requirements.
   B.   The subdivider shall bear the cost of such inspection, which shall be
the actual cost of the inspection by the city.
   C.   Grading shall be inspected and certified by the developer's engineer.
(Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
15-3-14: OFF SITE COSTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   From time to time off site public improvements are necessary to enable
the subdivision and development of a property. At such times, the subdivider
shall be responsible for the extension of infrastructure. If said
infrastructure or certain aspects of said infrastructure is included in the
city's capital improvements program in a year coincident with the development
proposal, the city may, at the city's discretion, assume responsibility for the
extension of the subject infrastructure.
   B.   Off site improvements shall be designed and constructed according to
plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and shall be of
sufficient size and capacity to serve the full area capable of being served by
the type of improvement so that the city will not be required to construct
parallel or duplicate facilities. If said infrastructure is greater in size
than that needed to service the subdivision itself, the city, at its
discretion, may share in the expense thereof. Such cost sharing shall be
according to the procedure set forth by the city manager. Any payment of excess
costs by the city shall be pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-4313, 8-26-2008)
TITLE 16
PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
ARTICLE A. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY GENERALLY
SECTION:
16-1A-1: Definitions
16-1A-2: Protection Of Public Right Of Way Generally
16-1A-3: Grades Of Public Streets
16-1A-4: Prohibited Surface Materials In Certain Areas
16-1A-5: Debris On Public Right Of Way
16-1A-6: Maintenance Of Public Right Of Way
16-1A-7: Permission Required, Public Right Of Way
16-1A-8: Snow And Ice Removal
16-1A-9: Openings In Public Right Of Way
16-1A-10: Piano Permits
16-1A-11: Publishers' Box Maintenance Code
16-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   DEBRIS: Any dirt, erosion, mud, gravel or other materials.
   DIRECTOR: Director, department of public works.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Property dedicated to public use and intended for the
movement of the public, including public utilities as defined in this article.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, company or corporation utilizing or requesting
to use the public right of way to deliver energy or communication services.
   SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right of way dedicated to and/or
intended primarily for pedestrian use.
   STREET: The improved portion of public right of way primarily intended for
vehicular travel and including alleys. (1994 Code)
16-1A-2: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY GENERALLY:
The director of public works shall be responsible for construction, management
and maintenance of public right of way. (1994 Code)
16-1A-3: GRADES OF PUBLIC STREETS:
The grades of all streets and alleys along the centerlines thereof shall be
called out in feet and decimals thereof in relation to certain reference datum,
namely SUIBM 1 - old stone capitol, on top of granite block at northwest corner
of steps at west entrance; bronze tablet marked "University of Iowa B.M."
110.13, Iowa City datum or 698.40, national geodetic vertical datum. (1978 Code
§31-8; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1A-4: PROHIBITED SURFACE MATERIALS IN CERTAIN AREAS:
   A.   Within the area of the city bordered by Church, Dodge, Bowery and
Madison Streets, no person shall place or allow to be placed any loose rocks,
stones, gravel or similar loose substances as a surface material in the area
between the traveled or paved area of the street right of way and the abutting
property line.
   B.   The director of public works shall adopt administrative regulations
which describe acceptable surface materials and establish policies and
procedures for their placement and maintenance. (1978 Code §31-10)
16-1A-5: DEBRIS ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Debris Deposits Prohibited: Deposit of debris upon the public right of
way in such a manner as to create a public nuisance shall be unlawful 1 .
   B.   Responsibility For Removal; Failure To Remove: In the event that debris
is deposited upon the public right of way, the owner or person in possession or
control of the property from which the debris was carried shall promptly,
without notice or demand, remove said debris the same day as when deposited. If
such debris is not promptly removed, the city may, after reasonable written
notice to the owner or person in possession or control of the property, remove
the debris and assess the cost of such work against the property from which the
debris was removed, for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as
provided by state law.
   C.   Summary Removal By City: In addition to the provisions of this section,
whenever, in the judgment of the director of public works or the police chief,
an emergency exists creating a health or safety hazard which requires immediate
removal of debris from the public right of way, the city may remove the debris
and assess the removal cost against the property from which the debris was
removed, for collection in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by
state law. (1978 Code §31-11; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-3800, 7-29-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   6-1-2N of this code.
16-1A-6: MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
The abutting property owner shall maintain all public right of way located
between the edge of the street or curb line and the property line, and shall
keep such area in a safe condition free from defects, debris, nuisances,
obstructions or any other hazard. The abutting property owner may be liable for
damages caused by failure to maintain the public right of way located between
the edge of the street or curb line and the property line. The abutting
property owner shall maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition, in a state of
good repair, and free from defects. The abutting property owner may be liable
for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk. Notwithstanding the
obligations imposed hereunder, the property owner shall in no event remove
diseased trees or dead wood or plant, trim, remove or treat any tree or plant
material on public right of way without first obtaining a permit from the city
forester. (Ord. 04-4126, 5-4-2004)
16-1A-7: PERMISSION REQUIRED, PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any encroachment into
or over the public right of way, except as specifically allowed by this code.
For any such encroachment into or over the public right of way that is
specifically allowed by this code that exceeds fourteen (14) days, including
signs, buildings, and other structures, a use of public right of way agreement
must be signed by the abutting property owner and approved by the city as a
part of the approval process. If the duration of the encroachment is fourteen
(14) or fewer days, the Director is authorized to issue a permit to the
abutting property owner or other person applying to use the right of way.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 24-4937, 9-17-2024)
16-1A-8: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 1 :
   A.   Removal Required: No owner, tenant, responsible party or person in
possession or control of property shall allow snow or ice accumulations to
remain upon abutting sidewalks for more than twenty four (24) hours. (1978 Code
§31-120; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Removal By City: Snow or ice accumulations which have remained on any
sidewalk for more than twenty four (24) hours may be removed by the city. If
the property owner fails to pay the costs of removal, after written billing,
the city may assess the costs against the property in the same manner as a
property tax, as provided by state law.
   C.   Removal By Persons Other Than City:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any private property owner or person in
possession or control of private property to deposit snow and/or ice from
private property onto public right of way.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to remove snow or ice from public right of way
in a manner which interferes with or unduly restricts vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic.
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to or limit the city's snowplowing
operations.
   D.   Removal Policies: The director may establish snow and ice removal
policies, as provided by state law, which policies shall be approved by
resolution of the city council. (1994 Code)
   E.   Violation: Violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction
punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 6-1-2K and sections
  9-4-9 and
  10-5-5 of this code.
16-1A-9: OPENINGS IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful to leave open or in an insecure condition any grating,
vaults, vault doors, manholes and coverings to stairways or window wells or any
other opening in or on public right of way. (1994 Code)
16-1A-10: PIANO PERMITS:
The city engineer or designee is authorized to issue an annual piano permit for
placement of a piano on the right of way subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Use is limited from March 1 to November 30;
   B.   Insurance coverage as required by the city's risk manager;
   C.   Execution of an agreement to indemnify the city;
   D.   No sale, transfer, or assignment of the piano permit without written
consent of the city;
   E.   The location of the piano must be approved by the city and shall not
interfere with access to public or city utilities located and/or operated
within the city's right of way;
   F.   No sign or advertisement is allowed on the piano except for a sign
identifying the sponsor(s) of the piano;
   G.   The piano must be securely covered from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. Sunday through Wednesday and from twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Thursday through Saturday. When uncovered
the piano must be available for use by all members of the public.
   H.   The piano shall be securely anchored to the right of way. The anchoring
system must be approved by the city engineer or designee. Applicant shall be
responsible for all damage to the right of way caused by the anchoring or
placement of the piano. A deposit in an amount determined by the city engineer
or designee shall be required prior to placement of the anchoring system and
shall be returned when the sidewalk is restored to its prior condition.
   I.   The applicant shall be solely responsible for the piano and any and all
damage to the piano.
The city engineer or designee shall grant the permit if the applicant has fully
completed the application which includes signing the indemnification agreement,
providing a certificate of insurance showing compliance with this section, and
paying the deposit. If the permit is denied, the city engineer or designee
shall state the reasons therefor within three (3) working days of the
application being filed. The process for appeals and revocation of the permit
shall be the same as for a temporary use of sidewalk permit. (Ord. 10-4406, 9-
21-2010)
16-1A-11: PUBLISHERS' BOX MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall place or maintain any publishers' box
on public right of way or on City Plaza without first obtaining a permit.
   B.   Definition: "Publishers' box" means any machine or other enclosed box
used for distributing newspapers or other printed material while offering or
displaying the material for sale or free distribution and capable of operation
by pedestrians without the assistance of an attendant.
   C.   Deadline: All publishers' boxes presently on public right of way and on
City Plaza shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the effective date
hereof, unless a permit has been issued.
   D.   System: A permit system to enforce the publishers' box maintenance code
shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 16-4673, 8-16-2016)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS
SECTION:
16-1B-1: Permit Required; Restriction
16-1B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTRICTION:
Before any person shall cut any curb on any street in the city, the person
shall first obtain an access permit from the department of public works, which
permit shall be issued only on condition that the curb cutting be done in
accordance with the provisions of
title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of this code.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE C. SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
16-1C-1: Sidewalk Grades
16-1C-2: Location
16-1C-3: Construction And Repair
16-1C-1: SIDEWALK GRADES:
All sidewalks shall conform to the established grade of that part of the street
upon which the sidewalks are located and shall be elevated above such
established grade approximately one-third inch (1/3") for every one foot (1')
of the distance from the curb unless such elevation is, under existing
conditions, impracticable, as determined by the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-
97; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1C-2: LOCATION:
Sidewalks must be located within the public right of way so that the line of
the inner edge of the sidewalk is one foot (1') from the property line. In
cases where there is practical difficulty meeting this location standard, the
city engineer may modify the location of a sidewalk. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
16-1C-3: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR:
   A.   Sidewalks must be constructed, reconstructed and repaired in accordance
with the Iowa City municipal design standards, as amended. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
   B.   No person, other than those employed by or under contract with the
city, shall construct any sidewalk within the public right of way without first
having obtained a permit from the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-110; amd. 1994
Code)
   C.   The city engineer may order the repair, replacement, or reconstruction
of a public sidewalk upon written notice and as provided by state law. Such
order and written notice shall constitute issuance of a permit as required in
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
16-1D-1: Definitions
16-1D-2: Permit Requirements
16-1D-3: Performance Deposits
16-1D-4: Excavation Operations
16-1D-5: Traffic Control
16-1D-6: Protection And Preservation Of Properties During Excavations
16-1D-7: Backfilling
16-1D-8: Repairs Of Surfaces
16-1D-9: Cleanup
16-1D-10: Time Of Completion
16-1D-11: Emergency Excavations
16-1D-12: Exemptions From Provisions
16-1D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   CITY: The city of Iowa City.
   DIRECTOR: The city manager of the city or designee.
   EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public right of way made by any
means.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square,
plaza and city owned right of way or any other public property owned or
controlled by the city and dedicated to public use.
   SPECIFICATIONS: The latest editions of "Standard Specifications For Highway
And Bridge Construction", as amended, Iowa department of transportation, Ames,
Iowa.
   SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable
or wire or any other similar structure located below the surface of any public
place.
   UTILITY: Any public utility regulated by the Iowa commerce commission or its
successor and/or persons holding a franchise or other agreement with the city
or other entities. (1978 Code §31-22; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exceptions: All persons making or filling any
excavation in any public place shall first obtain a permit from the director,
except as provided in section
16-1D-11 of this article. Permits shall be obtained at least the day prior to
making an excavation. No excavation permit is required for substructure
installation in a new subdivision prior to acceptance of the public right of
way improvements by the city. (1978 Code §31-45)
   B.   Application For Permit: No excavation permit shall be issued unless a
written application is submitted to the director on a form provided by the
city. The application, when approved, shall constitute a permit. (1978 Code
§31-46)
   C.   Insurance Required: Before an excavation permit is issued, the
applicant shall deposit with the city a certificate of public liability
insurance in such amounts as may be determined by the city. The certificate of
insurance shall list the city of Iowa City, Iowa, and its officers, employees
and agents as additional named insureds. (1978 Code §31-47; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Permit Fee: The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the
excavation permit fee schedule as established by resolution of the city council
and shall be paid by all parties wishing to make excavations pursuant to this
article, except for those parties with which the city has a franchise agreement
and from whom the city receives franchise fees. (Ord. 09-4373, 12-1-2009)
16-1D-3: PERFORMANCE DEPOSITS:
   A.   Deposits Required: Cash security performance deposits are required for
any excavation in a public place. An application for an excavation permit shall
be accompanied by a deposit, made in accordance with a rate schedule adopted by
city council resolution.
   B.   Refund Of Deposits: Upon request of the permittee and upon completion
of the work, the deposit shall be refunded no later than one year from the
satisfactory completion of the work.
   C.   Use Of Deposits: Deposits shall be used to pay the cost of any work the
city performs to restore or maintain the public places in the event the
permittee fails to perform the work as required by the city. The amount
released to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount expended by the city.
If the deposit is not sufficient to cover the cost of work required by the
city, the permittee shall be personally liable for the balance of such costs.
(1978 Code §31-23; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-4: EXCAVATION OPERATIONS:
Each excavation shall be done in such manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring
property. Specifically, the permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce
noise, dust and unsightly debris, and no work shall be done between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except with the
express written permission of the city engineer or in case of an emergency 1 .
(1978 Code §31-32; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 4 of this code for noise control regulations.
16-1D-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   If a street closing is required, the permit holder shall first request
the approval of the director. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee
to notify and coordinate all excavations with the police, fire and transit
departments and ambulance services.
   B.   As a general guide for all maintenance and construction signing, part
VI of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", as amended, shall be
used. The permittee shall illustrate on the excavation permit the warning and
control devices proposed for use. At the request of the director, such warning
and control devices shall be increased, decreased or modified. (1978 Code §31-
24; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-6: PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF PROPERTIES DURING EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces From Equipment Damage: Backhoe equipment
outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever outriggers are placed on
any paved surface. Tracked vehicles are not permitted on paved surfaces unless
specific precautions are taken to protect the surface. The permittee is
responsible for any damage to existing pavement caused by operation of such
equipment and, upon order of the director, shall repair surfaces damaged by
excavation equipment. (1978 Code §31-25; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Protection Of Adjoining Property: The permittee shall protect from
injury any adjoining property by providing adequate support, including adequate
shoring. (1978 Code §31-26; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Compliance With Iowa One Call Requirements: Prior to excavation, the
permit holder shall first comply with state "Iowa One Call" requirements in
chapter 480, code of Iowa, as amended. (1994 Code)
   D.   Preservation Of Monuments: The permittee shall not disturb any surface
monuments or survey markers found on the line of excavation work unless
approval is obtained from the city engineer. (1978 Code §31-37; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-7: BACKFILLING:
   A.   Backfilling Under Or Within Two Feet Of Paved Surfaces: The trenches
for all substructures under paved surfaces and traveled ways or within two feet
(2') of paved surfaces shall be backfilled as required by design standards
established by the city, as approved by resolution of the city council. (1978
Code §31-28; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Backfilling Of Unpaved Areas And Parkways: Excavated soil from unpaved
and untraveled ways shall be carefully deposited and satisfactorily tamped in
uniform layers to minimize settlement. (1978 Code §31-29; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-8: REPAIRS OF SURFACES:
The director may specify the type of resurfacing required for any excavation.
(1978 Code §31-30; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-9: CLEANUP:
As the excavation work progresses, all public right of way and private
properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and
other debris. If the permittee fails to clean up within twenty four (24) hours
after notice, the director shall authorize the work to be done at the expense
of the permittee. (1978 Code §31-34; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-10: TIME OF COMPLETION:
All excavation work and backfilling shall be completed in a prompt manner, as
determined by the director. (1978 Code §31-31; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-11: EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS:
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent excavations that may be necessary
for the immediate preservation of life or property. The person making such
emergency excavation shall apply to the director for a permit on the first
working day after such work is commenced. (1978 Code §31-36; amd. 1994 Code)
16-1D-12: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
In performing a public function regarding the excavation of a public place, the
city, its departments, divisions, employees and contractors shall be exempt
from these provisions. (1978 Code §31-38)
ARTICLE E. SIGNS IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
16-1E-1: Definitions
16-1E-2: Restrictions
16-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square,
plaza and city owned right of way or any other public property owned or
controlled by the city and dedicated for public use.
   SIGN: As defined in title 14, chapter 9, article C, "Sign Definitions", of
this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
16-1E-2: RESTRICTIONS:
No privately owned signs shall be placed on or over a public place, except as
provided for in section
14-5B-10 of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
ARTICLE F. ADDRESSING
SECTION:
16-1F-1: Division Lines
16-1F-2: Designation Of Numbers; Records Kept
16-1F-1: DIVISION LINES:
All buildings now or hereafter erected and fronting the public streets within
the limits of the city shall be numbered according to the following plan:
   A.   In general, in numbering buildings fronting on streets running north
and south, the line of division shall be Iowa Avenue.
   B.   In general, in numbering buildings fronting on streets running east and
west, the line of division shall be Capitol Street. (1978 Code §31-83; amd.
1994 Code)
16-1F-2: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS; RECORDS KEPT:
   A.   Buildings on the east side of streets running north and south shall
bear even numbers, and buildings on the west side of such streets shall bear
odd numbers.
   B.   Buildings on the north side of streets running east and west shall bear
even numbers, and those on the south side of such streets shall bear odd
numbers.
   C.   Each twenty feet (20') of frontage shall constitute a number beginning
on either side of the division line or the line from which the numbers are
computed with numbers "one" and "two" for the first twenty feet (20') of either
side of the street, and the numbers in the successive blocks in either
direction shall advance by one hundred (100).
   D.   The city engineer shall, when requested by any property owner,
designate the number of any building within the city in accordance with the
provisions of this article and shall keep a record of the numbers so
designated. (1978 Code §31-84)
ARTICLE G. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY USE PERMIT
SECTION:
16-1G-1: Provisions
16-1G-2: Definitions
16-1G-3: Application Process
16-1G-4: Duration Of Permit
16-1G-5: Conditions
16-1G-6: Permit To Work
16-1G-7: Micro Wireless Facility Permit
16-1G-8: Fees And Rates
16-1G-1: PROVISIONS:
No person may site a small wireless facility in the right-of-way or on a City
structure except as provided herein. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-2: DEFINITIONS:
   APPLICATION: A request to site a small wireless facility in the right-of-
way.
   CITY STRUCTURE: A structure owned by the City that exists at the time an
application is submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or
installation of transmission equipment in compliance with applicable codes,
including but not limited to water towers, buildings, and other structures,
whether within or outside the public right-of-way. It does not include a tower
or existing base station or other structure owned by the City that exists at
the time an application is submitted.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY, SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, SITING, TRANSMISSION
EQUIPMENT, AND UTILITY POLE: As those terms are defined in chapter 8C of the
Code of Iowa.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY USE PERMIT: Written authorization to site a small
wireless facility in the right-of-way. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-3: APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   The application shall be submitted to the Public Works Department on a
form provided by the Public Works Department.
   B.   The application shall be deemed granted unless the Director of Public
Works, or designee, denies or approves it within ninety (90) days of submission
of a completed application. The City and the applicant may agree in writing to
extend the time for processing an application. If the City receives
applications for the approval of more than seventy five (75) small wireless
facilities within a single seven-day period, whether from a single applicant or
from multiple applicants, the Director of Public Works, or designee, may notify
an applicant submitting any additional siting applications during that seven-
day period that the City is invoking its right to an automatic thirty-day
extension for any additional siting application submitted during that seven-day
period.
   C.   The Director of Public Works, or designee, may only deny an application
if any of the following apply:
      1.   The application fails to include reasonable information required by
the City and in accordance with this subsection.
      2.   The application does not comply with the Iowa Electrical Safety
Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, applicable Fire Safety Codes, or any
Building Code or similar Code of general applicability for the protection of
the public health, safety, or welfare that was adopted by the City prior to the
filing of the application.
      3.   The application would result in the City being noncompliant with the
Federal Americans With Disabilities Act.
      4.   a. A licensed engineer selected by the applicant or the City
certifies that siting the small wireless facility as proposed would compromise
the structural safety of, or preclude the essential purpose of, the utility
pole or wireless support structure in the public right-of-way on which it is
proposed to be sited and any of the following conditions apply:
            (1)   The applicant fails to redesign the small wireless facility
in a manner determined necessary by the engineer to make the existing utility
pole or wireless support structure structurally sound for the siting of the
small wireless facility.
            (2)   The applicant fails to modify the utility pole or wireless
support structure to make the structure structurally sound for the siting of
the small wireless facility.
            (3)   The applicant fails to replace the utility pole or wireless
support structure with a utility pole or wireless support structure that is
structurally sound for the siting of the small wireless facility.
            (4)   The applicant fails to propose an alternative location for
the siting of the small wireless facility.
         b.   If an applicant chooses to modify or replace a utility pole or
wireless support structure to make the structure structurally sound for the
siting of a small wireless facility, the applicant shall pay or advance to the
City the costs of modifying or replacing the utility pole or wireless support
structure with a utility pole or wireless support structure that would safely
support the small wireless facility and preserve the essential purpose of the
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      5.   The application seeks approval of a new small wireless facility,
utility pole, or wireless support structure that would impair, interfere with,
or preclude the safe and effective use of facilities already located in the
public right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular, utility, or other City public
right-of-way purposes.
      6.   The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless
facility outside the public right-of-way that would impair, interfere with, or
preclude the safe and effective use of a City structure or property for a
public purpose.
      7.   The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless
facility on a wireless support structure used exclusively for emergency
communications equipment.
      8.   The application seeks approval for the siting of a small wireless
facility on a utility pole that is the vertical portion of a support structure
for a traffic control signal or device, and the City determines that the
utility pole lacks sufficient space or load capacity for the proposed siting or
the small wireless facility cannot be sited on the utility pole without
impairing the public health, safety, or welfare.
   D.   The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall document the basis for
the denial, including the specific Code provisions or standards on which the
denial is based, and provide the applicant with such documentation on or before
the date the application is denied.
   E.   An applicant whose application is denied shall have an opportunity to
cure any deficiencies identified by the Director of Public Works, or designee,
as the basis for the denial and to submit a revised application within thirty
(30) days following the date of denial without paying an additional fee. The
Director of Public Works, or designee, shall approve or deny a revised
application within thirty (30) days following submission. The Director of
Public Works, or designee, shall not identify any deficiencies in a second or
subsequent denial that were not identified in the original denial. (Ord. 17-
4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-4: DURATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The duration of a permit shall be ten (10) years, with one automatic
five-year renewal.
   B.   The owner of the small wireless facility may terminate the permit upon
providing ninety (90) days' notice to the City.
   C.   The construction of a small wireless facility permitted pursuant to
this section shall commence no later than two (2) years following the date that
the permit is issued, or two (2) years after any appeals are exhausted. If
construction is not commenced as provided herein, the permit expires.
   D.   Upon expiration of the permit or upon termination by the owner, the
owner shall remove the small wireless facility from the right-of-way at its
sole cost. If the owner fails to do so within thirty (30) days, the City may
remove it and discard it at the owner's expense. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-5: CONDITIONS:
The permit is subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Payment of the annual recurring rate.
   B.   Compliance with the Iowa Electrical Safety Code, the National
Electrical Safety Code, applicable Fire Safety Codes, and any Building Code or
similar Code of general applicability for the protection of the public health,
safety, or welfare that the City has adopted prior to the filing of the
application.
   C.   The small wireless facility reasonably matches the aesthetics of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure that incorporates
decorative elements. Aesthetics includes but is not limited to color.
   D.   Compliance with section 306.46(1) and section 306.47 of the Iowa Code.
   E.   After the construction of a small wireless facility or new utility pole
is completed in accordance with all conditions under which the permit is
granted, the owner of the small wireless facility or new utility pole, or the
owner's successor in interest, shall maintain the small wireless facility or
new utility pole at the expense of the owner or successor.
   F.   If, after the construction of a small wireless facility or new utility
pole is completed in accordance with all conditions under which the permit is
granted, the City subsequently undertakes any maintenance, public improvement
project, or reconstruction of City-owned property or equipment which requires
the modification, relocation, or reconstruction of the small wireless facility
or new utility pole, such work and the costs thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner or successor. If the project necessitating the
modification, relocation, or reconstruction of the small wireless facility or
new utility pole is for a private commercial purpose, the owner or successor
shall modify, relocate, or reconstruct the small wireless facility or new
utility pole upon prepayment of the costs of such work by the private
commercial entity whose project facilitates the need for such work. For
purposes of this provision, "new utility pole" means a new utility pole
installed by a wireless service provider pursuant to this section solely for
use as a wireless support structure and that is owned by the wireless service
provider.
   G.   The height shall not exceed the limitations in section 8C.7C(1) of the
Iowa Code. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-6: PERMIT TO WORK:
A wireless service provider shall obtain a permit to work in the right-of-way
or on a City structure located outside of the right- of-way with the same terms
and conditions provided for other commercial projects or uses in the right-of-
way or on a City structure, such as excavating permit. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-
2017)
16-1G-7: MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT:
In addition to obtaining a small wireless facility use permit, a person shall
obtain a micro wireless facility single-use right- of-way permit for the
installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of a micro
wireless facility if any of the following conditions apply:
   A.   The work is contained within a highway lane or requires the closure of
a highway lane.
   B.   The work disturbs the pavement, shoulder, ditch, or operation of a
highway.
   C.   The work involves placement of a micro wireless facility on a limited
access right-of-way.
   D.   The work requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the
traveling public or the protection or operation of public infrastructure and
such work was not authorized in, or will not be conducted in, the same time,
place, or manner that is consistent with the approved terms of the existing
permit for the facility or structure upon which the micro wireless facility is
attached.
   E.   For purposes of this section, "highway" means the same as defined in
section 325A.1 of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
16-1G-8: FEES AND RATES:
Fees and rates shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 17-4720, 8-15-2017)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC UTILITIES AND USE OF CITY RIGHT OF WAY
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16-2A-1: Purpose
16-2A-2: Definitions
16-2A-3: Maps And Projections
16-2A-4: Extension Or Expansion Of Utility System; Major Repair Work And
Installation Of New Systems
16-2A-5: Extension Or Expansion Of Electrical Transmission Systems
16-2A-6: Construction And Repair Of System
16-2A-7: Excavations
16-2A-8: Tree Trimming
16-2A-9: Conditions Of Street Occupancy
16-2A-10: Underground Service Required
16-2A-11: Underground Service Districts For Distribution Systems, Energy And
Communications Systems
16-2A-12: Public Utility Company Or System Contractors
16-2A-13: Penalties
16-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of city right of way for the
distribution of energy and communications by companies which have franchise
agreements with the city 1  or are otherwise permitted to use public right of
way to deliver services. The purpose of this chapter is also to regulate public
utilities and other companies requesting to use city right of way where no
formal agreement previously existed concerning such use. Finally, this chapter
is intended to optimize the use of city right of way and to further protect the
abutting property owner's enjoyment of the owner's property and to protect the
public interest. (1978 Code §33-172; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
16-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   COMMUNICATION SYSTEM: Any system used for the transmission of information.
   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: All electrical system components designed or
used for the distribution of electrical energy to individual properties within
the city.
   ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SYSTEM: Those electrical system components which
directly serve or support an electrical distribution system, and also
electrical lines carrying thirty four and five-tenths (34.5) kilovolts or more
of electric current.
   ENERGY: Power supplied by a public utility to customers either in the form
of gas or electricity.
   MAJOR REPAIR WORK: The repair or reconstruction of a part of the utility
system to the extent that part of the system under repair involves one or more
complete city blocks.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Property dedicated to public use and intended for the
movement of the public, including public utilities as defined in this chapter.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR COMPANY: Any person, company or corporation
utilizing or requesting to use the public right of way to deliver energy or
communications services.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEM, SYSTEM OR SYSTEM COMPONENTS: Includes poles, overhead
wires, coaxial and/or fiberoptic cables and conduit, underground wires, piping,
manholes and other installations and appliances necessary for the generation,
transmission or distribution of energy or communications systems.
   UNDERGROUND SERVICE DISTRICT: A defined area or tract of land within which
all system components are required to be placed below the surface or grade of
the right of way, or private property upon which said components are located or
through which they traverse. (1978 Code §33-173; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-3: MAPS AND PROJECTIONS:
Each public utility company, company or system requesting or using city public
right of way shall furnish to the department of public works current maps
showing the location of all existing underground utility system or system
components in city right of way and also on private property. Each company or
system shall thereafter provide the city with updated maps when same are
updated by the company. In addition, each company or system shall furnish
information and projections concerning all planned or proposed system
extensions, expansions and major repair work. Such information and projections
shall be prepared in advance of the company's actual work, thereby giving due
consideration to the city's capital improvement plan, shall be provided in
comprehensive form and shall give sufficient advance prior notice to the city
in order to provide the city an opportunity to review. (1978 Code §33-175; amd.
1994 Code)
16-2A-4: EXTENSION OR EXPANSION OF UTILITY SYSTEM; MAJOR REPAIR WORK AND
INSTALLATION OF NEW SYSTEMS:
Before any public utility company or system commences any installation,
extension, expansion or major repair of its system, the company or system shall
first file with the department of public works a written statement specifying
the public right of way, including streets, alleys, public places or private
property or parts thereof, in which the company or system proposes to extend,
expand, install or repair its system. The director of public works may require
that the statement be accompanied by a map, plan and specifications to an
acceptable scale showing the proposed location of the system components with
reference to the streets and alleys and lot lines, the size and dimensions of
all system components and the distance above or beneath the surface of the
ground. If the proposed locations of any system components are found by the
director of public works to interfere with the reasonable and proper use,
construction, reconstruction and maintenance of any public improvements or
other existing system component or other structure upon or under public right
of way or public places of the city, the director of public works shall, within
a reasonable time after the filing of such plan, map and specifications, note
the necessary and proper changes to eliminate all interference with public
improvements or existing system and refer the same back to the company or
system for correction. Upon approval of the company's or system's proposed work
by the director of public works, a permit shall be issued authorizing the
company or system to excavate in public right of way and to construct such
system in accordance with the approved maps, plans and specifications. The
permit issued hereunder shall include any permit required pursuant to chapter 1
of this title. No such excavation or construction shall be commenced before the
issuance of the permit required herein, and all work shall be in strict
accordance with the approved maps, plans and specifications. (1978 Code §33-
176; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-5: EXTENSION OR EXPANSION OF ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Information Required: Before any public utility company or system, now
or hereafter operating or maintaining an electrical system within Iowa City
commences any extension or expansion of its electrical transmission system
within commonly developed areas of the city or the installation of any new
electrical transmission system, there shall be filed with the department of
public works, in duplicate, a written statement specifying the streets, alleys
and public places or private property or parts thereof in which it proposes to
extend, expand, install or repair its system. The director of public works may
require that the statement be accompanied by maps, plans and specifications, in
duplicate, drawn to an acceptable scale, showing the proposed location of the
electrical system components with reference to the streets and alleys and lot
lines, the size and dimensions of all electrical system components and the
distance above or beneath the surface of the ground it is proposed to repair or
to lay the same. If the proposed locations of any electrical system components
shall interfere with the reasonable and proper use, construction,
reconstruction and maintenance of any public improvements or other existing
system component or other structure upon or under the streets, alleys or public
places of the city, the director of public works shall, within a reasonable
time after the filing of such plan, map and specifications, note the necessary
and proper changes to eliminate all interference with public improvements or
existing system and refer the same back to the public utility company for
correction. Such map, plan and specifications, when properly changed and
corrected, shall be filed in the office of the department of public works, and
a copy thereof, together with the written statement, shall be forwarded to the
planning and zoning commission. If at all possible, when public right of way is
used, transmission lines shall be located along arterial and collector street
right of way. (1978 Code §33-179; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Review By Director Of Public Works: In reviewing the written
statement and the maps, plans and specifications submitted by the electrical
utility company or system pursuant to subsection A above, the director of
public works shall determine the degree to which the proposal complies with the
purpose of this chapter, as stated in section
16-2A-1 of this article, and shall forward findings and a recommendation to the
city council.
      2.   Review By Planning And Zoning Commission: In reviewing the written
report and the maps, plans and specifications submitted by the electrical
utility company or system pursuant to subsection A above, the planning and
zoning commission shall review the proposal in light of the following planning
criteria and shall report its findings and recommendations to the city council:
         a.   The relationship of the proposed project to present and future
economic development of the area.
         b.   The relationship of the proposed project to the existing electric
utility system and parallel existing utility routes.
         c.   The relationship of the proposed project to the present and
future land use and zoning ordinances.
         d.   The inconvenience or damage which may result to property owners
as a result of the proposed project.
      3.   Recommendations: The director of public works shall submit a
recommendation to the planning and zoning commission, and the commission shall
review the director's recommendation and shall submit a recommendation to the
city council within sixty (60) calendar days of the director's report. (1978
Code §33-180; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   City Council Approval Required:
      1.   Within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the recommendation of
the planning and zoning commission, which shall include the director's
recommendation, the city council shall, by resolution, either approve or
disapprove said proposal based on the standards and criteria stated in
subsection B of this section and on the recommendation received. In the event
that the city council disapproves said proposal, the resolution shall reflect
the reasons for disapproval. If the city council fails to either approve or
disapprove such proposal within the said sixty (60) calendar day period, the
proposal shall be considered to be approved.
      2.   Upon the approval of the company's or system's proposal, the
director of public works shall issue a permit therefor, and the company or
system may proceed with the work. No person shall perform any such work until
the required permit has been issued, which shall include any permit required
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title. All work shall be in strict accordance
with the approved maps, plans and specifications. (1978 Code §33-181; amd. 1994
Code)
16-2A-6: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SYSTEM:
In the process of location, construction, reconstruction, replacement or repair
of any system component, the excavation or obstruction made or placed in any
public right of way or public ground at any time or for any purpose shall be
properly barricaded to protect the public and to assure the safe and efficient
movement of traffic. All pavement removed or displaced shall be properly and
speedily replaced under the general supervision of the city. As a condition to
use of public right of way, every public utility company or system, except
those public utility companies or systems having a franchise by city ordinance
1 , shall pay all damages or injuries to persons or property, as well as to the
city, resulting from the negligent or improper construction or repair of such
system and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the city from and against
all claims of every nature for damages to person or property arising or
resulting from the company's or system's own negligence. If the company or
system fails to repair or arrange for proper repair after five (5) days'
written notice to do so, then the city may make such repairs at the expense of
such company or system. (1978 Code §33-177; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
16-2A-7: EXCAVATIONS:
In addition to the requirements for obtaining a permit for making excavations
in public right of way pursuant to
chapter 1, article D of this title, the company or system shall provide the
department of public works with twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to the
actual commencement of the work, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of
such public right of way, including streets, alleys or public places, and shall
comply with all provisions of chapter 1 of this title in performing such work.
In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the company or system may
proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit;
provided, however, that the company or system shall apply for and obtain the
excavation permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work.
(1978 Code §33-178; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-8: TREE TRIMMING:
A public utility company or system authorized to cut and trim trees under the
terms of its franchise must conduct such work in a careful and prudent manner.
The authority or obligation of the company in this regard shall not extend
beyond trimming trees sufficiently to clear and prevent interference with its
aboveground transmission or distribution lines and facilities. Cutting or
trimming shall be performed in residential street and alley areas in accordance
with standards established by the city forester. The company or system shall
submit to the city forester on or before December 1 of each year a schedule of
tree trimming in the residential street and alley areas. Trimming or cutting
trees on an emergency basis and not shown on the annual trimming and cutting
schedule shall be reported to the city forester by the company or system within
seven (7) calendar days following such trimming or cutting. (1978 Code §33-178;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-9: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Use: All utility system components installed by a company or system
within the city shall be so located and/or relocated as to cause minimum
interference with other public utilities or public improvements located in the
public right of way and so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said public right
of way.
   B.   Relocation: The company or system shall, upon reasonable written notice
and at its cost and expense, remove, locate and relocate its system components
in, on, over or under any public right of way in such manner as the city may,
at any time, require for purpose of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, repair or change in grade of any public
improvement on, in or about any such public right of way for the purpose of
promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement or for the purpose of
facilitating the vacation and redevelopment of public right of way by the city.
In the event the company or system fails to act within the allotted time, the
city may cause the system components to be relocated, and the costs thereof
shall be assessed to the company or system.
   C.   Placement Of Components: The company or system shall not place its
system components in the public right of way where the same will interfere with
the normal use or maintenance of any public improvement, including but not
limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, traffic control devices, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, storm drains or water mains. (1978 Code §33-186; amd.
1994 Code)
16-2A-10: UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED:
In all new residential subdivisions platted or developed in Iowa City, public
utility companies and systems shall be required to install utility distribution
systems underground in accordance with accepted engineering practices. Gas
utility distribution mains and lines and supply lines, except for certain
control facilities, shall be placed underground throughout the city in
accordance with accepted engineering practices. All aboveground gas facilities
shall be located with due regard for aesthetics. Underground electrical
distribution systems and communication systems shall be installed pursuant to
the requirements of
chapter 2, article B of this title. (1978 Code §33-182; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-11: UNDERGROUND SERVICE DISTRICTS FOR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS, ENERGY AND
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS:
   A.   Districts Established:
      1.   The city may, upon a showing of good and reasonable cause, require
the company or system to place or bury its electrical distribution systems,
other energy distribution systems and communications systems underground in any
underground service district hereafter established by the city pursuant to this
provision.
      2.   The following described area(s) shall constitute the underground
service district(s):
Downtown District: Madison Street north from Court Street to Washington Street,
Washington Street east to Gilbert Street, Gilbert Street south to Burlington
Street, Burlington Street west to Linn Street, Linn Street south to Court
Street and Court Street west to Madison Street.
(1978 Code §33-183; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   District Regulations:
      1.   Before commencing the work of placing such systems underground, the
company or system shall file with the city a written statement specifying the
particular public right of way, including streets, alleys and public highway,
in which underground systems are to be located, the approximate size of the
lines, cables and/or conduits proposed to be used and the distance from the
surface of the street to the top of such lines, cables and/or conduits.
      2.   The statements required by subsection B1 of this section shall be
accompanied by a map, plan or specifications which shall show the proposed
location of the lines, cables and/or conduits with reference to the public
right of way and surface of the streets and the approximate dimensions of the
lines, cables, conduits or manholes to be used. The proposed locations may be
changed by the department of public works if such locations shall, in any way,
interfere with other conduits, pipes or mains placed underground by the city or
by any other company or system and, thereafter, approved by the department.
      3.   The approved statement, map, plan or specifications, together with
the original statement, shall remain on file in the office of the department of
public works. All underground systems shall be constructed in accordance with
the approved statement, map, plan or specifications.
      4.   A permit to excavate in any public right of way shall be issued by
the department of public works as provided in this title only after approval of
the department of public works. All such excavations shall be made in
compliance with the requirements of this title 1 .
      5.   In planning underground conduits, the company or system shall
include in the plans a conduit space in which the city may place its city
alarm, city control or city communication wires, free of charge. The company or
system shall work with the city in the installation, repair and removal of
alarm, control and communication wires in the space allotted to the city.
      6.   The aboveground extension of a utility or system line from an
underground conduit to a building or other location within the underground
service district must be approved by the department of public works prior to
installation.
      7.   Any aboveground system or system components in an underground
service district shall be located with due regard for aesthetics. (1978 Code
§33-184; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  chapter 1, article D of this title.
16-2A-12: PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR SYSTEM CONTRACTORS:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply fully to all persons performing
work for a public utility company or system under a contract or other type of
work order. (1978 Code §33-185; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2A-13: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor, a
municipal infraction, or an environmental infraction. Municipal infractions
shall be punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
ARTICLE B. UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
SECTION:
16-2B-1: Definitions
16-2B-2: Underground Service Required For Electrical Distribution Systems And
Communications Systems
16-2B-3: Easements
16-2B-4: Streetlights
16-2B-5: Special Conditions; Waiver Of Requirements
16-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   APARTMENT BUILDING: A building containing at least five (5) apartments and
provided with electric and communication services through one service
extension.
   APPLICANT: The developer, builder or other person, partnership, association,
corporation or governmental agency applying for the construction of an
underground electric distribution system or a communications system in a
subdivision or requesting service to a new apartment building.
   COMMUNICATION SYSTEM COMPANY OR COMPANY: The communication system company or
companies serving the city.
   ELECTRIC PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY OR COMPANY: Electric company or companies
serving the city.
   SUBDIVISION: A tract of land divided into lots, pursuant to state and city
law. (1978 Code §§33-77, 33-97; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-2: UNDERGROUND SERVICE REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS:
Extension of electric distribution lines necessary to furnish permanent
residential electric service or communication system service to new residences
within a new residential subdivision or to new apartment buildings shall be
made underground from existing communications systems but does not include
electrical transformers, meter pedestal, switch gear and other appurtenances
impractical to bury. This article does not apply to electrical transmission
lines. (1978 Code §§33-78, 33-98; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-3: EASEMENTS:
The applicant shall provide adequate easements, including easements necessary
for access to street lights, to allow electric and communication system
services for the subdivision, and the easements shall be included as part of
the plat of the subdivision. (1978 Code §§33-79, 33-99; amd. 1994 Code)
16-2B-4: STREETLIGHTS:
In new subdivisions, the electric public utility company shall provide
underground wiring to the pole sites for appropriate streetlights as determined
by the city manager, or designee. The subdivider may pay an additional amount,
as determined by the company, and obtain ornamental poles approved by the city
manager, or designee. The company can make the additional charge for ornamental
poles only if it supports the additional charge by a current cost analysis
available to the general public showing the cost difference between the usual
wooden pole and the ornamental pole. (1978 Code §33-85; amd. 1994 Code; Ord.
97-3765, 1-14-1997)
16-2B-5: SPECIAL CONDITIONS; WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
In unusual circumstances, when the application of the provisions of this
article appears impracticable or unjust, the utility system or company, or the
subdivider, shall refer the matter to the city engineer for consideration. The
city engineer may waive any provisions of this article if enforcement would be
hazardous, unusually costly, destructive of the property of another or contrary
to the public interest. (1978 Code §§33-84, 33-103; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CITY UTILITIES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16-3A-1: Purpose
16-3A-2: Definitions
16-3A-3: Miscellaneous Provisions
16-3A-4: Rates And Charges For City Utilities
16-3A-5: Establishing City Utility Accounts; Deposits Required
16-3A-6: Billing And Collection Procedures; Delinquent Accounts
16-3A-7: Discontinuance And Restoration Of Service
16-3A-8: Fees And Billing Procedure Upon Change In Tenant Account
16-3A-1: PURPOSE:
This article governs the general provisions relating to the provision of water,
wastewater and solid waste services by the city, referred to generally as "city
utilities". Where more specific provisions relate to a specific city utility
contained in an article dealing with that service, the more specific shall
control. (1994 Code)
16-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   ACCOUNT: A record of debit and credit entries to cover transactions
involving city utility services provided to a particular person.
   ACCOUNT HOLDER: The person in whose name the city utility account is applied
for and to whom the city utility is authorized to provide service.
   BILL: A declaration, in writing, stating the amount due on the specific city
utility account.
   CITY UTILITIES, CITY UTILITY SERVICES: The providing of water, wastewater,
storm water drainage, and/or solid waste services to persons who are obligated
to pay for said services.
   OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interests.
   PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
   PROPERTY: The land and/or that which is constructed on the land owned by a
private individual or entity. The term "premises" shall be included in this
definition.
   SERVICE: The providing of a city utility to any user of that utility.
   SOLID WASTE: Includes unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid or
semisolid state, including, but not limited to, garbage, ashes, refuse, sludge,
yard waste, appliances, construction wastes, residential, commercial and
industrial wastes and waste being recycled.
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE: Storm water, ground water, and spent water discharged
to the city's storm water infrastructure.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of the community. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions.
   WATER: Potable water provided by the city utility. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 04-
4115, 3-16-2004)
16-3A-3: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Connections:
      1.   Before the permanent improvements of any street, highway, avenue,
alley, public ground or place whereon city utilities are located, provision for
utility connection therefrom to the curb lines of adjacent property shall be
made according to the specifications of the city engineer, including
inspections. All buildings and properties used for, or intended to be used for,
human occupancy and/or employment are required, at their expense, to install
suitable connections with city utilities. Each separate building shall be
provided with a separate connection to the city utility, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
      2.   In case the owners of the property shall fail to make the
connections required in the manner and within the time fixed by the city
council, the city council may cause the same to be made and the cost and
expense thereof assessed against the serviced property.
      3.   Construction materials for city utility connections shall be as set
forth in the design standards established by the city engineer, as approved by
resolution of the city council.
   B.   Use Of Same Trench By Public Utility Companies: To the maximum extent
practicable and in the exercise of due care, all public utility systems, such
as coaxial or fiberoptic cable, electric cable, communications cable and gas
pipes, shall be installed in the same trench. (1994 Code)
16-3A-4: RATES AND CHARGES FOR CITY UTILITIES:
   A.   Rates And Charges:
      1.   Before any ordinance is enacted to fix rates to be charged under
this section, a public hearing on the proposed change shall be held by the city
council at a time determined by motion of the city council. Notice of such
hearing shall contain the date, time and place for the hearing and shall be
published as required by state law. (1994 Code)
      2.   All contributors or users owning or occupying property in the city
of Iowa City shall be charged for the service used. In addition, a fee shall be
charged to all account holders for operation, maintenance, and improvements to
the city's storm water infrastructure utility. The city shall review the user
charge system and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the
system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and
maintenance, necessary expansion and debt service, and that the system
continues to provide for the uniform distribution of operation and maintenance
among all users. The city will annually notify all users, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the storm water utility charges and that portion of the user's
bill attributable to storm water management services. Such rates and charges
shall be in the amounts set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4
of this code. (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
      3.   The rates and charges set forth in the schedule of fees under title
3, chapter 4 of this code shall apply only to properties located within the
service areas of the respective city utility.
      4.   The rates and charges herein established shall go into effect with
the first full billing sent after the effective date contained in the ordinance
changing the rates and/or charges.
   B.   Temporary Water Use During Construction:
      1.   As soon as a new water service line has been connected, a temporary
water account may be established for temporary use of water for the
construction site. The owner or contractor shall pay a fee based on the type of
structure under construction and the length of time temporary water service is
needed, as set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
      2.   The water used for a temporary water account may not be used to
settle ditches or irrigate lawns or gardens, and the city may discontinue
service to the construction site if the temporary water account becomes
delinquent as set forth in this article or if the water is being used in
violation of the provisions of this subsection.
   C.   Bulk Water: Bulk water may be purchased at a location designated by the
city, at a charge provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this
code.
   D.   Connection Fee: Before connection by the abutting property owner to
distribution water mains constructed at the expense of the city, the property
owner shall pay to the city a fee based upon the front footage of the property
to be served and based upon the costs of an eight inch (8") distribution water
main. (1994 Code)
   E.   Billing Adjustments:
      1.   A billing adjustment will be made when it is discovered that an
account holder has been incorrectly billed for water, wastewater (sewer) or
solid waste/recycling service of the period of adjustment.
      2.   "Period of adjustment" shall be defined as follows: the entire
period of inaccuracy on the account, or five (5) years prior to the date the
error was discovered and corrected, whichever is the lesser period.
      3.   The calculation of any billing adjustment shall be based on the rate
or rates in effect at the time of the incorrect billing or billings.
      4.   When an account holder has been overcharged for services rendered,
one hundred percent (100%) of the overcharge for the applicable period of
adjustment, without interest, shall be refunded or credited to the account
holder.
      5.   When an account holder has been undercharged for services rendered
the account holder shall be billed fifty percent (50%) of the total amount
undercharged, without interest, for the applicable period of adjustment.
      6.   No interest shall run in favor of the City on undercharges and no
interest will run in favor of the account holder on overcharges.
      7.   The City Manager or designee shall establish rules for determining
the period of inaccuracy and the calculation of what the correct billing would
have been during that period.
      8.   Billings for solid waste/recycling services that were provided by
the City to the account holder but not billed by the City shall be waived and
shall not be collected when the billing error is discovered by the City on or
before July 1, 1997. (Ord. 97-3797, 7-29-1997)
16-3A-5: ESTABLISHING CITY UTILITY ACCOUNTS; DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Upon establishing a water service account, a wastewater account and/or
a residential solid waste collection account with the City, the person
establishing an account, with the exception of a residential owner account,
shall be required to make a combined account deposit for City services. The
amount of this deposit shall be as provided in the schedule of fees,
title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. Persons who have previously been required to
post a delinquent deposit shall be required to make a combined and/or
delinquent deposit before City services are provided.
   B.   Required deposits shall be held until service is terminated and the
account closed. At such time, the amount of the deposit shall be credited to
the account or refunded to the account holder if the account is closed and paid
in full.
   C.   Upon reestablishing one or more accounts as set forth in subsection A
of this section, the person establishing the account(s) shall be required to
make an account deposit for City services. The amount of the deposit shall be
as established in the schedule of fees,
title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. Persons who have previously been required to
post a delinquent deposit shall be required to make a combined and/or
delinquent deposit before City services are provided.
   D.   A delinquency deposit may be charged upon repeated delinquency of any
water, wastewater or solid waste service account. Upon the occurrence of a
third delinquency charge within the last three hundred sixty five (365) day
period, the account holder shall be required to make a combined deposit equal
to the average two (2) month billing for the account holder's account. The
average two (2) month billing shall be based upon the actual billings during
the prior twelve (12) month billing periods. If the account holder already has
a combined deposit on file with the City, that deposit amount will
proportionally reduce the delinquency deposit. The delinquency deposit can be
waived if the account holder enrolls in SurePay.
   E.   Delinquency deposits shall be held either three hundred sixty five
(365) days after the deposit was paid or three hundred sixty five (365) days
after the last occurrence of a delinquent account charge, whichever occurs
last. At such time, the deposit shall be credited to the utility account. If
service is terminated within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the
delinquent account charge, the deposit shall be credited to the account or
refunded if the account is paid in full.
   F.   Prior to establishing an industrial water service account, the person
establishing the account shall first execute a written agreement with the
Department of Public Works. Such accounts shall be governed by
chapter 3, article F, "Wastewater Treatment Works User Charges", of this title.
(Ord. 18-4745, 4-17-2018, eff. 7-1-2018; amd. Ord. 20-4830, 10-20-2020)
16-3A-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES; DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Delinquency:
      1.   Billings for services provided to properties for any one service
period, as defined by regulations established by the city and approved by
resolution of the city council, shall be submitted to account holders within
thirty (30) calendar days after the end of the billing period and shall be due
and payable within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the billing.
      2.   If payment in full is not received within twenty two (22) days of
the billing date, the account(s) shall be deemed delinquent and a delinquency
charge will be assessed as provided in
title 3, chapter 4 of this code. For locations which receive city water,
wastewater and/or solid waste services, the account holders shall be billed and
collected as a single account, and in the event of a delinquency in payment as
to either water, wastewater or solid waste services, subsequent payments shall
be credited first to the delinquent billings and then to the current billing.
      3.   If any check or automatic bank debit for payment of utility services
is returned, for any reason, to the city from the financial institution from
which it is written, a service fee shall be assessed as provided in
title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
   B.   Imposition Of Lien For Unpaid Services:
   1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, rates and charges
for city utilities not paid as provided by city ordinance are a lien upon the
property or premises served, upon certification by the city finance director or
designee to the county treasurer that the rates and charges are due. Said lien
shall be collected in the same manner as a property tax, as provided by state
law. At least thirty (30) days prior to such certification, the city finance
director, or designee, shall give written notice of intent to certify lien by
ordinary mail to the account holder of the delinquent account and, if the
account holder is a tenant, to the property owner of record.
   2.   For residential rental properties where the charges for service are
separately metered and paid directly by the tenant and when the utility account
is in the current tenant's name, liens of the property shall be pursuant to
state code.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3820, 12-16-1997; Ord. 01-3962, 4-3-2001; Ord. 12-
4505, 12-4-2012; Ord. 20-4830, 10-20-2020)
16-3A-7: DISCONTINUANCE AND RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Notice:
      1.   In the event an account holder fails to pay the full amount of the
billing for city utility services within twenty two (22) calendar days after
the billing date, service may be discontinued but only after giving the account
holder written notice and an opportunity for a hearing before the director of
finance or designee(s). The written notice shall be mailed by first class mail
to the affected account holder not less than seven (7) calendar days ("cure
period") in advance of discontinuance, and shall state: a) the reason for
discontinuance of service; b) the specific account(s) and service location(s)
for which payment is delinquent; and c) the amount(s) delinquent, including
fees and penalties.
      2.   When an account holder's account for water, wastewater and/or solid
waste service at a specific location is delinquent, the city may discontinue
water service at that location by shutting off the water service valve at the
stop box if available or by removal of the account holder's water meter. The
city shall have unrestricted access to such valves and water meters for the
purposes specified herein regardless of whether those water devices are located
in city right of way, city easement or on the property of the account holder,
and consent shall be deemed given for such access when service is requested and
when an account holder receives city utility services.
      3.   Notwithstanding the above, when an individual account holder is
billed under two (2) or more accounts for water, wastewater and/or solid waste
service at two (2) or more separate locations, a delinquency in payment for
service provided at any one or more of the locations shall be cause for the
city to discontinue service at all service locations for that account holder
regardless of whether the accounts for service at those other locations are
delinquent.
   B.   Restoration Of Service; Fees And Charges:
      1.   Upon payment of all due and payable water, wastewater and solid
waste service charges, including fees and penalties, the city shall cause the
account holder's water service to be restored. Services to rental properties
shall be resumed notwithstanding the failure of the persons formerly living
there or occupying the premises to have paid all fees and charges, provided all
such persons previously occupying the premises have vacated the premises as
verified, in writing, by the rental property owner or manager.
      2.   All payments required to restore the account holder's service shall
be in the form of cash, money order or a cashier's check, or credit card.
      3.   It shall be prohibited for any person to restore or attempt to
restore water, wastewater or solid waste service at a location where those
services have been discontinued unless and until the city authorizes such
restoration.
      4.   The director of finance is authorized to adopt and promulgate
billing and collection procedures for water, wastewater and solid waste service
accounts, including records. Such procedures shall be approved by the city
manager and city attorney.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 97-3769, 1-14-1997; Ord. 20-4830, 10-20-2020)
16-3A-8: FEES AND BILLING PROCEDURE UPON CHANGE IN TENANT ACCOUNT:
   A.   When a tenant notifies the city that the tenant is moving from the
property receiving city utility service, and the city has received no
authorization for service to a new tenant, the city shall automatically place
the account into the name of the property owner. Billings generated during the
first fifteen (15) calendar days after a rental property account has been put
into the owner's name shall include charges for actual water and wastewater
use; no minimum charges or solid waste charges will be included. In such
instances, the meter(s) need not be removed, and no service fee shall be
charged. When an owner receives a bill for water, wastewater and/or solid waste
service for the interim period between tenants, the owner may determine that
the bill should be paid by the tenant and inform the tenant of the tenant's
responsibility to pay the bill. Upon written notification from the owner, the
city will transfer the billed amount to the new tenant's account.
   B.   If an owner determines that a tenant is responsible for city services
to a property, and the owner has not authorized the city to provide services,
the owner may request, in writing, that the city provide a posting notice
regarding incomplete service application and the city's intention to
discontinue service within five (5) calendar days of that notice. If the tenant
fails to complete the service application, the city shall discontinue service
as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE B. PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEES
SECTION:
16-3B-1: Purpose
16-3B-2: Findings
16-3B-3: Procedures For Ordinance Adoption
16-3B-4: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project
16-3B-5: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project,
Phase II
16-3B-6: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk
Sewer Project
16-3B-7: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The 1996 Highlander Lift Station,
Force Main And Trunk Sewer Project
16-3B-8: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer
Project
16-3B-9: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The Dane Road Trunk Sewer Project
16-3B-10: Project Specific Tap-On Fee For The Scott Park Trunk Sewer Project
16-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish substantive and procedural rules
for the adoption and implementation of project specific tap-on fee ordinances
which shall provide for the equitable apportionment of the costs associated
with extension of city utility service to development in areas beyond the
current service area by charging a proportionate share of the total, actual
construction cost of the city utility to each owner of benefited property at
the time of such owner's connection to the city utility. (1978 Code §33-10.3;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-3B-2: FINDINGS:
It is the finding of the city council that the constitution of the state of
Iowa and the code of Iowa, all as amended, provide authority for the
establishment of project specific tap-on fee ordinances. (1978 Code §33-10.3;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-3B-3: PROCEDURES FOR ORDINANCE ADOPTION:
The city council shall substantially comply with the following procedures in
adopting a project specific tap-on fee ordinance:
   A.   Applicability: The code of Iowa, as amended, and local rules regarding
the adoption of ordinances shall apply, except as augmented by these
procedures. (1978 Code §33-10.3)
   B.   Public Notice And Public Hearing: Twenty (20) days' notice published in
accordance with state law shall be given and a public hearing held prior to
passage of the ordinance. (Ord. 99-3907, 10-19-1999)
   C.   Copy To Be Filed: Upon adoption of a project specific tap-on fee
ordinance, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be filed in the office of
the county recorder.
   D.   Contents Of Ordinance: A project specific tap-on fee ordinance shall
contain the following:
      1.   A general description of the project, including a narrative of the
reasons for its construction, a recital of actions taken in approving its
construction, a description of any interim financing used and disclosure of any
agreements between the city and owners or developers of any benefited
properties, including, but not limited to, tap-on fee prepayment and
development sequencing. (1978 Code §33-10.3)
      2.   A general boundary map of the project area showing location of the
benefited properties and the location of the constructed city utility. (Ord.
96-3753, 10-8-1996)
      3.   A legal description of the utility constructed. A plat of the
utility constructed shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and
placed on file in the office of the city engineer. Said plat shall be
incorporated in the ordinance by reference. (Ord. 98-3841, 7-28-1998)
      4.   A legal description of the properties benefited by the construction
of the city utility, as well as a calculation of the total area, in acres, of
the benefited property. (Ord. 96-3753, 10-8-1996)
      5.   The city engineer's certification of the actual, total cost of the
construction project, including, when applicable, interest costs.
      6.   A schedule of fees, on a per acre basis, to be paid by an owner or
building permit applicant upon connection to the city utility constructed.
      7.   A finding of which properties, if any, within the benefited area
which are exempt from the project specific tap-on fee ordinance by virtue of
their having been previously assessed for the service provided by the city
utility constructed. (1978 Code §33-10.3; amd. Ord. 96-3753, 10-8-1996)
16-3B-4: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The northwest sanitary sewer is a trunk sanitary sewer serving the
northwest area of the city within the Clear Creek drainage basin. The northwest
sanitary sewer project ("project") includes the construction of one lift
station, eighteen (18) manholes and six thousand seventy one (6,071) linear
feet of sewer pipe ranging in size from eight inches (8") in diameter to forty
two inches (42") in diameter.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the area generally located north of Melrose Avenue
and west of property owned by the University of Iowa since this area was not
expected to develop due to the lack of sanitary sewer on the university
property.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On October 2, 1990, the city council adopted resolution 90-183
authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the sanitary sewer. On
April 2, 1991, the city council held a public hearing on the plans,
specifications, form of contract and cost estimates. Following the public
hearing, the city council passed resolution 91-53 approving the plans and
specifications of the project and authorizing advertisement for bids. The city
awarded the northwest sanitary sewer project contract to Maxwell Construction
Company on April 22, 1991, by resolution 91-83. In resolution 91-293 adopted on
December 10, 1991, the city council accepted the work for improvements covering
the northwest sanitary sewer project.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds
as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution
90-227.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is eight hundred seven thousand six hundred forty six
dollars ninety four cents ($807,646.94). This cost includes two hundred
thirteen thousand two hundred twenty dollars seventy cents ($213,220.70) in
interest costs.
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The northwest sanitary sewer project benefits a
total of eight hundred sixty five and seven-tenths (865.7) acres. The eight
hundred sixty five and seven-tenths (865.7) acres has been divided into eight
(8) subareas labeled A through H for cost allocation purposes. See figure 1 of
this section.
   E.   Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap-on fee per acre for
the eight (8) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs
of the benefits associated with each subarea. (Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994)
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
A       83.6  $1,137.04
B       75.4  2,017.44
C       75.8  2,017.44
D       68.3  1,243.30
E       296.9 362.90
F       36.2  2,017.44
G       194.1 362.90
H       35.4  2,017.44
 
(Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994; amd. Ord. 98-3841, 7-28-1998)
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees, the payment of tap-on fees on a
per lot basis and development sequencing. Such agreements shall not in any way
alter the requirements regarding building permits set forth in subsection E of
this section.
   H.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: Project area divided into eight (8) subareas.
      2.   Figure 2: Map illustrating the general location of the project area
in relation to the Iowa City comprehensive plan, as amended.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the northwest sanitary sewer project.
      4.   Figures 4a And 4b: Plat of the northwest sanitary sewer project.
      5.   Figure 5: Map showing the property benefited by the northwest
sanitary sewer.
      6.   Figure 6: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
northwest sanitary sewer.
      7.   Figure 7: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2785.png]
 
Figure 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2787.png]
 
Figure 3   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER
Commencing at a concrete monument found at the Northeast Corner of Section 7,
Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian; thence
S00°03'27"E, along the East Line of said Section 7, 2603.16 feet, to a point on
the centerline of the existing sanitary sewer; thence S88°59'39"W, along said
centerline, 5.72 feet, to the existing manhole, which is the Point of
Beginning; thence N18°36'50"W, 82.98 feet; thence N67°15'43"W, 21.00 feet;
thence N67°15'43"W, 400.00 feet; thence N90°00'00"W, 400.00 feet; thence
S80°32'38"W, 400.00 feet; thence S70°47'26"W, 400.13 feet; thence S42°54'48"W,
400.00 feet; thence S49°26'49"W, 400.00 feet; thence S36°34'17"W, 400.45 feet;
thence S55°05'12"W, 312.31 feet, to its intersection with the West Line of the
East 1/2 of said Section 7.
And also commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Fractional Southwest Quarter
of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West, of the 5th Principal Meridian,
and for the purpose of this Legal Description the South Line of said Southwest
Quarter is assumed to bear S89°07'30"W, in accordance with existing Survey
Plats of Record; thence N00°22'54"E, along the East Line of said Fractional
Southwest Quarter of Section 7, 1788.07 feet, to the termination of the
previously described Sanitary Sewer, which is the Point of Beginning; thence
S55°22'54"W, 36.52 feet; thence S28°03'28"W, 219.92 feet; thence S60°32'42"W,
395.00 feet; thence S52°02'10"W, 365.00 feet; thence S57°59'21"W, 341.19 feet;
thence S65°13'07"W, 258.49 feet; thence S02°21'16"W, 400.00 feet; thence
S24°52'09"E, 263.46 feet; thence S56°56'21"E, 318.12 feet; thence N89°00'23"E,
103.30 feet; thence S0°59'37"E, 142.20 feet.
Figure 4a
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2789.png]
 
Figure 4b
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2791.png]
 
Figure 5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2793.png]
 
Figure 6   NORTHWEST INTERCEPTOR SEWER SERVICE AREA DESCRIPTION TOTAL SERVICE
AREA
A portion of the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 79
North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of the fenced highway a distance of 787 feet
N7°30'W of the Southwest Corner of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 6 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N82°30'E, 1835.2 feet; Thence S13°26'W,
919 feet; Thence S85°10'W, 1502.5 feet to the Southwest Corner of said Section
6, Thence N7°30'W, 787 feet to the Point of Beginning, all in the SW 1/4 of
said Section 6.
   AND ALSO:
The West Half of the Fractional Northwest Quarter and the West Half of the
Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the 5th Principal Meridian.
   EXCEPTING THEREFROM 25.0 Acres, more or less acquired for road purposes by
condemnation proceedings Recorded in Book 698, at Page 303 of the Records of
the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
   AND ALSO:
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 79 North,
Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
   AND ALSO:
All that Portion of Parcels A, B, and C of Clear Creek Subdivision as Recorded
in Plat Book 25, Page 53, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's
Office, contained within Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, EXCEPTING THEREFROM 6.33 acres of Right-of-way easements,
Recorded in Book 597, at Pages 22 through 27 of the Records of the Johnson
County Recorder's Office.
   AND ALSO:
All that portion of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision, as Recorded in Plat
Book 27, at Page 30 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office,
contained within the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12,
Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, which is more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7
West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N89°22'30"E, along the North Line of
the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 397.44 feet, to its intersection with
the Northeasterly Right-of-way Line of the existing Secondary Road, on the
Southwesterly Line of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision as Recorded in Plat
Book 27, at Page 30, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office,
which point is the Point of Beginning;
Then N89°22'30"E, along said North Line, 924.01 feet, to its intersection with
the East Line of said Lot 1; Thence S00°23'47"E, along said East Line, 929.77
feet, to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1; Thence N47°12'00"W, along the
Southwesterly Line of said Lot 1, 930.30 feet; Thence N40°45'00"W, along said
Southwesterly Line, 379.61 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land
contains 10.32 acres, more or less, and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.
   AND ALSO:
A parcel of land located in the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of Section 12, Township 79 North,
Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, City of Iowa City, Johnson County,
Iowa,
described as follows:
Beginning at the SW Corner of the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of said Section 12; Thence
N00°22'W, 988.0 feet along the West Line of said NW 1/4 SE 1/4; Thence
S52°43'E, 885.0 feet; Thence S47°38.5'E, 652.2 ft. to the South Line of said NW
1/4 SE 1/4; Thence S89°24'W, 1179.8 feet along said South Line, to the Point of
Beginning; containing 13.97 acres, more or less.
   AND ALSO:
The South half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range
7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
   EXCEPTING THEREFROM 24.1 acres of existing Road Right-of-way conveyed by Fee
and Easements of Record and Recorded in Book 602, at Page 72, of the Records of
the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
   AND ALSO:
The East half of the Northwest Quarter and the East Half of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian.
   AND ALSO:
The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter and the Northeast Quarter of the
Fractional Northwest Quarter of Section 18, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the 5th Principal Meridian.
   EXCEPTING THEREFROM 5.4 Acres of Existing Road Right-of-way conveyed by Fee
and Easements of Record, and Recorded in Book 698, at Page 328, of the Records
of the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
Figure 7   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer
Project is $807,646.94. This cost includes $213,220.70 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 94-3609, 3-1-1994)
16-3B-5: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT,
PHASE II:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The northwest sanitary sewer, phase II, which is the north fork
trunk sewer of the northwest sanitary sewer constructed in 1991, serves the
northerly area of the Clear Creek drainage basin. The northwest sanitary sewer
project, phase II ("project") includes the construction of three (3) manholes
and one thousand one hundred nine (1,109) linear feet of twenty four inch (24")
diameter concrete sanitary sewer pipe.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the area designated as "A", "E", and "G" in figure 1
of this section, generally two thousand feet (2,000') north of Melrose Avenue
and west of property owned by the University of Iowa since this area was not
expected to develop due to the lack of sanitary sewer on the university
property.
      3.   An agreement regarding prepayment and collection of sanitary sewer
tap on fees has been made between the city of Iowa City and the developers of
Walnut Ridge, parts 5-7.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On October 2, 1990, the city council adopted resolution 90-183
authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the sewer for the
northwest sanitary sewer project which included phase II, the north fork. On
August 2, 1994, the city council held a public hearing on the plans,
specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public
hearing, the city council passed resolution 94-269 approving the plans and
specifications of the project and authorizing advertisement for bids. The city
council awarded the project construction contract to Maxwell Construction
Company on August 30, 1994, by resolution 94-290. The city council accepted the
work for the project improvements on July 18, 1995, by resolution 95-188.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds
as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution
95-63.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is one hundred nineteen thousand five hundred sixty three
dollars sixty three cents ($119,563.63). This cost includes thirty one thousand
nine hundred seventy nine dollars six cents ($31,979.06) in interest costs.
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of five hundred
seventy four and six-tenths (574.6) acres. The benefited area has been divided
into three (3) subareas labeled "A", "E", and "G" for cost allocation purposes
(see figure no. 1 of this section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap on fee per acre for
the three (3) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs
of the benefits associated with each subarea and are in addition to project
specific tap on fees established in section 16-3B-4 of this article.
 
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
A       83.6  $208.08
E       296.9 208.08
G       194.1 208.08
 
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of benefited properties divided into three (3) subareas and the location of the
constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the project.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project
has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in
book 41, page 22 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said
plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2795.png]
 
Figure 2   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE NORTHWEST SANITARY
SEWER PROJECT, PHASE II
All of Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 which lie North of the following described
line:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Fractional Southwest Quarter of
Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence N00°22'54"E, along the East Line of the East One-Half of the Fractional
West One-Half of said Section 7, 2630.39 feet to the Northeast Corner of Outlot
"H", Walnut Ridge, Part Four, in accordance with the Plat thereof Recorded in
Plat Book 34, Page 20, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office
and the POINT OF BEGINNING; Thence S73°32'25"W, along the North Line of said
Walnut Ridge, Part Four, 239.51 feet; Thence S16°27'35"E, along said North
Line, 55.49 feet; Thence S73°32'25"W, along said North Line, 161.46 feet;
Thence N78°15'03"W, along said North Line, 235.85 feet; Thence N04°57'17"E,
along said North Line, 89.48 feet; Thence S67°17'52"W, along said North Line,
791.07 feet, to the Northwest Corner of said Walnut Ridge, Part Four; Thence
S47°00'W, 350 feet; Thence N63°00'W, 500 feet; Thence S58°00'W, 600 feet;
Thence S67°00'W, 400 feet; Thence N89°00'W, 550 feet; Thence S55°00'W, 600
feet, to the Easterly Right-of-Way Line of U.S. Highway 218.
Parcel Descriptions:
Parcel 1
All that portion of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision, as Recorded in Plat
Book 27, at Page 30 of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office,
contained within the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12,
Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, which is more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7
West of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N89°22'30"E, along the North Line of
the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 397.44 feet, to its intersection with
the Northeasterly Right-of-way Line of the existing Secondary Road, on the
Southwesterly Line of Lot 1 of Charbon's Second Subdivision as Recorded in Plat
Book 27, at Page 30, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's Office,
which point is the Point of Beginning;
Thence N89°22'30"E, along said North Line, 924.01 feet, to its intersection
with the East Line of said Lot 1; Thence S00°23'47"E, along said East Line,
929.77 feet, to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1; Thence N47°12'00"W, along
the Southwesterly Line of said Lot 1, 930.30 feet; Thence N40°45'00W, along
said Southwesterly Line, 379.61 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of
land contains 10.32 acres, more or less, and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.
Parcel 2
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 79 North,
Range 7 West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
Parcel 3
All that Portion of Parcels A, B, and C of Clear Creek Subdivision as Recorded
in Plat Book 25, Page 53, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's
Office, contained within Section 12, Township 79 North, Range 7 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, EXCEPTING THEREFROM 6.33 acres of Right-of-way easements,
Recorded in Book 597, at Pages 22 through 27 of the Records of the Johnson
County Recorder's Office.
Parcel 4
A portion of the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 79
North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal Meridian described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of the fenced highway a distance of 787 feet
N7°30'W of the Southwest Corner of Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 6 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian; Thence N82°30'E, 1835.2 feet; Thence S13°26'W,
919 feet; Thence S85°10'W, 1502.5 feet to the Southwest Corner of said Section
6, Thence N7°30'W, 787 feet to the Point of Beginning, all in the SW 1/4 of
said Section 6.
Parcel 5
The West Half of the Fractional Northwest Quarter and the West Half of the
Fractional Southwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the 5th Principal Meridian.
   EXCEPTING THEREFROM 25.0 Acres, more or less acquired for road purposes by
condemnation proceedings Recorded in Book 698, at Page 303 of the Records of
the Johnson County Recorder's Office.
Parcel 6
The East half of the Northwest Quarter and the East Half of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian.
The total area of Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 which lie North of the above
described line is 574.6 acres, more or less.
Figure 3   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE NORTHWEST SANITARY SEWER PROJECT, PHASE II
Commencing at the Northeast corner of Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 6
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Iowa City, Johnson County, Iowa; Thence
S00°03'27"E, along the East Line of said Section 7, a distance of 2557.47 feet;
Thence S89°56'33"W, 1593.89 feet to the Point of Beginning of the Centerline
Alignment for an existing sanitary sewer; Thence N77°55'22"W, along said
centerline, 399.48 feet; Thence N73°43'27"W, along said centerline, 393.53
feet; Thence N74°32'12"W, along centerline, 333.30 feet to the Point of
Termination.
Figure 4   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer Project, Phase II,
has been completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost of the Northwest Sanitary Sewer
Project, Phase II is $119,563.63. This cost includes $31,979.06 in interest
costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3915, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-6: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK
SEWER PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The South Sycamore sanitary trunk sewer ("project") provides gravity
sanitary sewer to areas immediately south of Grant Wood Elementary School. This
trunk sewer is the first major extension of sanitary sewer to areas that
previously could not be served by gravity sewer and was made possible by the
construction of the south wastewater treatment plant and the southeast
interceptor sewer. The project includes the construction of twenty six (26)
manholes and eight thousand four hundred thirty (8,430) linear feet of concrete
sanitary sewer pipe ranging in size from twelve inches (12") to twenty four
inches (24") in diameter.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the southeast side of Iowa City as designated in
figure 1 of this section. The project was initiated by the city of Iowa City to
encourage compact contiguous development in the area with sanitary sewer
service provided at a reasonable cost.
      3.   An agreement regarding prepayment and collection of sanitary sewer
tap on fees has been made between the city of Iowa City and the developers of
Mount Prospect, parts 5-8, South Pointe Addition, parts 1-6 and Hollywood
Manor, part 6.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On November 12, 1991, the city council adopted resolution 91-281
authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the project. On May 26,
1992, the city council held a public hearing on the plans, specifications, form
of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public hearing the city council
passed resolution 92-134 approving the project and fixing the date for bids.
The city council awarded the project construction contract to Weber Mid-State
Construction on June 23, 1992, via resolution 92-186. The city council accepted
the work for the project on January 18, 1994, via resolution 94-16.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds
as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project via
resolution 89-284.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is eight hundred fifty eight thousand five hundred forty
eight dollars thirty five cents ($858,548.35). This cost includes two hundred
twenty seven thousand six hundred fifty eight dollars forty nine cents
($227,658.49) in interest costs.
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of four hundred
seventy seven and nine-tenths (477.9) acres (see figure 1 of this section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be one
thousand seven hundred ninety six dollars fifty cents ($1,796.50) per acre. The
fee reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is
in addition to any other project-specific tap on fees established.
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance: This project
serves twenty eight and six-tenths (28.6) acres of existing development in
order to divert flow from an existing, undersized sewer. No tap on fees will be
charged to residents in this area, which includes the following subdivisions:
Mount Prospect, parts 1&1B, Hollywood Manor, parts 4&5 and Grant Wood
Elementary School.
   I.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of the benefited properties, exempt properties, and the location of the
constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the project.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project
has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder as denoted in
book 2593, page 151 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer.
Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1   GENERAL BOUNDARY MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2797.png]
 
Figure 2   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE SOUTH SYCAMORE
SANITARY TRUNK SEWER
Areas in Section 22, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   The East 750 feet of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 22.7
acres.
2.   Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter; Thence West 750 feet; Thence Southeasterly to a point which
is 500 feet South of said Northeast Corner; Thence North 500 feet to the Point
of Beginning. 4.3 acres.
Areas in Section 23, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
2.   The Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
3.   The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 acres.
4.   All of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter except beginning at
the Southwest Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; Thence
North 820 feet; Thence Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of said Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence West to the Point of Beginning. 27.6
acres.
5.   All of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter except the North 500
feet of the East 575 feet thereof. 33.4 acres.
6.   Beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter; Thence North 1100 feet; Thence East 550 feet; Thence
Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter; Thence West to the Point of Beginning. 23.6 acres.
7.   The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 acres.
Areas in Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   The West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 16.7
acres.
2.   The West 550 feet of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 16.7
acres.
3.   All of the West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter
except beginning at the Southwest Corner of the Northwest Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter; Thence North 745 feet; Thence Southeasterly to the Southeast
Corner of said West 550 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter;
Thence West 550 feet to the Point of Beginning. 12.0 acres.
Areas in Section 26. Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter; Thence South 975 feet; Thence Northwesterly to the Northwest
Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; Thence East to the
Point of Beginning. 29.5 acres.
2.   All of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except beginning at
the Southwest Corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; Thence
North 345 feet; Southeasterly to the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter; Thence West to the Point of Beginning. 34.8 acres.
3.   The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter. 40.0 acres.
4.   All of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except beginning at
the Northwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; Thence
Southeasterly to a point which is 950 feet East of the Southwest Corner of the
Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; Thence West 950 feet to said
Southwest Corner; Thence North to the Point of Beginning. 25.6 acres.
5.   Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter; Thence South 575 feet; Thence Northwesterly to a point which
is 370 feet West of said Northeast Corner; Thence East 370 feet to the Point of
Beginning. 2.4 acres.
   LOTS SERVED BY SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER.
 
Mount Prospect Addition, Part One
Lots 1 - 13 & 19 - 35                   
Mount Prospect Addition, Part One "B"   
Lots 96 - 105                           
Hollywood Manor Addition, Part Four     
Lots 154 - 191                            28.6 acres
Hollywood Manor Addition, Part Five
Lots 192 - 201 & 205 - 213
 
   Total Area of Properties Benefited = 477.9 acres.
Figure 3   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SOUTH SYCAMORE SANITARY TRUNK SEWER
A 40.00 Foot Wide Permanent Easement for the South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk
Sewer, located in the Southwest Quarter of Section 23, and in the Southwest
Quarter of Section 25, and in Section 26, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, which is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a nail found in a concrete corner post at the Northeast Corner of
the Southeast Quarter of Section 26, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, and for the purpose of this legal description, the
Centerline of Sycamore Street is assumed to bear N01°20'10"W, as recorded in
Plat Book 8, at Page 41, of the Records of the Johnson County Recorder's
Office; Thence S01°28'13"E, 6.42 feet; Thence N87°26'48"E, 486.65 feet; Thence
S02°33'12"E, 40.00 feet; Thence S87°26'48"W, 527.41 feet; Thence N01°28'13"W,
403.17 feet; Thence N27°44'33"W, 843.64 feet; Thence N03°45'15"E, 897.46 feet;
Thence N37°10'25"W, 632.98 feet; Thence N85°23'53"W, 621.90 feet; Thence
S88°11'49"W, 1326.14 feet, to the West Line of the Northeast Quarter of said
Section 26; Thence S87°45'11"W, 1089.43 feet; Thence N02°14'49"W, 40.00 feet;
Thence N87°45'11"E, 1034.24 feet; Thence N01°02'50"W, 1331.21 feet; Thence
N01°20'10"W, 768.80 feet; Thence N88°43'02"E, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°20'10"E,
768.87 feet; Thence S01°02'50"E, 1330.47 feet; Thence N87°45'11"E, 15.63 feet,
to the West Line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 26; Thence
N88°11'49"E, 1307.11 feet; Thence N01°48'11"W, 10.00 feet, to the North Line of
said Northeast Quarter; Thence N88°11'49"E, along said North Line, 20.00 feet,
to the Northwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Northeast Quarter as
recorded in Plat Book 7, at Page 63, of the Records of the Johnson County
Recorder's Office; Thence N88°17'12"E, along the North Line of said Northeast
Quarter of the Northeast Quarter, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°42'48"E, 14.30 feet;
Thence S85°23'53"E, 324.97 feet; Thence N01°42'48"W, 50.05 feet, to the North
Line of said Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence N88°17'12"E,
along said North Line, 40.00 feet; Thence S01°42'48"E, 54.47 feet; Thence
S85°23'53"E, 237.73 feet; Thence S37°10'25"E, 665.81 feet; Thence S03°45'15"W,
901.11 feet; Thence S27°44'33"E, 841.70 feet, to the East Line of the Northeast
Quarter of said Section 26; Thence S01°28'13"E, along said East Line, 365.31
feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land contains 7.81 acres, more
or less, and is subject to easements and restrictions of record.
Figure 4   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the South Sycamore Sanitary Trunk Sewer Project
has been completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost for the South Sycamore Sanitary
Trunk Sewer Project is $858,548.35 which includes $227,658.49 in interest
costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3916, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-7: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE 1996 HIGHLANDER LIFT STATION,
FORCE MAIN AND TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The 1996 Highlander Lift Station, force main and trunk sewer project
("project") provides sanitary sewer service to the NCS/Northgate Corporate Park
area and the north slope of the area south of Interstate 80 in northeast Iowa
City. The project includes the construction of a sewerage lift station, twelve
(12) manholes, two thousand seven hundred thirty (2,730) linear feet of gravity
sanitary sewer pipe ranging in size from eight inches (8") to thirty inches
(30") in diameter and one thousand four hundred thirty four (1,434) linear feet
of six inch (6") force main sewer pipe.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the northeast side of Iowa City as designated in
figure 1 of this section. The project was initiated by the city of Iowa City to
fulfill the city's obligation under the conditions of a CEBA grant to National
Computer Systems, Inc., and to encourage compact contiguous development with
sanitary sewer service provided at a reasonable cost.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On April 11, 1995, the city council adopted resolution 95-80
authorizing an agreement with Shoemaker & Haaland to design the project. On
January 16, 1996, the city council held a public hearing on the plans,
specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the public
hearing the city council passed resolution 96-8 approving the project and
fixing the date for bids. The city council awarded the project construction
contract to Maxwell Construction, Inc., on February 13, 1996, via resolution
96-36. The city council accepted the work for the project on April 8, 1997, via
resolution 97-105.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of general obligation bonds
as interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project via
resolution 95-63.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is six hundred twenty three thousand ninety three dollars
seventeen cents ($623,093.17). This cost includes one hundred sixty six
thousand six hundred fifty five dollars forty four cents ($166,655.44) in
interest costs (see figure 5 of this section).
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of six hundred
ninety six and seven-tenths (696.7) acres (see figures 1 and 2 of this
section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be eight
hundred ninety four dollars thirty five cents ($894.35) per acre. The fee
reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in
addition to any other project specific tap on fees established.
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance: This project
serves one hundred twenty four and one-tenth (124.1) acres of existing
development previously served by a lift station removed and replaced with this
project. No tap on fees will be charged to residents in this area since these
properties were assessed for the original lift station and force main by
special assessment proceedings (see figures 1 and 3 of this section).
   I.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of the benefited properties, exempt properties and the location of the
constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the project.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the properties exempt from the costs
associated with construction of the project.
      4.   Figure 4: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project
has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in
book 2809, page 152 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer.
Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      5.   Figure 5: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2799.png]
 
Figure 2   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE 1996 HIGHLANDER
LIFT STATION, FORCE MAIN AND TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Areas in Section 36, Township 80 North Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   All of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter lying Southeasterly
of Iowa State Highway 1 Right of Way. 7.2 Acres
2.   The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying Westerly of the Iowa
State Highway 1 Right of Way. 39.5 Acres
3.   The Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, excepting the Iowa State
Highway 1 Right of Way. 36.0 Acres
4.   The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying East of the Iowa
State Highway 1 Right of Way and North of the Interstate Highway 80 Right of
Way. 22.5 Acres
5.   The Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying West of the Iowa
State Highway 1 Right of Way and North of the Interstate 80 Right of Way. 7.0
Acres
6.   The Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
7.   The Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
8.   The Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
9.   The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
10.   The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying Southeasterly of
Iowa State Highway 1 and South of Rapid Creek Road. 14.9 Acres
11.   The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying South of the Rapid
Creek Road. 21.2 Acres
12.   The Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter. 40.0 Acres
13.   The Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter lying Southeasterly of
Iowa State Highway 1. 38.2 Acres
Areas in Section 31, Township 80 North Range 5 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying Southwest of Lynden
Heights Road. 22.5 Acres
2.   In the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter the following described
land: Beginning at the Southeast Corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 thence
Northwesterly to a point on the West line of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 which point is
400 feet North of the Southwest corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4; thence Southerly
400 feet; thence Easterly 1320 feet to the Point of Beginning. 6.1 Acres
3.   The Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
4.   The Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
5.   The Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter lying Southwest of Lynden
Heights Road. 0.5 Acres
Areas in Section 6, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   In the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a tract of land
described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner; thence Easterly to the
Northeast corner; thence Southerly 400 feet; thence Southwesterly to a point on
the West line of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4, which point is 790 feet South of the
Point of Beginning; thence Northerly to the Point of Beginning. 18.0 Acres
2.   In the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter a tract of land
described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest Corner; thence Easterly to the
Northeast Corner; thence South 790 feet; thence Southwesterly to a point on the
West line of the NW 1/4 NW 1/4, which point is 1060 feet South of the Point of
Beginning; thence North to the Point of Beginning. 28.0 Acres
Areas in Section 1, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian:
1.   The Easterly 725 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter
lying South of the Interstate Highway 80 Right of Way. 19.7 Acres
2.   The Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter. 40.0 Acres
3.   The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except the Southerly 260
feet of the Easterly 500 feet. 37.0 Acres
4.   The Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter except the Southerly 260
feet. 32.1 Acres
5.   In the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, the Northerly 400 feet
of the Easterly 725 feet. 6.7 Acres
6.   In the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, the Northerly 400 feet
thereof. 12.1 Acres
7.   In the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter the following described
tract; the Northerly 400 feet excepting the Easterly 500 feet of the Northerly
400 feet. 7.5 Acres
   TOTAL AREA OF BENEFITED PROPERTIES = 696.7 Acres
Figure 3   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES EXEMPT FROM TAP ON ORDINANCE
1.   The West half of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North,
Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. lying Northerly of Interstate Highway 80 right-of-
way and Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way and the Northerly 281
feet of the Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36-80-6 lying
Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way, containing 50.1 acres more or
less. ("NATIONAL COMPUTER SYSTEMS" PROPERTY)
2.   The Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80
North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. Westerly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-
way, except the Northerly 281 feet, containing 2.9 acres more or less. ("PLUM
GROVE ACRES, INC." PROPERTY)
3.   Commencing at the Southeast corner of the Northeast quarter of the
Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th
P.M.; thence Westerly along the South line of said Northeast quarter 715.26
feet to the point of beginning; thence North 46°32' West 561.87 feet to the
Easterly right-of-way of Iowa State Highway 1; thence Southwesterly along said
right-of-way to the South line of said Northeast quarter of Southwest quarter
of Section 36; thence Easterly along said line 582.94 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 2.6 acres more or less. ("WILLIAM B. KRON, JR." PROPERTY)
4.   The Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80
North, Range 6 West of the 5th P.M. lying Northerly of Interstate Highway 80
right-of-way and Easterly of Iowa State Highway 1 right-of-way, except the
following: (1) Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Southeast quarter;
thence Westerly along the North line of said Southeast quarter 256.59 feet;
thence Southwesterly 805.18 feet to the Northerly right-of-way of Interstate
Highway 80; thence Easterly along said right-of-way to the East line of said
Southeast quarter; thence Northerly along the East line of said Southeast
quarter to the point of beginning; and (2) 1.20 acres platted as Highlander
Development First Addition, said parcel contains 15.2 acres more or less.
("HIGHLANDER PARTNERSHIP" PROPERTY)
5.   Commencing at the Northeast corner of the Southeast quarter of the
Southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 80 North, Range 6 West of the 5th
P.M.; thence North 189.76 feet to the point of beginning; thence North
49°06'50" West 1,186.34 feet to the Easterly right-of-way of Iowa State Highway
1; thence South 24°44'00" West along said right-of-way 267.5 feet; thence South
14°48'00" West 203.04 feet along said right-of-way; thence South 24°44'00" West
118.0 feet along said right-of-way; thence South 46°32'00" East 561.87 feet;
thence Easterly along the North line of said Southeast quarter 458.67 feet;
thence Southwesterly 805.18 feet to the Northerly right-of-way of Interstate
Highway 80; thence Easterly along said right-of-way to the East line of the
Southwest quarter of the Southeast quarter of said Section 36; thence North
0°12'00" East along the East line of said Southwest quarter 1,164.0 feet;
thence South 89°26'00" West 1,309.0 feet to the point of beginning, except for
50.00 acres platted as Highlander Development First Addition, said parcel
contains 2.14 acres more or less. ("M. DEAN JONES AND JOHN STEVENS, CONTRACT TO
HIGHLANDER, INC., CONTRACT TO JOMAC DEVELOPMENT COMPANY" PROPERTY)
6.   HIGHLANDER DEVELOPMENT FIRST ADDITION NORTHGATE DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC.
PROPERTY. Said subdivision contains 51.2 acres more or less.
   TOTAL AREA OF PROPERTIES EXEMPT = 124.1 Acres
Figure 4   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF 1996 HIGHLANDER LIFT STATION, FORCE MAIN AND
TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Introduction
Following are legal descriptions of the location of the sanitary sewer and
force main constructed with the 1996 Highlander Lift Station, Force Main and
Trunk Sewer Project. These descriptions have been prepared from the information
contained in the IDNR approved construction plans, the property acquisition
plats and the As-Built Record Drawings of the constructed improvements.
Sanitary Sewer Description
Commencing at a found Concrete Monument at the NW Corner of the SW 1/4 of
Section 36, T80N, R6W, of the 5th P.M.; Thence S89°16'46" E - 1324.85 feet
along the North line of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 to a found pin set in concrete
at the NW Corner of the NE 1/4 of said SW 1/4; thence S89°22'32" E - 398.27
feet along the North line of said NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and also being the North
line of a Tract of Land described in Warranty Deed Book 370, Page 129, as
recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder; thence S28°04'42" W -
132.79 feet to a point; thence S61°55'18" E - 30.59 feet to the center of a new
lift station wet well and the Point of Beginning of this sanitary sewer
centerline description; thence S48°12'11" E - 26.25 feet along the centerline
of a 24" sanitary sewer line to manhole #1; thence continuing S48°12'11" E -
123.75 feet along the said centerline of a 24" sanitary sewer line to manhole
#2; thence S12°15'42" W - 130.00 feet along the centerline of a 18" sanitary
sewer line to manhole #3; thence S48°54'49" E - 1140.00 feet along the
centerline of an 18" sanitary sewer line to manhole #5A and the end of this
centerline description.
Also a description of the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer beginning at
manhole #1; thence S25°21'49" W - 805.29 feet along the centerline of a 12"
sanitary sewer line to manhole #8; thence S79°05'44" W - 78.58 feet along the
centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer line to manhole #9; thence S25°06'01" W -
395.12 feet along the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer line to manhole #10;
thence S55°42'47" E - 41.89 feet along the centerline of a 12" sanitary sewer
line to an existing sewer manhole and the end of this centerline description.
Force Main Description
Commencing at a found Concrete Monument at the N.W. Corner of the SW 1/4 of
Section 36, T80N, R6W, of the 5th P.M.; thence S89°16'46" E - 1324.85 feet
along the North line of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 to a found pin set in concrete
at the N.W. Corner of the NE 1/4 of said SW 1/4; thence S89°22'32" E - 398.27
feet along the North line of said NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and also being the North
line of Tract of Land described in Warranty Deed Book 370, Page 129, as
recorded in the office of the Johnson County Recorder; thence S28°04'42" W -
132.79 feet to a point; thence S61°55'18" E - 30.59 feet to the center of a new
lift station wet well and the Point of Beginning of this force main centerline
description; thence S42°33'03" W - 50.63 feet along the centerline of a 6"
force main line to a point; thence S18°27'47" W - 134.31 feet along said
centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence S25°21'49" W - 573.49
feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a point; thence
S70°06'01" W - 84.62 feet along said centerline of a 6" force main line to a
point; thence S25°06'01" W - 520.62 feet along said centerline of a 6" force
main line to a point; thence S2°36'01" W - 80.70 feet along said centerline of
a 6" force main to an existing 6" force main and the end of this description.
Figure 5   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the 1996 Highlander Lift Station, Force Main and
Trunk Sewer Project has been completed in substantial conformance with the
approved plans and specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost for the 1996 Highlander Lift
Station, Force Main and Trunk Sewer Project is $623,093.17 which includes
$166,655.44 in interest costs.
/s/
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3917, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-8: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE FOR THE SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK SEWER
PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The Scott Boulevard trunk sewer, completed in 1998, serves the
southeasterly area of the city of Iowa City. The Scott Boulevard trunk sewer
includes sanitary sewer ranging in size from eight inch (8") to sixty six inch
(66") and totaling approximately twelve thousand (12,000) linear feet. Also
included is the removal of the Heinz Lift Station and the Village Green Lift
Station. Areas currently not within the city's boundary, when annexed, will be
served by this trunk sewer.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the southeast side of Iowa City as designated in
figure 1 of this section.
      3.   Certain agreements regarding the payment of tap on fees have been
negotiated between the city of Iowa City as follows:
         a.   Subdivider's agreement recorded at book 1840, page 108, records
of the Johnson County recorder between the city and village partners in
connection with the subdivision of Village Green part 13 and applying to
Village Green part 13 and remaining portions of Village Green as described
therein.
         b.   Agreements recorded at book 2371, page 178, book 2391, page 199
and book 2708, page 248, records of the Johnson County, Iowa recorder regarding
the Scott Six Industrial Park.
         c.   Conditional zoning and subdivider's agreements applying to
Windsor Ridge Addition, parts 1 through 14.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On November 8, 1994, the city council adopted resolution 94-339
authorizing an agreement with MMS Consultants to design the Scott Boulevard
trunk sewer project. On June 17, 1997, the city council held a public hearing
on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following
the public hearing the city council passed resolution 97-204 approving the
plans and specifications of the project and authorizing advertisement for bids.
The city council awarded the project construction contract to Barbarossa and
Sons, Inc., on July 15, 1997, by resolution 97-244. The city council accepted
the work for the project improvements on July 7, 1998, by resolution 98-223.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of sewer revenue bonds as
interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project by resolution
97-181.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is three million one hundred ninety two thousand five
hundred eighty two dollars twenty one cents ($3,192,582.21). This includes nine
hundred four thousand three hundred ninety four dollars twenty four cents
($904,394.24) in interest costs.
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of one thousand
eight hundred eighty (1,880) acres (see figure 1 of this section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits, final subdivision plats or
final approval of planned area developments shall be issued for any parcel or
tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The tap on fee for the benefited area shall be one
thousand six hundred ninety eight dollars eighteen cents ($1,698.18) per acre.
The fee reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and
is in addition to any other project specific tap on fees established.
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap On Ordinance:
      1.   Existing platted subdivisions as of July 7, 1998, previously
assessed for sanitary sewer service provided by the Heinz Lift Station and the
Village Green Lift Station as follows: all BDI Additions; Village Green
Addition parts 9, 10, 11, 12; Village Green South Addition parts 1, 2, 3A, 3B,
4A, 4B.
      2.   Saddle Brook Addition part 1, an existing development already served
by existing sanitary sewer.
   I.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of the benefited properties and the location of the constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the Scott Boulevard trunk sewer project, listing the total area
in acres.
      3.   Figure 3: General map of properties exempt from costs associated
with this project specific tap on fee ordinance and properties subject to
existing agreements with the city for payment of tap on fees.
      4.   Figure 4: Legal description of the Scott Boulevard trunk sewer
project. A plat of the project has been recorded in the office of the Johnson
County recorder as denoted in book 2818, page 9 and is also on file in the
office of the city engineer. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      5.   Figure 5: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2801.png]
 
Figure 2   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY BENEFITED BY THE SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK
SEWER PROJECT
   ASSESSMENT LEGAL DESCRIPTION
Beginning at the center of Section 30, Township 79 North, Range 5 West; Thence
West along the South line of the Northwest quarter of said Section 30, to the
West one-quarter corner of said Section 30; Thence West along the South line of
the Southeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of Section 25, Township
79 North, Range 6 West; Thence North along the West line of said Southeast one-
quarter of the Northeast one-quarter to the Southwest corner of the Northeast
one-quarter of said Northeast one-quarter; Thence West along the South line of
the Northwest one-quarter of said Northeast one-quarter to the Southwest corner
of said Northwest one-quarter; Thence North along the West line of said
Northwest one-quarter to the North one-quarter corner of said Section 25;
Thence East along the North line of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southwest
corner of the Southeast one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter of the
Southeast one- quarter of Section 24, Township 79 North, Range 6 West; Thence
North along the West line of the East one half of said Southwest one-quarter of
the Southeast one-quarter to the Northwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter
of the Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of said Section 24;
Thence West along the South line of the Northwest one-quarter of said Southeast
one- quarter to the Southwest corner of the Northwest one-quarter of said
Southeast one-quarter; Thence North along the West line of the East one-half of
said Section 24, to the North one-quarter corner of said Section 24; Thence
North along the West line of the Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-
quarter of Section 13, Township 79 North, Range 6 West to the Northwest corner
of said Southwest one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter; Thence East along
the North line of the South one-half of the Southeast one-quarter of said
Section 13, to the Southeast corner of the Northeast one-quarter of said
Southeast one-quarter; Thence North along the East line of said Southeast one-
quarter, to the West one-quarter of Section 18, Township 79 North, Range 5
West; Thence East along the North line of the Southwest one-quarter of said
Section 18, to the Southwest corner of the Southeast one- quarter of the
Southeast one-quarter of the Northwest one-quarter of said Section 18; Thence
North along the West line of the East one half of said Southeast one-quarter of
the Northwest one- quarter, to the Northwest corner of the Northeast one-
quarter of said Southeast one-quarter of the Northwest one-quarter; Thence East
along the South line of the North one half of the North one half of said
Section 18, to the Southwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter of the
Northeast one-quarter of said Section 18; Thence North along the West line of
said Northeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter, to the Northwest
corner of said Northeast one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter; Thence East
along the North line of said Northeast one-quarter, to the Northeast corner of
said Section 18; Thence East along the North line of the Northwest one-quarter
of Section 17, Township 79 North, Range 5 West, to the Northeast corner of the
Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 17; Thence
South along the East line of the West one half of the West one half of said
Section 17, to the Southeast corner of the Northwest one-quarter of the
Southwest one-quarter of said Section 17; Thence West along the South line of
said Northwest one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter to the Southwest corner
of said Northwest one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter; Thence South along
the West line of the Southwest one-quarter of said Section 17, to the Southwest
corner of said Section 17; Thence South along the East line of Section 19,
Township 79 North, Range 5 West to the Southeast corner of the Northeast one-
quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of said Section 19; Thence West along the
South line of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter, to the
Southwest corner of said Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter;
Thence South along the East line of the Southwest one-quarter of said Southeast
one- quarter, to the Southeast corner of said Southwest one-quarter of the
Southeast one-quarter; Thence South along the East line of the Northwest one-
quarter of the Northeast one-quarter of said Section 30 to the Southeast corner
of said Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter; Thence West along
the South line of said Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-quarter, to
the Southwest corner of said Northwest one-quarter of the Northeast one-
quarter; Thence South along the West line of the Northeast one-quarter of said
Section 30, to said Point of Beginning, containing 1880 acres more or less.
Figure 3   PROPERTIES EXEMPT FROM THIS PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP ON FEE ORDINANCE
AND PROPERTY SUBJECT TO EXISTING AGREEMENT WITH CITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAP ON FEES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2803.png]
 
Figure 4   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SCOTT BOULEVARD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
The Centerline Alignments of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project located in
the North one half of Section 25, Township 79 North, Range 6 West, the East one
half of Section 24, Township 79 North, Range 6 West and the West one half of
Section 19, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
Johnson County, Iowa, which is more particularly described as follows:
Alignment No. 1
Commencing at the West one quarter corner of Section 25, Township 79 North,
Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa; Thence
N88°36'00"E along the South line of the Northwest one quarter of said Section
25, a distance of 1071.33 feet; Thence N00°00'00"E, 755.56 feet to an existing
manhole in a structure, and the Point of Beginning of Alignment No. 1 of the
Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project; Thence N77°12'13"E, along said centerline,
355.02 feet; Thence N82°54'06"E, along said centerline, 496.69 feet; Thence
S74°05'54"E, along said centerline, 631.22 feet; Thence N79°54'04"E, along said
centerline, 568.78 feet; Thence N64°54'06"E, along said centerline, 67.95 feet;
Thence N38°54'06"E, along said centerline, 304.80 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E,
along said centerline, 64.00 feet; Thence S81°05'56"E, along said centerline,
208.00 feet; Thence S51°05'56"E, 80.00 feet; Thence S21°05'56"E, along said
centerline, 240.00 feet; Thence S43°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00 feet;
Thence S66°05'56"E, along said centerline 48.00 feet; Thence S88°35'56"E, along
said centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 329.54
feet; Thence N42°54'04"E, along said centerline, 802.66 feet; Thence
N31°53'52"E, along said centerline, 550.93 feet; Thence N10°23'52"E, along said
centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N11°06'08"W, along said centerline, 456.00 feet;
Thence N11°23'52"E, along said centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N33°53'52"E,
along said centerline, 397.83 feet; Thence N33°53'33"E, along said centerline
and crossing under U.S. Highway No. 6, a distance of 354.88 feet; Thence
N03°14'22"E, along said centerline, 942.45 feet; Thence N51°09'51"E, along said
centerline, 203.07 feet; Thence N00°13'57"E, along said centerline, 715.91
feet; Thence N28°52'10"E, along said centerline, 461.37 feet; Thence
N01°33'45"W, along said centerline, 439.23 feet; Thence N24°58'18"E, along said
centerline and crossing under the Heartland Rail Corporation railroad tracks,
160.00 feet; Thence N31°15'52"E, along said centerline, 254.44 feet; Thence
N53°55'19"E, along said centerline, 181.25 feet to the Point of Termination of
Alignment No. 1 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project.
Alignment No. 2
Commencing at the West one quarter corner of Section 25, Township 79 North,
Range 6 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa; Thence
N88°36'00"E along the South line of the Northwest one quarter of said Section
25, a distance of 1071.33 feet; Thence N00°00'00"E, 755.56 feet to an existing
manhole in a structure; Thence N77°12'13"E, along said centerline, 355.02 feet;
Thence N82°54'06"E, along said centerline, 496.69 feet; Thence S74°05'54"E,
along said centerline, 631.22 feet; Thence N79°54'04"E, along said centerline,
568.78 feet; Thence N64°54'06"E, along said centerline, 67.95 feet; Thence
N38°54'06"E, along said centerline, 304.80 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said
centerline, 64.00 feet; Thence S81°05'56"E, along said centerline, 208.00 feet;
Thence S51°05'56"E, 80.00 feet; Thence S21°05'56"E, along said centerline,
240.00 feet; Thence S43°35'56"E, along said centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence
S66°05'56"E, along said centerline 48.00 feet; Thence S88°35'56"E, along said
centerline, 48.00 feet; Thence N68°54'04"E, along said centerline, 329.54 feet;
Thence N42°54'04"E, along said centerline, 802.66 feet; Thence N31°53'52"E,
along said centerline, 550.93 feet; Thence N10°23'52"E, along said centerline,
32.00 feet; Thence N11°06'08"W, along said centerline, 456.00 feet; Thence
N11°23'52"E, along said centerline, 32.00 feet; Thence N33°53'52"E, along said
centerline, 397.83 feet; Thence N33°53'33"E, along said centerline and crossing
under U.S. Highway No. 6, a distance of 354.88 feet; Thence N03°14'22"E, along
said centerline, 942.45 feet; Thence N51°09'51"E, along said centerline, 203.07
feet; Thence N00°13'57"E, along said centerline, 715.91 feet to the Point of
Beginning of Alignment No. 2 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project; Thence
N78°15'17"W, along said centerline and under Scott Boulevard, 421.00 feet;
Thence N73°014'06"W, along said centerline, 283.28 feet; Thence N01°02'49"E,
along said centerline, 452.41 feet; Thence N16°32'49"W, along said centerline,
356.31 feet; Thence N05°28'57"W, along said centerline, and under Heinz Road
and the Heartland Rail Corporation railroad tracks, 601.00 feet; Thence
N62°26'23"W, along said centerline, 274.41 feet to the Point of Termination of
Alignment No. 2 of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project.
Figure 5   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Richard A. Fosse, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the Scott Boulevard Trunk Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost for the Scott Boulevard Trunk
Sewer Project is $3,192,582.21 which includes $904,394.24 in interest costs.
/s/         
Richard A. Fosse, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 00-3918, 2-15-2000)
16-3B-9: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE DANE ROAD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The Dane Road trunk sewer serves the area located west of the Iowa
City airport and south of U.S. Highway 1. The Dane Road trunk sewer project
included the construction of thirty two (32) manholes and ten thousand eight
hundred forty six feet (10,846') of sanitary sewer pipe with pipe diameter
ranging from eight inches (8") to thirty inches (30") and included the removal
of the W.B. development lift station. Areas currently not within the city's
boundary, when annexed, will be served by this trunk sewer.
      2.   The city council determined that installation of the project would
facilitate development of the southwest side of Iowa City as designated in
figure 1 of this section and encourage compact development with sanitary sewer
service provided at reasonable cost.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On October 8, 2001, the city council adopted resolution 01-328
authorizing an agreement with Earth Tech Inc., to design the sewer for the Dane
Road trunk sewer project. On February 18, 2003, the city council held a public
hearing on the plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate.
Following the public hearing, the city council passed resolution 03-61
approving the plans and specifications of the project and authorizing
advertisement for bids. The city council awarded the project construction
contract to Metro Pavers Inc., on June 10, 2003, by resolution 03-185. The city
council accepted the work for the project improvements on February 1, 2005, by
resolution 05-53.
      2.   The city council authorized the issuance of sewer revenue bonds as
interim financing to pay the construction costs of the project in resolution
03-302.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is one million five hundred forty nine thousand seven
dollars twenty four cents ($1,549,007.24). This cost includes two hundred
twenty eight thousand three hundred forty six dollars seventy two cents
($228,346.72) in interest costs.
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of three hundred
eighty eight and six-tenths (388.6) acres. The benefited area has been divided
into two (2) subareas labeled "A" and "B" since the area is bisected by U.S.
Highway 218 right of way (see figure 1 of this section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection to
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The following table lists the tap-on fee per acre for
the two (2) subareas in the benefited area. The fee reflects the actual costs
of the benefits associated with each subarea and are in addition to any other
project specific tap-on fees established.
 
Subarea Acres Fee Per Acre
A       168.5 $3,986.12
B       220.1 3,986.12
 
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area, to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of benefited properties divided into two (2) subareas and the location of the
constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the project.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project
has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in
book 49, page 34 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said
plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2806.png]
 
Figure 2   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES BENEFITED BY THE DANE ROAD TRUNK
SEWER
Areas in the Northeast Quarter Section 29, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   That part of the Northeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter lying Southwesterly
of Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218). 29.7 acres.
2.   The North 870 feet of the Southeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter. 26.4
acres.
3.   The North 870 feet of the West 625 feet of the Southwest Quarter,
Northeast Quarter. 12.5 acres.
4.   That part of the Northwest Quarter, Northeast Quarter except the South 825
feet of the West 690 feet. 26.9 acres.
5.   That part of the Northeast Quarter, Northeast Quarter lying Northeasterly
of Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 2.9 acres.
Areas in the Northwest Quarter Section 29, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   The North 495 feet of the East 355 feet of the Northwest Quarter. 4.0
acres.
Areas in the Southwest Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   That part of the Southeast Quarter, Southwest Quarter lying Southeasterly
of State Highway 1. 27.0 acres
Areas in the Southeast Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   That part of the Southeast Quarter lying Southwesterly of State Highway 1
and Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 42.0 acres.
2.   That part of the Southeast Quarter lying Northeasterly of State Highway 1
and Primary Road 518 (Hwy 218) right of way. 73.5 acres.
Areas in the Northeast Quarter Section 20, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   That part of the Northeast Quarter lying Southerly of the Iowa City
Municipal Airport and State Highway 1 right of way. 8.7 acres.
Areas in the Southwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   That part of the Southwest Quarter 21 except the North 600 feet thereof.
123.6 acres.
Areas in the Southeast Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   The South 720 feet of the West 345 feet of the Northwest Quarter,
Southeast Quarter. 5.7 acres.
Areas in the Northwest Quarter Section 28, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian:
1.   The North 425 feet of the West 580 feet of the Northwest Quarter. 5.7
acres.
TOTAL AREA OF BENEFITED PROPERTIES = 388.6 ACRES
Figure 3   LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE DANE ROAD TRUNK SEWER PROJECT
Alignment 1
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 1 is a part of the Southeast Quarter Section
20, and the South Half Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, further described as follows:
Commencing at the South Quarter Corner of Section 20; thence N00°13'50"E along
the West line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 20, 588.85 feet; thence
S89°46'10"E 36.79 feet to a sanitary sewer manhole and the Point of Beginning;
thence S89°39'50"E along the centerline of the sanitary sewer 199.23 feet;
thence S88°51'34"E along said centerline 420.83 feet; thence N89°48'03"E along
said centerline 265.01 feet; thence S89°43'53"E along said centerline 255.85
feet; thence S68°33'03"E along said centerline 245.66 feet; thence S32°09'06"E
along said centerline 152.41 feet; thence N53°48'50"E along said centerline
415.85 feet; thence S71°19'13"E along said centerline 331.39 feet; thence
S71°49'06"E along said centerline 315.05 feet; thence N89°48'18"E along said
centerline 268.48 feet to manhole which is 388.47 feet North and 54.43 feet
East of the Southeast Corner Section 20; thence N00°11'34"E along said
centerline 162.68 feet; thence N11°55'02"E along said centerline 404.31 feet;
thence N2°46'30"E along said centerline 242.62 feet; thence N82°51'46"E along
said centerline 519.06 feet; thence N81°53'54"E along said centerline 329.19
feet; thence N3°46'40"W along said centerline 61.36 feet; thence N84°04'32"E
along said centerline 575.88 feet; thence N84°14'38"E along said centerline
545.87 feet; thence N83°49'54"E along said centerline 595.54 feet to a manhole
which is 1483.96 feet North and 62.98 East of the South Quarter Corner of
Section 21; thence N84°59'57"E along said centerline 587.04 feet; thence
N0°45'15"W along said centerline 41.50 feet to the Point of Termination; For
the purpose of this description the West line of the Southeast Quarter Section
20 is assumed to bear N00°13'50"E.
Alignment 2
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 2 is a part of the Northeast Quarter Section
20, and the Northwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa further described as
follows:
Commencing at the East Quarter Corner of said Section 20; thence N00°17'56"E
along the East line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 20, 1420.85 feet;
thence N90°00'00"E 39.22 feet to a Sanitary Sewer manhole and the Point of
Beginning; thence S35°14'41"W along the centerline of the Sanitary Sewer 398.05
feet; thence S59°08'38"W along said centerline 400.38 feet; thence S57°09'20"E
along said centerline 399.83 feet; thence S43°16'20"W along said centerline
399.46 feet; thence S30°54'20"E along said centerline 350.83 feet to the Point
of Termination. For the purpose of this description the East line of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 20 is assumed to bear N00°17'56"E.
Alignment 3
Dane Road Trunk Sewer Alignment 3 is a part of the Southeast Quarter Section
20, and the Southwest Quarter Section 21, Township 79 North, Range 6 West of
the Fifth Principal Meridian, Johnson County, Iowa, further described as
follows:
Commencing at the East Quarter Corner of said Section 20; thence S00°09'12"W
along the East line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 20, 1043.61 feet;
thence N90°00'00"W, 89.48 feet to a Sanitary Sewer Manhole and the Point of
Beginning; thence S64°29'04"E along the centerline of the Sanitary Sewer 228.29
feet; thence S71°33'48"E along said centerline 222.78 feet; thence S79°55'00"E
along said centerline 289.94 feet; thence S88°52'53"E along said centerline
258.99 feet; thence N84°50'44"E along said centerline 112.09 feet to the Point
of Termination. For the purpose of this description the East line of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 20 is assumed to bear S00°09'12"W.
Figure 4   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Ronald R. Knoche, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that the construction of the Dane Road Trunk Sewer has been completed
in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost of the Dane Road Trunk Sewer
Project is $1,549,007.24. This cost includes $228,346 in interest costs.
/s/         
Ronald R. Knoche, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 09-4333, 4-6-2009)
16-3B-10: PROJECT SPECIFIC TAP-ON FEE FOR THE SCOTT PARK TRUNK SEWER PROJECT:
   A.   General Project Description:
      1.   The Scott park trunk sewer project ("project") provides gravity
sanitary sewer to areas northeast of Court Street and Scott Boulevard to
Rochester Avenue. This trunk sewer is an extension of sanitary sewer to areas
that previously could not be served by gravity sewer and was made possible by
the upgrade of the Court Hill trunk sewer. The project included the
construction of fourteen (14) manholes and three thousand two hundred fifty
(3,250) linear feet of sanitary sewer pipe ranging from eight inches (8") to
eighteen inches (18") in diameter.
      2.   The city council determined that the project would facilitate
development of the northeast side of Iowa City as designated in figure 1 of
this section and encourage compact, contiguous development in the area with
sanitary sewer service provided at a reasonable cost.
   B.   Actions Taken By City Council In Approving The Project:
      1.   On August 19, 2003, the city council held a public hearing on the
plans, specifications, form of contract, and cost estimate. Following the
public hearing the city council passed resolution 03-213 approving the project
and fixing the date for bids. The city council awarded the project construction
contract to Bockenstedt Excavating, Inc., on September 23, 2003, via resolution
03-297. The city council accepted the work for the project on May 18, 2004, via
resolution 04-147.
   C.   Total Project Cost: The total actual cost of the project, as certified
by the city engineer, is two hundred twenty two thousand seven hundred sixty
nine dollars sixty two cents ($222,769.62).
   D.   Total Area Benefited: The project benefits a total of 189.21 acres (see
figure 1 of this section).
   E.   Building Permits: All tap-on fees must be paid prior to connection with
the city's sanitary sewer. No building permits shall be issued for any parcel
or tract of land located in the benefited area until the property owner or
building permit applicant pays the tap-on fee for that parcel or tract.
   F.   Schedule Of Fees: The tap-on fee for the benefited area shall be one
thousand thirty eight dollars twenty six cents ($1,038.26) per acre. The fee
reflects the actual costs of the benefits associated with the area and is in
addition to any other project specific tap-on fees established.
   G.   Agreements With Developers: The city may, in its discretion, enter into
agreements with developers subdividing property in the benefited area to allow
equalization of the tap-on fees among the lots in the subdivision, including
agreement for the prepayment of tap-on fees and development sequencing. Such
agreements shall not in any way alter the requirements regarding building
permits set forth in subsection E of this section.
   H.   Properties Exempt From Project Specific Tap-On Fee Ordinance: This
project serves 10.03 acres of existing development. No tap-on fees will be
charged to residents in this area, which includes the addresses on Hummingbird
Lane south of Lower West Branch Road.
   I.   Maps And Illustrations:
      1.   Figure 1: General boundary map of the project area showing location
of the benefited properties, exempt properties, and the location of the
constructed project.
      2.   Figure 2: Legal description of the properties benefited by the
construction of the project.
      3.   Figure 3: Legal description of the project. A plat of the project
has been recorded in the office of the Johnson County recorder as denoted in
book 49, page 33 and is also on file in the office of the city engineer. Said
plat is incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Figure 4: City engineer's cost certification.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2808.png]
 
Figure 2
Property Address Legal Description Area (Acres)
                                   
Property Address                 Legal Description                 Area (Acres)
                                                                   
                                 Com on S Line Hwy 1 34' E of W
3405 Rochester Ave.              line 7-79-5 E 149.73' S 299.4' W  1.02
                                 149.73' N 299.4' to beg
                                                                  
                                 That part of W 300' SW NW desc as
3500 Lower West Branch Rd.       aud. par. #97040 in survey bk 37  2.38
                                 pg 347
                                                                  
                                 Comm C/L of Old Hwy 1 807.3' NELY
3661 Rochester Ave.              of intersection with W/L 7-79-5;  4.00
                                 S 296.77' to beg.; S 404'; E
                                 432'; N 404'; W 432' to POB
                                                                  
4643 Herbert Hoover Hwy. SE      Lot 1 except land conveyed to     7.90
                                 Johnson County in book 997
                                                                  
4640 Lower West Branch Rd. SE    Tegler subdivision lot 2          13.92
                                                                  
                                 Comm at pt of inter S ROW line of
                                 Hwy 1 & W line of W 1/2 NE NW;
4653 Herbert Hoover Hwy. SE      thence S 144'; E 145'; N 181.95'; 0.54
                                 thence SWLY along road to beg
                                 .54A
                                                                  
4665 Herbert Hoover Hwy. SE      Tract "B" of boundary survey as   10.95
                                 described in book 29, page 67
                                                                  
                                 E 1/2 NE NW except land conveyed
4679 Herbert Hoover Hwy. SE      in book 998 page 460 as easement  18.55
                                 to Johnson County
                                                                  
                                 Com NE cor SW W 1639.8' to pt of
4641 Lower West Branch Rd. SE    beg; S 218' W 100' N 218' E 100'  0.50
                                 to beg
                                                                  
                                 Com NE cor SW sec N 87 deg 45' W
4659 Lower West Branch Rd. SE    along N line SW 954.7' to beg S 2 1.84
                                 deg 15' W 321.4' N 87 deg 45' W
                                 249.1' N 2 deg 15' E 321.4' S 87
                                                                  
                                 Com NE cor SW N 87 deg 45' W
                                 along N line SW 707.5' to beg S 2
4667 Lower West Branch Rd. SE    deg 15' W 321.4' N 87 deg 45' W   1.83
                                 247.2' N 2 deg 15' E 321.4' S 87
                                 deg
                                                                  
4694 Lower West Branch Rd. SE    E 10A SE NW                       9.60
                                                                  
290 Hummingbird Ln.1             1285--1 Hoyle's first subdivision 1.00
                                 lot 1
                                                                  
                                 Com 2045.12' N of SW cor 7-79-5;
164 Hummingbird Ln.1             E 769.70' to pt of beg; S 110'; E 0.77
                                 303.59'; N 110'; W 303.59' to beg
                                 0.77 ac
                                                                  
                                 Com at a pt on C/L rd 2045.12' N
                                 of SW cor 7-79-5; E 769.70'; S 0
140 Hummingbird Ln.1             deg 01' W 110' to pt of beg; E    0.98
                                 303.59'; S 140'; S 140'; W
                                 303.59';
                                                                  
                                 Com 2045.12' N & 769.7' E of SW
110 Hummingbird Ln.1             cor 7-79-5 S 240- to pt of beg; E 0.98
                                 303.59'; S 140 thence W 303.59';
                                 N 140' to beg 0.98 ac
                                                                  
66 Hummingbird Ln.1              1668--2 Lyman subdivision lot 2   1.30
                                                                   
32 Hummingbird Ln.1              1668--1 Lyman subdivision lot 1   1.00
                                                                  
Rochester Heights subdivision    Lots 21 - 60                      13.75
                                                                  
Olde Towne Village subdivision   Lots 1 - 49                       33.21
                                                                  
Lindeman subdivision parts 3 & 4 Lots 63 - 166                     63.19
                                 
                                   Total                       189.21 acres
 
Note:
   1.   Exempt - Hummingbird Lane total acres = 6.03.
Figure 3
Scott Park Trunk Sewer is a part of the Northwest Quarter and the Southwest
Quarter Section 7, Township 79 North, Range 5 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, further described as follows:
Commencing at the West Quarter Corner of Section 7 a cut X in the road;
thence N01°06'32"W along the West line of Section 7 564.26 feet;
thence N90°00'00"E 52.98 feet to a sanitary sewer manhole the Point of
Beginning;
thence N88°55'04"E along the centerline of the sanitary sewer 173.85 feet;
thence N88°28'47"E along said centerline 157.16 feet;
thence S50°42'24"E along said centerline 401.59 feet;
thence S50°41'43"E along said centerline 199.52 feet;
thence S75°55'31"E along said centerline 138.35 feet;
thence S45°10'49"E along said centerline 302.45 feet;
thence S19°21'15"E along said centerline 220.90 feet;
thence S32°15'06"E along said centerline 381.82 feet;
thence S10°37'09"E along said centerline 400.08 feet;
thence S11°13'53"E along said centerline 240.34 feet;
thence S78°19'33"E along said centerline 119.56 feet;
thence S11°29'17"E along said centerline 248.16 feet;
thence S10°59'19"E along said centerline 265.60 feet the Point of Termination;
For the purpose of this description the West line of the Northwest Quarter
Section 7 is assumed to bear N01°06'32"W.
Figure 4   COST CERTIFICATION
   I, Ronald R. Knoche, City Engineer for the City of Iowa City, Iowa, hereby
certify that construction of the Scott Park Trunk Sewer Project has been
completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
   I further certify that the total actual cost for the Scott Park Sanitary
Trunk Sewer Project is $222,769.62.
/s/         
Ronald R. Knoche, P.E.
City Engineer
(Ord. 09-4334, 4-6-2009)
ARTICLE C. POTABLE WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
16-3C-1: Definitions
16-3C-2: Denial Of Application For Service Line
16-3C-3: Connection To Distribution Water Main
16-3C-4: Water Meters
16-3C-5: Extension Of Distribution Water Mains
16-3C-6: Fire Protection
16-3C-7: Information Supplied To Plumbers And Interested Parties
16-3C-8: City Not Liable For Damages By Turning On Water
16-3C-9: Shut Off Of Service
16-3C-10: Private Wells Restricted
16-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN: Water pipe owned, operated or maintained by the
city and used for the purpose of distribution of potable water.
   DUAL PURPOSE WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to
measure the volume of water passing through the service line which is
discharged into the city wastewater treatment facilities.
   FULL LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT: The replacement of the entire length of
the lead service line such that the service line is lead-free, as defined by
the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 40 CFR 143.12.
   LEAD SERVICE LINE: A lead service line is a pipe laid from the distribution
water main to the point of service or building served that contains any lead
piping, fittings, fixtures, solder, connectors, goosenecks, pigtails, or
galvanized iron pipes that are or were downstream of a lead service line.
   PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: Connection from the distribution water
mains to the building or point of service, including any and all of the
following: pipe(s), valve(s), fire hydrant(s) and pump(s).
   SERVICE AREA: The areas served by city water.
   SERVICE LINE: The pipe laid from the distribution water main to the point of
service or building served. The service line shall include stop boxes, pipes
and valves between the distribution water main and the water meter.
   SINGLE PURPOSE WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to
measure the volume of water passing through the service line which is not
discharged into the wastewater treatment facilities.
   STOP BOX: A shutoff valve on a service line that can be opened and closed
from the surface of the ground.
   WATER METER: A city owned and city furnished device used to measure the
volume of water passing through a service line. (1978 Code §33-115; amd. 1994
Code; Ord. 23-4916, 11-6-2023)
16-3C-2: DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR SERVICE LINE:
The director of public works may deny an application for a water service line
when, in the judgment of the director, the extension of a distribution water
main rather than a service line is necessary to provide adequate service or to
assure the future development of the city water utility. (1978 Code §33-116;
amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-3: CONNECTION TO DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN:
   A.   Application For Service: Application for water service line connections
shall be made, in writing, to the department of public works by the owner of
the property to be served or by the owner's agent. Such application shall state
the official address(es) of the property to be served, the size of the pipe
required and the approximate location. (1978 Code §33-133)
   B.   Service Lines:
      1.   Cost Of Installation To Property Owner: All service lines, including
the connection to the distribution water main, shall be installed at the
expense of the owner of the property to be served.
      2.   New Lines: The size of all new service lines shall be as set forth
in the standards on file in the department of public works.
      3.   Separate Connections: There shall be separate service lines from the
distribution water main to each building service. Such service lines shall be
installed according to the standards established by the city engineer.
      4.   Extension: After a service line has been laid, no person shall make
any attachment or connection to said service line in order to serve any other
property or buildings. (1978 Code §33-134)
      5.   Shutoff Required:
         a.   An outside stop box shall be provided for each individual
building or property for each service line, shall be located between the curb
and property line, shall be visible from the sidewalk or public right of way
and be accessible to the city. For a building or dwelling with more than one
dual purpose water meter, an individual shutoff valve shall be provided for
each such meter. This can either be done by installing a separate outside stop
box for each meter or by installing the shutoff valves and meters in a common
utility space. If the shutoff valves are located in a utility space, outside
access to this space must be provided to the city, including a key. This
requirement shall also pertain to an existing building that is being modified
to provide for multiple meters.
         b.   If an existing building is modified to provide two (2) or more
dual purpose water meters and is served by only one service line and one
outside stop box, the account holder shall provide a common utility space with
outside access.
         c.   For those buildings so modified between January 30, 1996 and July
1, 2011, where no common utility space with outside access is available, the
account(s) attributable to the stop box shall be placed in the property owner's
name, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the public works director.
   C.   Maintenance Of Service: All service lines shall be maintained at the
expense of the owner of the property. Any leak or other defect in the service
line shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the owner, as set forth in this
section. If not repaired or replaced promptly, the water may, after written
notice to the owner, be turned off by the city until such repairs or
replacement have been made. (1978 Code §33-136)
   D.   Abandoned Service Lines: All service lines which are no longer used
must be permanently closed off at the distribution water main at the expense of
the property owner. This work shall be completed within one calendar year from
the date of abandonment. If not completed in the required time, the city or its
agent, after written notice to the owner, shall complete the work and bill the
property owner.
   E.   Repair Or Reconnection Prohibited: Repair, partial replacement, or
reconnection of a lead service line to a distribution water main is prohibited.
   F.    Lead Service Line Replacement Requirement: Any lead service line that
develops a leak or other defect shall require a full lead service line
replacement in lieu of repair. The method of connection at the distribution
water main shall comply with the City's adopted tapping policies and approved
materials. The owner shall report to the Iowa City Water Division any planned
lead service line replacement prior to commencing work. The cost of such
replacement shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (1994 Code; amd.
Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996; Ord. 11-4438, 7-5-2011; Ord. 23-4916, 11-6-2023)
16-3C-4: WATER METERS:
   A.   Metered Water Required:
      1.   Requirements For Installation Of Water Meters:
         a.   All water furnished by the city shall be metered unless otherwise
provided in this article. The owner shall provide a suitable location and
plumbing system for the water meter. The owner shall be responsible for
obtaining the meter from the city and also for the installation of each meter.
On new construction, the water meter(s) shall be installed prior to or
coincident with installation of plumbing fixtures. The water meter(s) shall be
installed in accordance with the standards established by the city engineer.
         b.   Plumbing systems shall be so constructed and the meters so placed
that the volume of water passing through the service line shall be measured by
the water meter(s). (1978 Code §33-149; amd. 1994 Code)
         c.   A meter charge in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees,
title 3, chapter 4 of this code, will be required for each meter provided by
the city.
         d.   All owners and occupants of property where water meters are
located are deemed to have consented to the city's right to enter the owner's
and/or occupant's property to test water meters where the city has reasonable
grounds to believe the water meter is not operating according to performance
standards of appropriately installed and operating water meters. If access to
the meter is not permitted, the water service may, after written notice to the
property owner, be turned off by the city until access is allowed. (Ord. 96-
3715, 1-30-1996)
      2.   Requirements For Single Purpose Water Meters:
         a.   A person may apply to the department of public works for a single
purpose water meter. If the department determines that such property is
eligible for installation of a meter, it will be provided to the person or the
person's plumbing contractor or authorized agency, upon payment of a
nonrefundable single purpose meter fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees,
title 3, chapter 4 of this code, and upon payment of the meter deposit.
         b.   A single purpose water meter shall be installed according to
standards. (1978 Code §33-149; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Proof Prerequisite To Installation: In a new building or structure, all
plumbing involving water meters shall be approved by the city plumbing
inspector after installation. (1994 Code)
   C.   Protection Of Meters:
      1.   The owner of the property where a water meter is located shall be
responsible for the care and protection of the water meter. In case of damage
to the water meter or in case of its stoppage or improper operation, the
property owner shall give immediate notice to the department of public works.
      2.   In all cases where water meters are broken or damaged, except for
ordinary wear and tear, the necessary repairs to the water meter shall be made
by the city, and the cost of such repairs shall be paid by the property owner.
If payment for damages is not received at the time of demand, the city may,
after written notice, shut off the water and not restore service until full
payment has been made, as set forth in article A of this chapter.
      3.   No person shall, in any way, interfere with installed water meters,
and no person except an authorized employee of the department of public works
shall break a seal on a water meter. (1978 Code §33-154; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Meter Tests: Whenever the city has reasonable grounds to believe a
water meter is not operating according to performance standards of an
appropriately installed and operating meter, the owner of the property may
request and the city may perform a test on the water meter. (1994 Code)
   E.   Inspections Permitted: All persons occupying and/or owning property
where city water meters are located shall permit the city to inspect all water
meters on or within the property when the city has reasonable grounds to
believe the water meter is not operating according to performance standards of
an appropriately installed and operating water meter. If city access is not
permitted to the meter, the water may, after written notice to the property
owner, be turned off by the city until access is allowed. If city access is not
permitted to the meter, the city may estimate water use for purposes of
wastewater treatment charges. (Ord. 96-3715, 1-30-1996)
   F.   Removal Of Meters: Whenever water service is to be discontinued, the
owner of the property shall grant the city access to the property for the
purpose of removing the water meter. (1994 Code)
16-3C-5: EXTENSION OF DISTRIBUTION WATER MAINS:
   A.   No distribution water main shall be extended outside the limits of the
city except to serve property within the city limits or under contract with the
city. (1978 Code §33-120; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Oversized diameter distribution water mains necessary to provide a
uniform supply of water throughout the service area shall be paid by a water
tap-on fee for acres served as defined by the water service area map on file in
the department of public works. (1994 Code)
16-3C-6: FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   All fire hydrants external to a building shall be installed according
to standards established by the city engineer and shall be maintained by the
city according to standards established by the director.
   B.   All existing fire hydrants external to a building shall be maintained
by the city.
   C.   Fees for maintaining fire hydrants external to a building that are not
city owned shall be charged as set forth in the schedule of fees, title 3,
chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
16-3C-7: INFORMATION SUPPLIED TO PLUMBERS AND INTERESTED PARTIES:
Information which may be obtained from the records, maps and employees of the
Department of Public Works relative to the location of distribution water mains
and service lines will be furnished to licensed plumbers and interested
parties, but such information shall not be construed as a guarantee of the
accuracy of such records. (1978 Code §33-119; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-8: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES BY TURNING ON WATER:
In turning on water, the City shall not be responsible for any damage that may
occur by reason of improperly installed or improperly functioning plumbing
fixtures or connections. (1978 Code §33-123; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3C-9: SHUT OFF OF SERVICE:
The City reserves the right to shut off the water in its distribution water
mains at any time for maintenance and installations and as the City deems
necessary to protect the City water utility system. (1978 Code §33-124; amd.
1994 Code)
16-3C-10: PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED:
   A.   No person shall install a private water well within the City limits
unless:
      1.   A determination has been made by the Public Works Director that:
         a.   The point of water use is greater than three hundred feet (300')
from an accessible distribution water main owned and controlled by the City;
         b.   The proposed private well is located outside the influence of an
existing or proposed City owned well; and
         c.   The proposed private well is needed due to extraordinary
circumstances of the location of the property within the City which, if private
ground water sources were not used, would work an extraordinary hardship on the
property; or
      2.   The well is being installed by a governmental entity on property
owned by that entity; the Public Works Director has determined that the
installation of the well will not adversely affect City water; and, the City
Manager has determined that the installation of a well is in the public
interest.
   B.   The City may require owners of existing private wells to connect to a
City owned distribution water main in accordance with provisions of this
article if the above conditions are not satisfied. Such connection shall be
completed within ninety (90) calendar days after official notice to do so, and
the existing private wells abandoned as required by State law.
   C.   A geothermal well is not a private water well for purposes of this
section. (Ord. 17-4717, 8-1-2017)
ARTICLE D. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USERS
SECTION:
16-3D-1: Purpose
16-3D-2: Definitions
16-3D-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
16-3D-4: Sanitary Sewer District
16-3D-5: Connection To Public Sanitary Sewer Required; Exceptions
16-3D-6: Building Sewers And Connections
16-3D-7: Discharge Of Effluent
16-3D-8: Prohibited Discharges
16-3D-9: Discharge Of Materials Upon Approval Of Director
16-3D-10: Hazardous Waste Discharge
16-3D-11: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors
16-3D-12: Maintenance Of Special Facilities
16-3D-13: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
16-3D-14: Violations And Penalties
16-3D-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to control
all discharges to the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-20.1)
16-3D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, which
begins five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary
sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house or building connection".
   CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater.
   DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from normal domestic or sanitary
wastewater.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): Clear, unpolluted water which enters the
collection system from the ground or uncontrollable sources.
   INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes
which are the cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation.
The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC, 1345), as amended, or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the solid waste
disposal act (SWDA, 42 USC 6901 et seq.), the clean air act, the toxic
substances control act, all as amended, or more stringent state criteria,
including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to title II of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by
the POTW.
   MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not
more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
   OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interests.
   PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the
violation.
   PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
   PLUMBING OFFICIAL: The person designated by the city to administer and
enforce the city codes relating to plumbing.
   PREMISES: Includes any interest in real property, including, but not limited
to, buildings and improvements, whether intended for or used for residential,
commercial or industrial use.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED REFUSE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer owned by the city.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), as amended, owned in this instance by the
city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plants but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article,
a POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the potw from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users
of the city's POTW. "Publicly owned treatment works" is synonymous with
"wastewater treatment works".
   REFUSE: Animal and vegetable waste from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
   RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR: Any contributor to the city's wastewater treatment
works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used only for domestic
dwelling purposes.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE: Spent water of a facility other than the POTW.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any periods of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and will
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
   STORM SEWER: A drain or sewer for conveying surface water, ground water or
unpolluted water from any source.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the wastewater
treatment works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment works provided.
   USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's POTW.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: See definition of Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(POTW).
   WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently. (1978 Code §33-20.2; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 1 :
   A.   City Approval And County Permit Required:
      1.   No person shall construct a private sanitary sewer disposal system
without first securing approval from the city.
      2.   No private sanitary sewer disposal system shall hereafter be
constructed without first obtaining a permit from the county board of health.
   B.   Definition Of Private Sewage System; Prohibitions: Private sewage
disposal systems include, but are not limited to, mechanical treatment systems,
septic tanks, lagoons and reservoirs. Manure pits, privy vaults and cesspools
are prohibited.
   C.   Compliance With Provisions: Owners of private sewage disposal systems
are not relieved from the responsibility of satisfying the requirements of this
article.
   D.   Design, Construction, Operation And Maintenance Of System: Design,
construction, operation and maintenance of private sanitary sewer disposal
systems shall comply with all requirements of the city, the county board of
health and the Iowa administrative code environmental protection division 567,
chapter 69, as amended.
   E.   Location:
      1.   No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed or installed
in water bearing strata supplying water used for drinking or culinary purposes,
nor in any porous soil where seepage or percolating surface or ground water may
carry the pollution or infection of the contents of such system into a well,
spring or any other source of water used as a public or domestic water supply.
      2.   No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed within fifty
feet (50') of any spring, well or watercourse, within ten feet (10') of any
property line or within twenty five feet (25') of any building used for human
occupancy.
   F.   Discharges From System: No private sewage disposal system shall
discharge effluent onto any street, alley or watercourse. Aerobic systems shall
discharge effluent directly into the city's wastewater treatment works.
Anaerobic systems shall discharge effluent to a subsurface absorption system.
(1978 Code §33-20.23)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2G of this code.
16-3D-4: SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT:
The entire city is hereby organized into one sanitary sewer district. (1978
Code §33-20.12; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-5: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy and/or employment, situated within the jurisdiction of the city in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the city are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the proper
public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within
ninety (90) calendar days after date of official notice to do so, provided said
public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the property line and is
accessible without the need to acquire additional property rights. (1978 Code
§33-20.13)
   B.   A nonresidential development consisting of one or more buildings on one
or more lots may, at the discretion of the director, be served by a private
sanitary sewer collection system, provided:
      1.   In association with such development there is the need for a lift
station and force main which is an integral part of the private sanitary sewer
collection system; and
      2.   The private sewer collection system is constructed in accordance
with Iowa City design standards for public improvements on file in the office
of the department of public works; and
      3.   A single legal entity is established and responsible for the
perpetual maintenance of the private sanitary sewer collection system. (1978
Code §33-20.13; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3D-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
director. Nothing in this article shall be construed or intended to change or
modify requirements set forth in title 17, chapter 1 of this code.
   B.   Nonliability Of City: The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss
or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation
of the building sewer.
   C.   Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city.
      2.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be in
conformance with chapter 1, article D of this title and title 17, chapter 1 of
this code. The excavation showing the building sewer and connections shall be
kept open until satisfactorily inspected by the city.
      3.   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by means approved by the plumbing official and shall be
discharged to the building sewer for gravity flow into the public sewer. (1978
Code §33-20.14)
   D.   Separate Building Sewers Required: A separate and independent building
sanitary sewer shall be provided for every building except as herein provided.
(1978 Code §33-20.13)
   E.   Surface Water Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other
sources of surface water or groundwater directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
   Any connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface water or groundwater directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer shall be promptly removed at the expense
of the owner of the property. If not promptly removed after written notice to
the owner, the city may perform the removal of the connection and assess the
cost to the owner.
   F.   Maintenance Of Building Sewers And Connection: All building sewers and
connections shall be maintained at the expense of the owner of the property.
Any failure or defect of the service line on the owner’s property prior to
making connection and the connection to the city sewer main including surface
restoration, shall be promptly repaired by the owner. If not promptly repaired
after written notice to the owner, the city may perform the repairs and assess
the cost to the owner.
   G.   Abandoned Building Sewers And Connections: All building sewers and
connections which are no longer used must be permanently disconnected and
plugged at the city sewer main at the expense of the property owner. This work
shall be completed within one calendar year from the date of abandonment. If
not completed in the required time, the city, after written notice to the
owner, shall complete the work and assess the cost to the owner. (1978 Code §
33-20.14; amd. Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017; amd. Ord. 20-4821, 4-7-2020; Ord. 20-
4838, 12-1-2020)
16-3D-7: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
Stormwater, groundwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged only
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the
director. (1978 Code §33-20.15)
16-3D-8: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner, any human or
animal excrement, refuse or other objectionable waste on public or private
property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with provisions of this article. (1978 Code §33-20.16)
   C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any petroleum derivative or flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas or any substances which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a flashpoint of less than
sixty degrees centigrade (60°C) (140°F) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR (code of federal regulations) 261.21, as amended.
      2.   Any pollutants containing toxic materials and any other poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, which injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, which create
a public nuisance or which create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater treatment works.
      3.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the wastewater treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
      4.   Any pollutants having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
      5.   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts or of such size which will
cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or in the POTW or cause any other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment works such
as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups and milk
containers, either whole or ground by refuse grinders.
      6.   Any pollutants having five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater
than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) or containing more than
three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) of suspended solids and having an
average daily flow of process wastewater greater than twenty five thousand
(25,000) gallons per day shall be subject to the provisions of article E of
this chapter. The user shall provide, at its own expense, preliminary treatment
as may be necessary, in the opinion of the director, to reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) or control the
quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
director, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained from the city, in writing.
      7.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the wastewater treatment works.
      8.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
      9.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-20.17)
16-3D-9: DISCHARGE OF MATERIALS UPON APPROVAL OF DIRECTOR:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes when the director determines
that such wastes can harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, have any adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, construction materials of the sewers,
nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater
treatment works, degree of treatability of wastes at the wastewater treatment
works and other pertinent factors. The substances which are prohibited, unless
approved in writing by the director, are:
      1.   Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25
mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral
oil origin.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32°) (0°C) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (65°C).
      3.   Any refuse that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any refuse grinder equipped with a motor of one horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. (1978 Code §33-
20.18)
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing objectionable or toxic substances or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works
exceeds the limits established in subsection
 16-3E-4B2 of this chapter for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits established in
subsection
16-3E-4B2 of this chapter or which, after treatment of the composite
wastewater, fail to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord.
17-4687, 1-17-2017)
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a
discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference.
      9.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended or dissolved solids.
         b.   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
         c.   Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the wastewater treatment works.
         d.   Volumes of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a
"slug", as defined herein.
      10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment works
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   B.   All problem discharges, including accidental spills of substances
listed herein, including slug discharges, shall be immediately reported by
telephone to the POTW. The caller shall notify the POTW of the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.
   C.   Persons discharging industrial wastewater must comply with this article
and with article E of this chapter. (1978 Code §33-20.18)
16-3D-10: HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE:
   A.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section
16-3D-8 of this article and which, in the judgment of the director, may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the director may:
      1.   Revoke or cancel the user's permit.
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers.
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      4.   Require payment to cover the additional cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges.
   B.   If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the director and subject to the requirements of
article E of this chapter and all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1978
Code §33-20.19)
16-3D-11: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. (1978 Code §33-20.20)
16-3D-12: MAINTENANCE OF SPECIAL FACILITIES:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, the facilities shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the user. (1978 Code §33-20.21)
16-3D-13: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   All measurements, samples, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be conducted
using the methods and procedures in 40 CFR part 136, as amended, and shall be
determined at the control manholes provided or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manholes. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   B.   Sampling shall be carried out to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the wastewater facilities and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all building sewers of a premises
is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally,
but not always, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all building sewers of a
premises, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (1978 Code
§33-20.22)
16-3D-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties: Any violation of this article shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The remedies available to the city for
correction of said violations shall be deemed cumulative, and the city's
election of one remedy shall not preclude the city from pursuing other
available remedies. (1978 Code §§33-20.11, 33-20.25; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Notice Of Violation: Any person or user found to be violating any
provision of this article shall be served by the director with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The person or user shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (1978 Code §33-
20.24)
ARTICLE E. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS INDIRECT DISCHARGE
SECTION:
16-3E-1: Purpose
16-3E-2: Definitions
16-3E-3: Compliance Required; General Provisions
16-3E-4: Pretreatment Standards
16-3E-5: Applicability Of More Stringent Requirements
16-3E-6: Application By Specific Industrial Users For Acceptance Of Discharge
And Connection
16-3E-7: Standards Declared; Information And Reports Required
16-3E-8: Dilution Instead Of Treatment
16-3E-9: Manholes And Sampling Equipment
16-3E-10: Accidental Discharges
16-3E-11: Upset Provision
16-3E-12: Bypass
16-3E-13: Records; Confidentiality
16-3E-14: Inspections; Entry Powers
16-3E-15: Enforcement
16-3E-16: Penalties
16-3E-17: Public Notification Of Violators
16-3E-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to control
indirect discharges to the wastewater treatment works. (1978 Code §33-30.1)
16-3E-2: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to this article. In
addition, as used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC (United States code) 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The executive director of the Iowa department of natural
resources or its successor.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: A. A responsible corporate
officer if the industrial user is a corporation. For the purpose of this
paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 1) a president, secretary,
treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principle
business function or any other person who performs similar policy or decision
making functions for the corporation; 2) the manager of one or more
manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two
hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditure
exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980
dollars) if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
   B.   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership
or sole proprietorship, respectively.
   C.   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection A or B of this definition. If: 1) the authorization is made in
writing by the individual described in subsection A or B of this definition;
and 2) the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and 3) the written authorization is
submitted to the city.
   D.   If an authorization under subsection A, B or C of this definition is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of subsections A, B and C of this definition must be submitted to
the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARD: National categorical pretreatment standard or
pretreatment standard.
   CITY: The city of Iowa City, Iowa.
   CONSISTENT REMOVAL: Reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of
the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment works to a less toxic
or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the wastewater treatment
works in samples taken and measured according to the procedures set forth in
section 403.7(c)(2) of title 40 of the code of federal regulations (CFR), part
403, "General Pretreatment Regulations For Existing And New Sources Of
Pollution", as amended, promulgated pursuant to the act.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY: The director, defined hereinafter.
   COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection
agency or, where appropriate, the administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
   GRAB SAMPLE: A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no
regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks, including, but not limited
to, vessels, chemical toilets, septic tanks and tank trucks, and specifically
excluding agricultural waste.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE TRANSPORTER (WASTE HAULER): A person or entity that
engages in the business of commercial transportation and disposal of holding
tank waste (hauled waste) and who contributes transported holding tank waste to
the POTW.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants from any nondomestic
source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), as
amended, into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the
system.
   INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of "indirect discharge", as defined in this
section.
   INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes
which are the cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation.
The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC 1345), as amended, or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the solid waste
disposal act (SWDA, 42 USC 6901 et seq.), the clean air act, the toxic
substances control act, all as amended, or more stringent state criteria
(including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to title II of SWDA, as amended) applicable to the method of disposal
or use employed by the POTW.
   MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD: (As
included in 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471, as
amended): Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), as
amended, which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES OR NPDES PERMIT): A
permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342), as amended.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD:
Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and
40 CFR, section 403.5, all as amended.
   NEW SOURCE: A facility from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, construction of which began after the publication of the proposed
pretreatment standards pursuant to section 307(c) of the clean water act (CWA),
as amended, which will apply to the facility if the standards are promulgated,
provided certain location and construction criteria are met.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT OR PLANTS: That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
   PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the
violation.
   PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent representative or
fiduciary thereof.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed
in moles per liter, e.g., standard units (s.u.).
   POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
refuse, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, dirt
or industrial, city or agricultural waste discharged into water.
   POLLUTION: The human made or human induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means,
except dilution.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works, as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), as amended, owned in this instance by the
city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plants but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article,
a POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users
of the city's POTW. "Publicly owned treatment works" is synonymous with
"wastewater treatment works".
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
   SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the city's wastewater
treatment works subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR, as
amended, and any other industrial user that:
   A.   Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more
of process wastewater per day; or
   B.   Has a flow of five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
   C.   Has in its wastes significant quantities of toxic pollutants; or
   D.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable
potential to adversely affect the POTW operation or violate a pretreatment
standard or requirement.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: A violation by an industrial user of one or more
of the following criteria:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH).
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in this article or an enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance.
   F.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
   H.   Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of its pretreatment
program.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the
"North American Industrial Classification System", office of management and
budget, 2012, as amended.
   STATE: The state of Iowa.
   STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For
The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", as amended, and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection
agency under the provisions of section 307(a) of the act, as amended, under
other acts mentioned in this article or under Iowa statutes and rules.
   UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the industrial user.
   USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's POTW.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid carried and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
   WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (1978 Code §33-30.2;
amd. Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996; Ord. 96-3762, 12-17-1996; Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-
2017)
16-3E-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Wastewater Treatment By Industrial Users: Industrial users shall
provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article
and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment
standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be acceptable to the city prior to the industrial user's initiation of
the changes. (1978 Code §33-30.11; amd. Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
   B.   Holding Tank Waste Transporter Permit Required:
      1.   Holding tank waste transporters, also known as waste haulers, may
not contribute to the POTW unless a written permit has first been applied for
and approved by the director or designee. In addition, holding tank waste
transporters contributing waste from industrial operations shall also first
obtain prior written approval from the director or designee for each load/
contribution to the POTW. The director may adopt written procedures to govern
the issuance of said permits and load approvals, and may establish forms for
application, load approval, manifest permit requirements, and other forms as
reasonably necessary.
      2.   Direct discharge of hazardous waste to the POTW by holding tank
waste transporters, by dedicated pipe, or by rail is prohibited.
      3.   Any holding tank waste transporter who violates the provisions of
this article or any director's procedures or directives applicable to said
permit and approval requirements shall be subject to the penalty provisions
contained in section
16-3E-16 of this article, and shall also be subject to other POTW remedial
actions including temporary or permanent suspension or rescission of the
transporter's or contributor's permit. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
16-3E-4: PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, if the federal standard is
more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that
subcategory, said federal categorical standards shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this article. This also applies to those federal
categorical standards promulgated by EPA after the effective date hereof.
      2.   Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may
apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the
federal pretreatment standards. The city may then modify pollutant discharge
limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in
40 CFR part 403, section 403.7, as amended, are fulfilled and prior approval
from the approval authority is obtained. (1978 Code §33-30.12)
   B.   Specific Standards:
      1.   An industrial user may not contribute to the POTW any substance
which may cause pass-through of any substance or any other product, such as
residues, sludges or scums, which may cause the POTW effluent to be unsuitable
for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no
case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under section 405 of the act, as amended, with any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substances
control act, all as amended, or with state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
      2.   No industrial user shall discharge wastewater causing the following
limitations to be exceeded at the POTW treatment plant influent when measured
in a twenty four (24) hour composite sample:
Pollutant Pounds Per Day
Pollutant  Pounds Per Day
CBOD       32,658.0
Cadmium    0.331
Chromium   7.65
Copper     16.95
Cyanide    3.229
Lead       5.62
Mercury    0.07236
Molybdenum 8.63
Nickel     13.4
pH         6.0 to 9.5
Phenols    96.59
Selenium   1.93
Silver     1.32
TKN        6,311.0
TSS        34,386.0
Toluene    96.59
Zinc       44.1
 
      3.   If the potable water supply exceeds the established pollutant
limitations of subsection B2 of this section, industrial user discharge
limitations shall be based on POTW performance and sludge disposal criteria.
      4.   No individual user shall discharge wastewater having a pH lower than
5.0 or greater than 12.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to POTW structures, equipment or personnel.
         a.   Where a permittee continuously measures the pH of wastewater
pursuant to a permit requirement, the permittee shall maintain the pH of such
wastewater within the range set forth in the applicable permit, except
excursions from the listed range are allowed subject to the following
limitations:
            (1)   The total time during which the pH values are outside the
required range of pH values shall not exceed seven (7) hours and twenty six
(26) minutes in any calendar month; and
            (2)   No individual excursion from the range of pH values shall
exceed sixty (60) minutes.
         b.   The director may adjust the requirements set forth in subsection
B4a of this section with respect to the length of individual excursions from
the range of pH values if a different period of time is appropriate, based upon
the treatment system, the plant configuration or other technical factors.
         c.   For purposes of this subsection B4, an "excursion" is an
unintentional and temporary incident in which the pH value of discharge
wastewater exceeds the range set forth in the applicable effluent limitations
guidelines.
      5.   No industrial user shall discharge any wastewater causing the POTW
treatment plant influent wastewater temperature to exceed forty degrees Celsius
(40°C) or one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F).
      6.   No industrial user shall discharge substances which create a fire or
explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with
a flashpoint of less than sixty degrees Celsius (60°C) or one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21,
as amended.
      7.   An industrial user shall notify, in writing, the POTW, the state and
EPA of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed
of, would be considered hazardous waste. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017; amd. Ord.
20-4821, 4-7-2020)
16-3E-5: APPLICABILITY OF MORE STRINGENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or more
stringent than those in this article.
   B.   The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this article.
   C.   Federal requirements and limitations promulgated after the effective
date hereof shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than this
article. (1978 Code §33-30.14)
16-3E-6: APPLICATION BY SPECIFIC INDUSTRIAL USERS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF DISCHARGE
AND CONNECTION:
   A.   No significant industrial user shall connect to or contribute to the
POTW after one hundred eighty (180) calendar days following the effective date
hereof unless the industrial user's discharge has been specifically accepted
and a permit issued by the director.
   B.   Industrial users seeking acceptance of their discharges shall complete
and file with the city an application for acceptance in the form prescribed by
the city. Proposed new significant industrial users shall request acceptance at
least ninety (90) calendar days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
POTW. In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in units
and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
      1.   Name, address and location (if different from the address). (1978
Code §33-30.15)
      2.   SIC number according to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual", a classification pursuant to the "North American Industrial
Classification System", office of management and budget, 2012, as amended.
(Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
      3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not
limited to, BOD, suspended solids, those mentioned in sections
16-3E-4 and
16-3E-5 of this article and any other pollutant which would inhibit plant
performance, affect low rate sludge quality or affect water quality standards
as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, together with any pollutant
or discharge which would be considered a hazardous waste if disposed of
differently. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and
contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended.
      4.   Time and duration of contribution.
      5.   Average daily, maximum daily and peak hourly wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
      6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances in sufficient detail and as
requested by the director.
      7.   Description of activities, facilities, laboratories and plant
processes on the premises, including all significant materials which are or
could be discharged.
      8.   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment
standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial
user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
      9.   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established. The
schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction). No increment of
progress shall exceed nine (9) months. Not later than fourteen (14) calendar
days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on
such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the established schedule. In no
event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between progress reports to the
director.
      10.   Data furnished by the industrial user must be certified in
accordance with federally required certification and signatory provisions
contained in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and 40 CFR 403.12(l), as amended. The city
will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished,
the director may issue a permit, not to exceed three (3) years, accepting and
limiting the industrial wastewater discharge. Industrial users shall report, in
advance of significant changes in operations, wastewater constituents and
characteristics to the city. (1978 Code §33-30.15)
      11.   All SIUs shall notify the POTW immediately of changes that occur at
the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby allowing the
POTW to reevaluate the need for a slug control plan or actions to prevent such
discharges. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
   C.   All provisions of this article shall be expressly subject to all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
   D.   The terms and conditions of discharge limitations in the permits may be
subject to modification by the city when limitations or requirements identified
in sections
16-3E-4 and
16-3E-5 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. The industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its specific limitations at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the specific limitations shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   E.   Industrial user discharge limitations shall be assigned to a specific
industrial user for a specific operation. A specific limitation shall not be
reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new industrial user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the written approval of the
city. Any succeeding owner or industrial user shall also comply with the terms
and conditions of the existing specific limitations.
   F.   Permits to industrial users shall contain, at a minimum, the following
conditions:
      1.   A statement of duration.
      2.   A statement of nontransferability.
      3.   Applicable federal, state and local effluent limitations.
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping
requirements.
      5.   A statement of the applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of the permit. (1978 Code §33-30.15)
   G.   Prior to disposal of any holding tank wastes to the POTW and prior to
the city's issuance of a permit, the transporter shall first provide the POTW
with an application on a form supplied by the director, which shall include the
following information and be subject to approval by the POTW:
      1.   Type And Yearly Quantity: An estimated annual breakdown, in gallons,
of type of holding tank waste to be contributed to the POTW for the following
categories: a) domestic; b) commercial; c) industrial; d) total.
      2.   Communities Served: A list of the communities that the holding tank
waste transporter will be serving.
      3.   Estimated Quantity: Estimate of the number of loads of holding tank
waste to be contributed to the POTW per day, per week or per month. The POTW
may impose a maximum limit on a transporter's disposal/contribution over a
twenty four (24) hour period.
      4.   Fees: A flat annual fee shall be charged for each transporter
permit, plus a fee per load contributed to the POTW, as set forth in title 3,
chapter 4, "Schedule Of Fees, Rates, Charges, Bonds, Fines And Penalties", of
this code. The permit shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months, and be
subject to renewal for an additional one year period, but only upon payment of
the annual fee and continued eligibility under this article.
      5.   Sources: Location and name of source of the holding tank waste or
site of removal, which site must be located within Johnson County unless
director determines extraordinary circumstances exist.
      6.   Manifest: At the time of or prior to disposal, each transporter must
provide the POTW with a manifest on a form supplied by the POTW. Said manifest
shall include the following information and be accurately completed by the
holding tank waste transporter:
         a.   Source of the holding tank waste (hauled waste).
         b.   The approximate volume in gallons of the holding tank waste.
         c.   The type of holding tank waste to be transported and contributed
to the POTW, namely whether residential, commercial, industrial or other.
         d.   Known or suspected pollutants.
         e.   Driver's name, driver's license number and driver's signature.
      7.   Prior Load Approval: Prior to any disposal or contribution to POTW
of holding tank waste from industrial operations not requiring either a
categorical pretreatment agreement or a pretreatment agreement, transporter
shall first receive written approval for each load from the director or
designee. Written approval for industrial waste may be in the form of an
approved manifest or otherwise as established by the director.
      8.   Pretreatment Standards And Fees:
         a.   All holding tank waste transporters who are transporting
industrial waste subject to either categorical pretreatment limits or to
pretreatment limits are further subject to the applicable federal, state and
local pretreatment requirements, including the prohibited discharge standards
specified in 40 CFR section 403.5(a) and (b) and local limits adopted in
accordance with 40 CFR section 403.5(c), all as amended, as set forth in this
article. All such holding tank waste transporters shall meet the pretreatment
standards and shall first receive written approval from the director or
designee for each load prior to contribution to the POTW, which approval may be
in the form of an approved manifest.
         b.   Fees for pretreatment permit holders acting as their own
transporter or who contract with a holding tank waste transporter shall be the
same as those set out for extra strength users required by section 16-3A-4 of
this chapter and as established in section
3-4-4, "Wastewater Treatment Works User Charges", under "Monthly Surcharge", of
this code. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
      9.   Times And Location: Time and location limitations for disposal/
contribution of holding tank waste to POTW will be: seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. Monday through Friday at the POTW treatment plant
by appointment only. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
      10.   Samples:   POTW at all times retains the right to sample and
analyze any holding tank waste being transported to or contributed to the POTW,
which right includes the authority to hold, sample and analyze said waste prior
to, during and after contribution to the POTW. The holding tank waste shall not
be contributed to the POTW until the director or designee completes all
analyses and has determined, to the POTW's complete satisfaction, that said
waste is not incompatible with the POTW.
      11.   Inspection: If the POTW has reasonable cause to believe that the
information on the manifest for any holding tank waste brought to or
contributed to the POTW is inaccurate, incomplete and/or falsified, after
written notice to transporter the POTW retains the right to inspect and copy
the transporter's business records concerning the sources and volumes of the
holding tank waste either contributed to or in anticipation of contribution to
the POTW.
      12.   Refusal: The POTW retains the right, at all times, to refuse any
holding tank waste if the POTW deems said waste to be incompatible with the
indirect discharge requirements of this article or other applicable
regulations, rules, procedures or permit.
      13.   Nontransferability: The permit issued herein is personal to the
permit holder, and is not assignable or transferable.
      14.   Renewable: Permits may be renewed after one calendar year (12
months), but such renewal may become effective only if the permit holder
remains in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations governing their
permit, and upon payment of the annual fee.
      15.   Penalties: Any holding tank waste transporter and any contributor
of industrial waste to the POTW subject to either categorical pretreatment or
pretreatment limits who violates the requirements of this article or any
director's procedures or directives shall be subject to the penalty provisions
contained in section
16-3E-16 of this article, and shall also be subject to other remedial actions
including temporary or permanent suspension or rescission of the transporter
permit. (Ord. 96-3731, 4-23-1996)
16-3E-7: STANDARDS DECLARED; INFORMATION AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the promulgation of
an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, industrial users
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the
director the information required by subsections
 16-3E-6B1 through B11 of this article, together with a list of all
environmental control permits held by the industrial user's facility. (Ord. 17-
4687, 1-17-2017)
   B.   Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, any industrial user subject
to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a
report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements, together with the average and maximum daily flow
for these process units in the industrial user's facility which are limited by
such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial users into compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to
by a qualified professional, as required by subsection
 16-3E-6B10 of this article. (1978 Code §33-30.16)
   C.   After the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or in the case
of a new source or after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, each
significant noncategorical industrial user or any industrial user subject to a
pretreatment standard shall submit to the director during the months of June
and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment permit or by
the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall
include all parameters for which the POTW has not sampled and analyzed
pollutants directly. In addition, this report shall include a record of
measured daily flows during the reporting period, and shall be signed and
certified by a qualified professional and an authorized representative of the
user, as required by subsection
16-3E-6B10 of this article. At the discretion of the director and in
consideration of factors such as local high or low flow rates, holidays or
budget cycles, the director may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted. (Ord. 96-3762, 12-17-1996)
   D.   Information required by this section and section
16-3E-6 of this article and records of monitoring activities and results must
be retained by the industrial user for a minimum of three (3) years, or longer
in the case of unresolved litigation or when requested by the approval
authority. (1978 Code §33-30.16)
16-3E-8: DILUTION INSTEAD OF TREATMENT:
   A.   Dilutions Restricted: No industrial user shall increase the use of
process water or in any way attempt to dilute discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in this article, with the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or with any other pollutant specific limitation
developed by the city or state, except where expressly authorized to do so by
an applicable standard or limitation. (1978 Code §33-30.17)
   B.   Mass Limitations:
      1.   The director may revise a permit to impose mass limitations on
industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection
16-3E-7B of this article shall indicate the mass of pollutants in the effluent
of the industrial user regulated by pretreatment standards. These reports shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow and the nature and concentration or the production and mass, where
requested by the director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by
the applicable pretreatment standards. Monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and recordkeeping shall be as prescribed in the applicable
pretreatment standard.
      2.   All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act, as amended, and
contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test
procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques approved by the EPA. (1978 Code §33-30.18)
16-3E-9: MANHOLES AND SAMPLING EQUIPMENT:
When required by the director, an industrial user shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters, samplers and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the flows. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the director. The manhole shall be installed by the user at its expense and
shall be maintained by the user in such a manner as to be safe and accessible
at all times. Costs incurred by the city for sampling, data recovery and
analysis shall be assessed to the industrial user. (1978 Code §33-30.19)
16-3E-10: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
   A.   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of hazardous quantities of pollutants, prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's and/or
industrial user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing appropriate
disposal facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall
be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before
construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete such
a plan within three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days following the
effective date hereof. No industrial user who commences contribution to the
POTW after the effective date hereof shall be permitted to introduce pollutants
into the POTW system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved
by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the
industrial user's facility, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this
article.
   B.   In the case of an accidental discharge, including slug discharges, the
industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the
incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume and corrective actions. A written notice shall be
permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees of the person or office and phone number to call in
the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure. Within five (5) calendar days following an
accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the director a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW,
fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. (1978
Code §33-30.20)
   C.   Each industrial user shall notify the POTW immediately of changes that
occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby
allowing the POTW to reevaluate the need for a slug control plan or actions to
prevent such discharges. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
16-3E-11: UPSET PROVISION:
   A.   Interpretation: An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation.
   B.   Effect Of An Upset: An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to
an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of subsection C of this section are met.
   C.   Conditions Necessary For A Demonstration Of Upset: An industrial user
who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant
evidence, that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of
the upset. (1978 Code §33-30.21)
      2.   The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and
professional manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures. (Ord. 17-4687, 1-17-2017)
      3.   The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within 5
days):
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Reviewability Of EPA Consideration Of Claims Of Upset: In the usual
exercise of prosecutorial discretion, EPA enforcement personnel should review
any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in
the course of the review constitute final EPA action subject to judicial
review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   User Responsibility In Case Of Upset: The industrial user shall control
production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies to the situation when, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost or fails. (1978 Code §33-30.21)
16-3E-12: BYPASS:
   A.   Bypass Not Violating Applicable Pretreatment Standards Or Requirements:
An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provisions of subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   Notice:
      1.   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the
industrial user shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible, at least
ten (10) calendar days before the date of the bypass.
      2.   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within twenty
four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) calendar days of
the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The
city may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report
has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
   C.   Prohibition Of Bypass:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage.
         b.   There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.
         c.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
subsection B of this section.
      2.   The city may approve an anticipated bypass after considering its
adverse effects if the city determines that the bypass will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection C1 of this section. (1978 Code §33-30.22)
16-3E-13: RECORDS; CONFIDENTIALITY:
   A.   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available for inspection and copying by the POTW or officials of the EPA
or approval authority, upon request.
   B.   Information and data concerning an industrial user obtained from
inspections, reports, questionnaires, applications for permits, permits and
monitoring programs shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and
is able to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. When requested
by the person or user furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes ("protected portions") shall not be
made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to
governmental agencies for uses related to this article and to the national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit, state disposal system permit
and/or pretreatment programs. Protected portions of a report shall also be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person or user furnishing the report.
Furthermore, the EPA shall have immediate and unlimited access to all
information collected by the city under its pretreatment program. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the city until and unless a ten (10) day
written notice is given to the industrial user. (1978 Code §33-30.23)
16-3E-14: INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
   A.   The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties:
      1.   For the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, testing, repair and maintenance in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
      2.   To carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by industrial
users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements by industrial users. Representatives of the POTW shall be
authorized to enter any premises of any industrial user in which a discharge
source or treatment system is located or in which records are required to be
kept under 40 CFR 403.12(m), as amended, to assure compliance with pretreatment
standards. Such authority shall be at least as extensive as the authority
provided under section 308 of the act, as amended.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of
the city shall comply with all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees. The city shall also indemnify the owner against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner
as a result of the city's gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. (1978
Code §33-30.24)
16-3E-15: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   After written notification to an offending owner or industrial user,
the city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or repeal a permit
when such suspension or repeal is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to
the environment, to the POTW, cause interference to the POTW or cause the city
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Said notification shall be in
writing and delivered in person to the industrial user, shall include an order
to cease and desist and shall briefly describe the noncomplying discharge or
threatened discharge. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the
event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the city's
suspension order, the city shall take such steps as it deems necessary to
protect the citizenry, including immediate severance of the building sewer
connection, in order to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to the public. The city shall reinstate the wastewater treatment
service only upon proof, satisfactory to the city, of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
industrial user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city
within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of occurrence.
   B.   In addition to the provisions in subsection A of this section, any
industrial user who, after written notice and failure or refusal to cure the
defect or offending activities within the cure period, continues to violate the
following conditions of this article or of any applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having its wastewater treatment service revoked by
the city for the following:
      1.   Failure of an industrial user to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
      2.   Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
      4.   Failure of an industrial user to provide prior notification of any
new or increased discharge; or
      5.   Violation of conditions of this article. (1978 Code §33-30-25)
16-3E-16: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection
16-3E-15B of this article may, upon conviction of an environmental infraction,
be fined an amount of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per
violation, when appropriate.
   B.   In addition to subsection A of this section and section
16-3E-15 of this article, the city shall have the authority, as granted by the
state, to obtain remedies for noncompliance by any industrial user with any
pretreatment standard and requirement. The city may seek injunctive relief for
noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements.
Industrial users who violate pretreatment standards and requirements may be
assessed civil or criminal penalties in the amount of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation upon conviction of an environmental
infraction.
   C.   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this article shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, on conviction
thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00) or thirty (30) days in jail for each violation. (1978 Code §33-30.25)
16-3E-17: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATORS:
The city shall provide annual public notification, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the city in which the POTW is located, of industrial
users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment
requirements. (1978 Code §33-30.26)
ARTICLE F. WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES
SECTION:
16-3F-1: Purpose
16-3F-2: Definitions
16-3F-3: Funding To Generate Adequate Revenue
16-3F-4: Charges Established
16-3F-5: Discontinuance Of Service
16-3F-6: Review Of Rates And Charges; Annual Notice To Users
16-3F-7: Application Of Revenues
16-3F-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the city's wastewater
treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used only for
the purposes of operation, maintenance, replacement, expansion and debt service
for such wastewater treatment works. This article shall take precedence over
any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and users
of the wastewater treatment works which are inconsistent with section 204(b)(1)
(A) of the clean water act, as amended, and the corresponding regulations.
(1978 Code §33-40.1)
16-3F-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): Clear, unpolluted water which enters the
collection system from the ground or uncontrollable sources.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not
more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: All expenditures during the useful life of the
treatment works for materials, labor and utilities, together with other items
which are necessary for managing and maintaining the treatment works to achieve
the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
   REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR: Any contributor to the city's treatment works whose
lot, parcel of real estate or building is used only for domestic dwelling
purposes.
   SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater, as amended, and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
   TREATMENT WORKS: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of city sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial
wastes. These include intercepting wastewater treatment, outfall wastewater
treatments, sewage collection system, individual systems, pumping, power and
other equipment and their appurtenances; extension improvements, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any land
or work, including site acquisitions of the land that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment, such as land used for composting sludge, temporary storage
of such compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land
treatment systems before land application, or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of
wastewater, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary wastewater
treatment systems.
   USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
   USER CHARGE: That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is
charged in a uniform and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance, debt service and replacement of the treatment works.
   WATER METER: Any water volume measuring and recording device approved by or
furnished and installed by or under the supervision of the city of Iowa city.
(1978 Code §33-40.2)
16-3F-3: FUNDING TO GENERATE ADEQUATE REVENUE:
The user charge system shall generate adequate revenues to pay:
   A.   Costs of billing, collection and administration expenses in keeping
with a long term city policy, including a minimum water usage fee.
   B.   Costs of annual operation and maintenance of treatment works, including
replacement.
   C.   Costs associated with wastewater treatment bond retirement for bonds
now outstanding, including payments to all sinking, revenue, depreciation,
extension and improvement funds established in the ordinances or resolutions
authorizing such bonds.
   D.   When required, costs associated with retirement of wastewater treatment
bonds to be issued in the future.
   E.   Costs associated with the city's wastewater pretreatment program. (1978
Code §33-40.11)
16-3F-4: CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   User Charges: Charges shall be as provided in schedule of fees, title
3, chapter 4 of this code. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the
city based on the user's use of the treatment works as determined by water
meter(s) which are acceptable to the city. User charges shall be based on
actual water used during the billing period. If actual water use is not
available, the user charge will be based on prior water usage. New customers
shall have a first billing based on an estimate determined by the city finance
department. Users shall pay for wastewater treatment services provided, as
follows:
      1.   Basic Service:
         a.   A minimum monthly charge, which includes:
            (1)   A fixed fee for billing, collection, administration and sixty
percent (60%) of infiltration/inflow expense.
            (2)   A user charge for two hundred cubic feet (200 cu ft) of water
usage.
         b.   A user charge for all water used in excess of two hundred cubic
feet (200 cu ft) per month. The user charge is for operation and maintenance of
the treatment works, including replacement, necessary expansion and debt
service, plus forty percent (40%) of infiltration/inflow expense.
      2.   Extra Strength Wastes: A monthly surcharge for those users who
contribute wastewater having a strength greater than "normal domestic
wastewater", as defined in section
16-3F-2 of this article.
      3.   Toxic Wastes: A monthly surcharge for those users who discharge any
toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the treatment
works or which cause increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or
replacement of the treatment works or which must be regulated or limited to
protect effluent or sludge quality.
   B.   Applicability Of Charges: The user charge rates established in the
schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this code, apply to all users of the
city's treatment works, regardless of the location of such services and users.
   C.   Water Not Discharged Into System: If any user of water consumes water
for any purpose which does not cause discharge into the sanitary wastewater
treatment system, and if, as established by a separate water meter installed
and maintained by such user, the consumption of such water can be determined,
and if approved by the city, then, in that event, no charge shall be made on
the basis of water so supplied. Residential contributors shall not be allowed
this option unless approved by the city finance department.
   D.   Water Discharged Into System From Private Source: If any person shall
discharge water into the city sanitary wastewater treatment system from private
wells or sources other than the city water system, the city shall have the
right to install a meter at the owner's and/or user's expense to measure such
flow, or the city may elect to use whatever means satisfactory to the city for
determining sewage treatment charges. (1978 Code §33-40.12)
16-3F-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Location Served By City Water: As provided in section
16-3A-7 of this title. (1994 Code)
   B.   Location Not Served By City Water: When a user's account for wastewater
treatment service is at a location not served by city water service and said
wastewater account is delinquent as provided in subsection A of this section,
wastewater treatment service may, at the city's option, be discontinued either
by disconnection of the user's wastewater treatment service line from the
city's wastewater main or by plugging said service line. The city shall have
unrestricted access to all wastewater treatment service connections for the
purposes specified herein, regardless of whether those connections are located
in city street right of way, city easement or in or on the property of the
user. (1978 Code §33-40.13; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3F-6: REVIEW OF RATES AND CHARGES; ANNUAL NOTICE TO USERS:
The city shall review the user charge system and revise user charge rates as
necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the
costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, necessary expansion
and debt service, and that the system continues to provide for the uniform
distribution of operation and maintenance among all users, including
replacement costs. The city will annually notify all users, in conjunction with
a regular bill, of the wastewater treatment charges and that portion of the
user's bill attributable to wastewater treatment services. (1978 Code §33-
40.15)
16-3F-7: APPLICATION OF REVENUES:
The entire income and revenues of the wastewater treatment works shall be
deposited, as collected, in a fund to be known as the wastewater treatment
revenue fund and shall be disbursed only as follows:
   A.   Operation And Maintenance Fund: Money in the revenue fund shall first
be disbursed to make deposits into a separate and special fund to pay current
expenses. The fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment operation and
maintenance fund (the "operation and maintenance fund"). There shall be
deposited in the operation and maintenance fund each month an amount sufficient
to meet the current expenses of the month plus an amount equal to one-twelfth
(1/12) of expenses payable on an annual basis, such as insurance. After the
first day of the month, further deposits may be made from the revenue fund to
this account, to the extent necessary to pay current expenses accrued and
payable and to the extent that funds are not available in the surplus fund.
   B.   Sinking Fund: Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to make
deposits into a separate and special fund to pay principal of and interest on
the bonds and parity bonds. The fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment
revenue bond and interest sinking fund ("sinking fund"). The minimum amount to
be deposited in the sinking fund in any month shall be an amount equal to one-
sixth (1/6) of the installment of interest coming due on the next interest
payment date on the then outstanding bonds and parity bonds, plus one-twelfth
(1/12) of the installment of principal coming due on such bonds on the next
succeeding principal payment date until the full amount of such installment for
both interest and principal is on hand. Money in the sinking fund shall be used
solely for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on the bonds and
parity bonds, as the same shall become due and payable.
   C.   Reserve Fund:
      1.   Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to maintain a debt
service reserve in an amount equal to at least the lesser of:
         a.   The maximum amount of principal and interest coming due on the
bonds and parity bonds in any succeeding fiscal year; or
         b.   Fifteen percent (15%) of the original principal amount of bonds
outstanding at any time.
      2.   Such fund shall be known as the wastewater treatment revenue debt
service reserve fund ("reserve fund"). The reserve fund shall be fully funded
in the required amount from proceeds of the bonds. If it is necessary to
replenish the reserve fund, in each month there shall be deposited in the
reserve fund an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the monthly amount
required by this article to be deposited in the sinking fund; provided however,
that when the amount on deposit in the reserve fund shall be not less than the
minimum required above, no further deposits need be made into the reserve fund
except to maintain said reserve fund at such level. Money in the reserve fund
shall be used solely for the purpose of paying principal at maturity of or
interest on the bonds and parity bonds when insufficient money is available in
the sinking fund. Whenever it becomes necessary to use money in the reserve
fund, the payments into the reserve fund required above shall be continued or
resumed until the reserve fund is restored to the required minimum amount.
   D.   Improvement Fund:
      1.   Money in the revenue fund shall next be disbursed to maintain a fund
to be known as the wastewater treatment improvement fund ("improvement fund"),
to the extent of all remaining monies in the revenue fund.
      2.   The minimum amount to be deposited in the improvement fund each
month shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); provided however, that
when the amount of said deposits in said improvement fund shall equal or exceed
two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), no further monthly deposits need be made
into the improvement fund except to maintain it at such level. Money in the
improvement fund not otherwise specially limited by other provisions of this
article shall be used solely for the purpose of paying principal of or interest
on the bonds or parity bonds when there is insufficient money in both the
sinking fund and the reserve fund and, to the extent not required for the
foregoing, to pay the cost of extraordinary maintenance expenses or repairs,
renewals and replacements not included in the annual budget of revenues and
current expenses, payment of rentals on any part of the wastewater treatment
works, payments due for any property purchased as a part of the treatment works
and for capital improvements to the treatment works. Whenever it shall become
necessary to use money in the improvement fund, the payments required above
shall be continued or resumed until the improvement fund is restored to the
required minimum amount.
   E.   Subordinate Obligations: Money in the revenue fund may next be used to
pay principal of and interest on, including reasonable reserves therefor, any
other obligations which, by their terms, shall be payable from the revenues of
the wastewater treatment works but subordinate to the bonds and parity bonds
and which have been issued for the purposes of extensions and improvements to
the treatment works or to retire the bonds or parity bonds in advance of
maturity or to pay for extraordinary repairs or replacements to the treatment
works.
   F.   Surplus Revenue:
      1.   All money thereafter remaining in the revenue fund at the close of
each month may be deposited in any of the funds created by this article, may be
used to pay for extraordinary repairs or replacements to the wastewater
treatment works or may be used to pay or redeem the bonds or parity bonds or
any of them or for any lawful purpose.
      2.   Any monies transferred from the above accounts to meet revenue
shortages must be returned to their respective accounts during the next fiscal
year. (1978 Code §33-40.26)
ARTICLE G. STORM WATER COLLECTION, DISCHARGE AND RUNOFF 1
SECTION:
16-3G-1: Purpose
16-3G-2: Definitions
16-3G-3: Scope Of Provisions
16-3G-4: Policies And Procedures Established
16-3G-5: Requirements For Construction Of Storm Water Management Facility
16-3G-6: Requirements For Construction
16-3G-7: Dry And Wet Bottom Storm Water Management Facilities
16-3G-8: Control In Excess Of Requirements
16-3G-9: Emergency Orders
16-3G-10: Storm Water Utility
16-3G-11: Illicit Discharge And Connection
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2D of this code.
16-3G-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this article to establish maximum rates for the
discharge of storm waters into the various watercourses of the city for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the population
by minimizing dangers of flooding to life and property.
   B.   It is further the intent of this article that runoff control devices be
provided as areas of land are developed or redeveloped for urban use. It is not
the intent of this article to utilize areas for the sole purpose of storing or
detaining excess storm water but to permit such areas to be used for other
compatible urban uses as well. (1978 Code §33-50.2; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   COMPENSATING STORAGE: Storage of excess storm water from development which
existed prior to the effective date hereof, or as otherwise exempt from storage
requirements.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of the department of public works or
designee.
   DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that is designed to
be normally dry and which accumulates excess storm water only during periods
when the restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm
water inflow rate.
   EXCESS STORM WATER: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainageways serving a
specific watershed.
   EXCESS STORM WATER PASSAGE: An overland route on the ground to carry excess
storm water runoff through a specific area.
   LOW FLOW: The carrying capacity of storm sewers and/or natural drainageways.
   NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY: Water which flows by gravity over a route formed on the
earth's surface prior to development.
   OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interests.
   PERSON: Shall include an individual person, user, responsible party, entity,
business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture, governmental
body or agency or any combination thereof or any agent, representative or
fiduciary thereof.
   POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area in
a manner that will ensure complete removal of all surface water by means of
natural gravity.
   SAFE STORM WATER DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The rate of storm water runoff that can
be transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct or combination
thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise
sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to cause
damage to structures or facilities located thereon.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY; FACILITY; FACILITIES: A facility
constructed to regulate the volume of storm water runoff that is conveyed
during a specific length of time.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation not absorbed by
soil or plant material.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
   STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: An area designated to temporarily accumulate
excess storm water.
   WATERSHED: The entire catchment area that contributes storm water runoff to
a given point.
   WET BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: A facility that contains a body
of water and which accumulates excess storm water during periods when the
restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water inflow
rate. (1978 Code §33-50.1; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-3: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
Excluding the central business district and the area designated as the new
south side neighborhood, this article shall apply to development which results
in an aggregate gross area of three (3) acres or more of drainage from or to a
single drainage area. The gross aggregate drainage area shall include streets
and other dedicated lands. (1978 Code §33-50.3; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-4: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED:
Written policies, procedures, criteria and regulations concerning the
inspection, determination and approval of the standards for the construction
and/or development of storm water management facilities have been established
by the director and shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (1978
Code §33-50.11; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY:
   A.   Immediately after approval of a preliminary plat, preliminary OPDH
plan, site review plan or building permit, whichever comes first, and in all
cases before site work begins, the owner shall submit the following documents
to the director of public works for approval:
      1.   Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil
erosion for the entire development.
      2.   Plans, specifications and all calculations for the control of storm
water runoff as required by this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the director.
   B.   Owner shall maintain the area surrounding the storm water management
facilities free from weeds and debris. In no event shall the owner fill or
permit the storm water management facilities to be filled in, and owner also
shall maintain the owner's land so as to minimize erosion in and around said
facility. (1978 Code §33-50.12; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Storm Water Release Rate: The controlled release rate of storm water
runoff shall not exceed the existing safe storm water drainage capacity of the
downstream system and shall be as established in the design standards approved
by resolution of the city council. Where a proposed development contains only a
portion of a watershed, the storage requirements shall be based upon the
proportion of the watershed being developed.
   B.   Excess Storm Water Passage:
      1.   An excess storm water passage shall be provided for all storm water
management facilities through the proposed facility and also through the
proposed development from the upland watershed as established in the design
standards approved by resolution of the city council.
      2.   No buildings or structures shall be constructed within such excess
storm water passage; however, streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas,
pedestrian walkways, utility easements and other open space uses shall be
considered compatible uses. In the event such excess storm water passage is
reshaped or its capacity to transport excess storm water otherwise restricted,
the director shall notify the agency or person causing such restriction to
remove the same and set a reasonable time for its removal. If such person
refuses or is unable to comply with such order, the director shall cause such
restrictions to be removed at the expense of such person.
      3.   Where a proposed development contains existing natural drainageways,
appropriate land planning shall be undertaken to preserve such natural
drainageways as part of the excess storm water passage.
   C.   Determination Of Storage Capacity: The volume of required storm water
storage shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year flood
event. Such calculation shall be made in accordance with methods approved by
the director.
   D.   Compensating Storage: In the event compensating storage is available,
said storage may be provided at an alternative location as approved by the
director.
   E.   Easements: Easements for storm water management facilities shall be
granted to the city for the purpose of repair, alteration or to ensure their
proper operation. Excepting pipes, culverts and inlet and outlet structures,
the responsibility for maintenance and repair of the facilities shall remain
the obligation of the subdivider and owner and their successors. (1978 Code
§33-50.15; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-7: DRY AND WET BOTTOM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES:
All storm water management facilities shall be designed, constructed and
maintained, including dry and wet bottom storage areas, according to the
standards approved by resolution of the city council. (1994 Code)
16-3G-8: CONTROL IN EXCESS OF REQUIREMENTS:
In the event storm water runoff control can be provided in excess of the
requirements of this article and the benefit of such additional control would
accrue to the city at large, the city may provide public participation in the
increased cost of the control of storm water runoff in proportion to the
additional benefits received. (1978 Code §33-50.19)
16-3G-9: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, whenever, in the judgment
of the director of public works, a condition occurs in a storm water facility
that creates a dangerous and imminent health and safety hazard, the director
shall order such hazards to be corrected, with written notice. (1978 Code §33-
50.14; amd. 1994 Code)
16-3G-10: STORM WATER UTILITY:
   A.   Purpose: It is determined and declared to be necessary and to lead or
contribute to a result conducive to the protection of the public health,
safety, welfare, and compliance with federal regulation, that a storm water
management utility district be established within the city. It is further
determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the
public health, welfare, and safety of the city and its residents that charges
be levied upon and collected from the owners or occupants of all developed
lots, parcels or real estate, and buildings that discharge storm water or
surface or subsurface waters, directly or indirectly, to the city storm water
drainage system, and that the proceeds of such charges so derived be used for
the purposes of management of storm water runoff quantity and quality,
construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and debt service for
construction of the storm water drainage, flood protection and storm water
quality improvements comprising the storm water utility.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   CITY: City of Iowa City.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY: Property upon which a structure or impervious surface
has been placed or constructed, thus increasing the amount of rainwater or
surface water runoff.
   DIRECTOR: The public works director or designee.
   DRAINAGE COURSE: A shallow narrow grassed or paved overland route, either
natural or constructed, over which water passes.
   DWELLING UNIT: A singular unit or apartment providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   ERU RATE: The dollar value periodically determined and assigned to each ERU
as a charge for storm water management services, and expressed as $x.xx per
ERU.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average impervious area of a single-
family residential property located within the city as periodically determined
and established as provided in this section.
   EXEMPT PROPERTY: Public streets, alleys and sidewalks; all University of
Iowa properties; all undeveloped properties.
   GROUND WATER: Water beneath the surface of the earth which is not bound to
soil particles.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA: The number of square feet of hard surfaced areas which
either prevent or resist the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered
under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off
the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that
present under natural conditions as undeveloped property, including, but not
limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks,
pavement, athletic courts, and semi- impervious surfaces such as gravel which
are used as driveways or parking lots.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures designed with two
(2) or more dwelling units to accommodate two (2) or more families or groups of
individuals living separately and not sharing the same living space.
   NONPOINT SOURCE DISCHARGE: Water discharged from the earth's surface to a
drainage course or watercourse.
   NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any developed lot not exclusively residential,
including, but not limited to, transient rentals, commercial, institutional,
churches, hospitals, governmental properties and parking lots, and multiuse
properties incorporating residential uses.
   POINT SOURCE DISCHARGE: Water discharged to the earth's surface through a
pipe, conduit, tube, duct, channel or pumping facility.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A detached residential structure
designed as a single dwelling unit to accommodate one family or group of
individuals living together and sharing the same living space, but excluding
multiuse properties which include single-family residential uses.
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT: The area served by the storm water
utility.
   STORM WATER INFRASTRUCTURE: The entire constructed and natural storm water
and ground water drainage system within the city limits of Iowa City.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT: The tasks required to control storm water runoff to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and comply with state
and federal regulations. It includes, but is not limited to, street sweeping,
erosion control, storm water basin improvements and maintenance, culvert and
storm sewer maintenance, storm water management planning and related public
education.
   STORM WATER UTILITY: The utility established under this section for the
purpose of managing storm water and imposing charges for the recovery of costs
connected with such storm water management.
   SURFACE WATER: Storm water, ground water, and spent water received by the
earth's surface.
   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: A parcel that has no impervious area.
   USER: The owner and/or occupant of any developed property within the limits
of Iowa City.
   WATERCOURSE: A natural overland route through which water passes, including
drainage courses, streams, creeks, and rivers.
   C.   District: The entire city is hereby organized into one storm water
utility district.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The city shall have the following powers, duties,
and responsibilities with respect to the storm water utility:
      1.   Prepare ordinances as needed to implement this division and forward
the ordinances to the city council for consideration and adoption, and adopt
such regulations and procedures as are required to implement this division and
carry out its duties and responsibilities.
      2.   Administer the design, construction, maintenance and operation of
the utility system, including capital improvements designated in the
comprehensive drainage plan.
      3.   Acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand,
replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such facilities,
operations, and activities, as are deemed by the city to be proper and
reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, but are not limited to, surface and underground
drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, and such other
facilities relating to collection, runoff, and retention as will support a
storm water management system, whether such facilities are owned and operated
directly by the city or are provided under statutory or contractual provisions
and furnishings of which facilities create or impose a cost or charge upon the
city for the service afforded by such facilities.
      4.   The city shall separately account for the storm water utility
finances. The storm water utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to
include all operation and maintenance costs, costs of borrowing, and other
costs related to the operation of the storm water utility. The budget is
subject to approval by the city council. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year shall be retained in a segregated fund, which shall be
used for storm water utility expenses in subsequent years. Storm water utility
fees collected shall be deposited in the storm water enterprise fund and shall
be used for no other purpose.
   E.   Establishment Of Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) Rate And Storm Water
Utility Charge:
      1.   For purposes of this article, an ERU shall be equivalent to three
thousand one hundred twenty nine (3,129) square feet of impervious area.
      2.   Except as provided in this article, every user owning or occupying
property that is not exempt property in the city of Iowa City shall pay to the
city a stormwater utility charge as determined in this article. In the event
the owner and the occupant of a particular property are not the same the
liability for payment of the stormwater management charge attributable to that
property shall be joint and several as to the owner and occupant.
      3.   The ERU rate to be applied to properties shall be as defined in
section
3-4-6 of this code.
      4.   The monies derived from the stormwater utility charge shall be used
solely for the operation and maintenance of the city wide stormwater
infrastructure and related water quality programs.
   F.   Determination Of Stormwater Utility Charge:
      1.   The stormwater utility charge for single-family residential
properties shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the ERU rate per month. As to
these properties, the stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier
of the following:
         a.   The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
         b.   Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided
construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
         c.   Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence.
      2.   For multi-family residential properties the stormwater utility
charge shall be fifty percent (50%) of the ERU rate multiplied by the number of
individual dwelling units existing on the property. As to these properties, the
stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier of the following:
         a.   The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
         b.   Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided
construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
         c.   Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence. (Ord. 04-4115,
3-16-2004)
      3.   For nonresidential property, the stormwater utility charge shall be
a base rate of one ERU rate, plus two dollars ($2.00) multiplied by the
numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the
particular property by the number of square feet in one ERU. As to these
properties, the stormwater utility charge shall commence upon the earlier of
the following: (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004; amd. Ord. 11-4431, 6-7-2011; Ord. 12-
4475, 4-17-2012; Ord. 13-4566, 12-17-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; Ord. 16-4660, 3-23-
2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
         a.   The issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
         b.   Ninety (90) days after construction is halted, provided
construction is at least fifty percent (50%) complete; or
         c.   Ninety (90) days after construction is completed, even if a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued for the residence.
   G.   Appeals:
      1.   An owner or occupant of a multi-family residential property
aggrieved by the initial or any subsequent calculation of the number of
dwelling units upon or in such property, calculation of the stormwater utility
charge, or allocation of such charge among occupants, may appeal such
calculations and allocation to the director. Upon such appeal, the stormwater
utility charge for such property may be recalculated utilizing information
supplied by the appealing owner or occupant, provided such information is
verified as correct by the director.
      2.   An owner or occupant of nonresidential property aggrieved by the
initial or any subsequent determination of the total impervious area of such
property, calculation of the stormwater utility charge for such property, or
allocation of such charge among occupants, may appeal such calculations and
allocation to the director. Upon such appeal, the stormwater utility charge for
such property may be recalculated utilizing information supplied by the
appealing owner or occupant, provided such information is verified as correct
by the director.
      3.   Any adjustment of the stormwater utility charge resulting from such
appeal shall be retroactive to the date the appeal was filed.
      4.   Appeals by the owners or occupants of property subject to stormwater
utility charges shall include a statement of the number of dwelling units,
total property area, and/or total impervious area, as appropriate for the
particular grounds for appeal. Such information may be shown on the stormwater
utility reporting forms or on appeal forms, and may be accompanied by plats,
county assessor's records, or survey data. The director may request additional
information from the appealing party. Based upon the information provided by
the utility and appealing party, the director shall make a final calculation of
the stormwater utility charge. The director shall notify the parties, in
writing, of the director's decision within ninety (90) days after receipt of
the appeal. If still aggrieved, a party may request, in writing, a review by
the city manager of the director's decision. Such request must be filed with
the city manager within thirty (30) days after the director's decision, shall
cite the specific error by the director, and shall include the calculation of
stormwater utility charge which the appealing party believes to be correct. The
city manager shall review the record presented and render a written decision
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for review. The city
manager may request additional information from the director or the appealing
party. If still aggrieved, a party may request review of the city manager's
decision by the city council in the same manner as above provided for review by
the city manager. The filing of an appeal shall not excuse the payment of the
stormwater utility charge when due. However, the city shall refund any portion
of the charge paid subsequent to the filing of the appeal which is adjudged to
be excessive, with interest at the rate provided by law.
   H.   Credits:
      1.   Nonresidential properties that obtain a national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) industrial stormwater permit from the Iowa
department of natural resources (IDNR) are eligible for a fifty percent (50%)
reduction in their monthly stormwater utility bill.
      2.   Proof of the NPDES permit must be submitted to the director and
approved prior to the establishment of the credit.
      3.   The city or director reserve the right to verify the permit
compliance and to inspect the facilities at any time.
   I.   Billing Procedures, Delinquent Accounts And Collection Procedures:
      1.   The charges established hereunder will be billed monthly to
customers in the Iowa City stormwater utility district.
      2.   Collection and delinquent account procedures shall be as in section
16-3A-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 04-4115, 3-16-2004)
16-3G-11: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to provide for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Iowa City
and the state of Iowa through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the
storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal
and state law. This section establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section are:
      1.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
      2.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
      3.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
section. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
   B.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following shall
mean:
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of the
Iowa City public works department.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of equal to
or greater than the threshold established by NPDES permit. Such activities
include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
   DISCHARGE: The release of water and any elements, compounds and particles
contained within or upon, from property owned or controlled by a person.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in this section.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
      1.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor
drains and sinks that are located under roof with walls and not subject to
stormwater runoff, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency;
or
      2.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency or
NPDES permit.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26[b](14), as amended.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general areawide basis.
   NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater or groundwater.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. "Pollutants"
may include, but are not limited to: sediment; paints, varnishes, and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned or maintained facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPP): A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATERCOURSE: A natural overland route through which water passes, including
drainage courses, streams, creeks, and rivers. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005; amd.
Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
   C.   Applicability: This section shall apply to all water entering the storm
drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement agency.
   D.   Responsibility And Administration: The authorized enforcement agency
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be
delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the agency.
   E.   Severability: The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or
the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this section.
   F.   Ultimate Responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated
pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore this section does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be
no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
   G.   Discharge Prohibitions:
      1.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses
any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing
any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited
except as described as follows: (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
         a.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this section: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one ppm chlorine),
firefighting activities, exterior building wash waters when no detergent or
other surfactants are used, pavement wash waters where no spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have occurred and when no detergents or other
surfactants are used, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
(Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005; amd. Ord. 07-4279, 9-4-2007)
         b.   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
         c.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test.
         d.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency or Iowa department of natural resources, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver,
or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system.
         e.   Discharges from University of Iowa property or facilities covered
by the University of Iowa's NPDES permit.
      2.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
         a.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
         b.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
         c.   A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
   H.   Suspension Of MS4 Access:
      1.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or
waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
      2.   Suspension Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this subsection,
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
   I.   Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges: Any person subject to
an industrial or construction activity NPDES Iowa department of natural
resources stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
      1.   Notice Of Intent (NOI) Submittal: The operator of a facility,
including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with such activity, shall submit a copy of the notice of
intent (NOI) to the authorized enforcement agency at the same time the operator
submits the original (NOI) to the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR)
and EPA as applicable. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the
authorized enforcement agency either in person or by mailing to:
   NOI To Discharge Storm Water
   City Hall - Engineering Division
   410 E. Washington St.
   Iowa City, IA 52240
      2.   Notice Of Intent (NOI) Offense: A person commits an offense if the
person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater with industrial or
construction activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent
to do so to the authorized enforcement agency.
   J.   Compliance Monitoring:
      1.   Applicability: This subsection applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial or construction activity.
      2.   Access To Facilities:
         a.   The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
         b.   Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
         c.   The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up
on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.
         d.   The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
         e.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
         f.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a permitted facility is a violation of this section. A person who is
the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this section.
         g.   If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and it is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   K.   Use Of Best Management Practices: Authorized enforcement agency will
adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity,
operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the U.S.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage
system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural
BMPs. Further, any owner, operator, tenant, or person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated
with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance
with the provisions of this subsection. These BMPs shall be part of a storm
water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
   L.   Watercourse Protection: Every person owning property through which a
watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part
of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
   M.   Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage
system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify
the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later
than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement
agency within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
   N.   Enforcement:
      1.   Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without
limitation:
         a.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
         b.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
         c.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
         d.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
         e.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
      2.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed.
   O.   Injunctive Relief: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
   P.   Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public
health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and
may be summarily abated or restored in accordance with applicable law, and/or a
civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such
nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
   Q.   Violations And Penalties: Violation of this section, "Illicit Discharge
And Connection", shall be punishable as a municipal infraction or environmental
infraction as provided for in subsection
1-4-2C of this code. A municipal infraction shall be punishable by a penalty as
provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
   R.   Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement
agency to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 05-4154, 3-22-2005)
ARTICLE H. SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
16-3H-1: Purpose
16-3H-2: Definitions
16-3H-3: Application Of City And County Regulations
16-3H-4: Enforcement
16-3H-5: Rules And Regulations
16-3H-6: Prohibited Practices
16-3H-7: Storage Of Solid Waste
16-3H-8: Collection And Disposal Of Solid Waste
16-3H-9: Solid Waste Disposal Requirements
16-3H-10: Littering
16-3H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city by providing for the collection and disposal of solid
waste; by regulating the storage, collection, transportation, processing,
disposal, recycling, reuse and littering of solid waste; and by providing for
the collection and disposal of solid waste. (1978 Code §15-1)
16-3H-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   APPLIANCES: Machines common to residential household use and shall include
refrigerators, stoves, microwave ovens, dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes
dryers, water heaters, furnaces, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, lawn mowers
and any device containing a gasoline engine, an electric motor or an electric
capacitor.
   BUILDING DEMOLITION MATERIALS: Waste material from the construction,
destruction or demolition of residential, commercial or industrial buildings,
except brick, foundation materials and untreated wood waste.
   BULKY SOLID WASTE: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and/
or noncombustible waste materials which are either too large or too heavy to be
placed in a thirty five (35) gallon container and/or safely and conveniently
loaded into solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste collectors.
Bulky solid waste shall also include televisions, computer monitors, tires, and
appliances.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste resulting from the operation of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural use, residential premises
that do not abut a public street, and residential premises with more than four
(4) dwellings.
   CORRUGATED CARDBOARD: Fiber material consisting of a fluted corrugated sheet
and one or two (2) flat linerboards, commonly used to manufacture cardboard
boxes.
   DEMOLITION: Substantial destruction of a building or structure and a
substantial removal of the interior of a building or structure.
   DIRECTOR: The city manager or designee.
   DWELLING: A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for
residential occupancy.
   FOOD WASTE: Food scraps and biodegradable, compostable food related
discards, as further defined by landfill solid waste rules and regulations.
   HAZARDOUS WASTES: Includes, but is not limited to, pathological wastes,
explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers, toxic radioactive materials
and those wastes defined as hazardous in the code of Iowa and rules of the Iowa
department of natural resources or its successor, all as amended.
   LANDFILL: The Iowa City Landfill And Recycling Center located in Johnson
County, Iowa.
   LANDFILL SERVICE AREA: Johnson County, Iowa, including both incorporated and
unincorporated cities located therein, together with the cities of Riverside
and Kalona, for which the city of Iowa City provides landfill services.
   LITTER: Garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or debris.
   OCCUPANT: Any person who, individually, jointly, or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling or any other improved or
unimproved real property.
   OPERATOR: Any person who occupies, possesses, uses or owns property within
the Iowa City landfill service area and/or who stores or generates solid waste
within the Iowa City landfill service area.
   OWNER: Any person with a legal or an equitable ownership interest in real or
personal property.
   PERMIT: The official document or certificate issued by the city clerk or
designee authorizing a person to place or maintain a solid waste container in
the downtown public right of way.
   PERSON: Includes an individual, entity, business, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, venture or any combination thereof or any agent,
representative or fiduciary thereof.
   PREMISES: A plot, separate tract, or parcel of land with fixed boundaries
suitable for occupancy by a use described in the Iowa City zoning code.
   PROCESSING: Bailing, compacting, composting, incinerating, recycling,
separating and shredding, together with all other processes whereby solid waste
characteristics are either modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, together with any and all public parks, waterways, squares,
spaces, grounds and buildings.
   RECYCLING: Any process by which certain solid waste is collected, separated,
and processed or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products
including the composting of untreated wood waste and yard waste.
   RECYCLING MATERIALS: Solid waste designated by the city as appropriate for
recycling, such as newsprint, magazines and catalogs, metal cans and plastic
containers and cardboard, as set forth in the rules and regulations established
by the director in accordance with section
16-3H-5 of this article.
   RECYCLING MATERIALS CONTAINER: A receptacle used by any person or operator
to store recycling materials during the interval between recycling materials
collections.
   REFUSE: Solid waste not suitable for recycling or reuse.
   REFUSE, RESIDENTIAL: Refuse generated from the maintenance and operation of
single-family, duplex, triplex and fourplex dwellings and home occupations
operating in compliance with title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code.
   RESIDENCE: Any dwelling either intended for or being used for residential
use.
   RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING MATERIALS, LARGE SCALE: Recycling materials generated
from any residence that does not abut a public street or from residential
premises with more than four (4) dwellings.
   RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING MATERIALS, SMALL SCALE: Recycling materials generated
from residences with four (4) or fewer dwelling units that abut a public
street.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any applicant or holder of an account for sewer, water
and/or solid waste service and includes any person who pays an individual
account for any one or a combination of the following services: water, sewer
and solid waste collection. If more than one person is listed on an account,
both persons shall be deemed a responsible party for purposes of collection,
storage and disposal of solid waste and compliance with this article.
   SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid
state, including, but not limited to, food waste, ashes, refuse, sludge, yard
waste, appliances, special waste, building demolition materials generated by
residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial activities.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL: The process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted
solid waste; in particular, the final disposition of solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: The entire solid waste system of planning and
administering storage, collection, removal, transportation, processing and
disposal of solid waste.
   SPECIAL WASTE: Solid waste that must be handled or processed in a special
manner, including building demolition materials (except untreated wood waste)
and asbestos containing material (ACM), friable and nonfriable, as defined in
the code of Iowa and rules of the Iowa department of natural resources or its
successor, all as amended.
   STORAGE: Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its
production until the time of its collection and removal.
   TRANSPORTATION: The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection
or processing to the Iowa City landfill.
   UNTREATED WOOD WASTE: Includes tree limbs, brush, Christmas trees, and
untreated lumber.
   YARD WASTE: Grass, leaves, trees, brush and garden residue. (Ord. 16-4683,
11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-2017; Ord. 17-4701, 4-4-2017)
16-3H-3: APPLICATION OF CITY AND COUNTY REGULATIONS:
Provisions of this article, together with any provision of any ordinance
administered by the county board of health which is not in conflict with this
article, shall govern the city's management of solid waste. (1978 Code §15-3)
16-3H-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspections And Remedies:
      1.   In order to ensure compliance with this article and the rules
promulgated pursuant hereto, together with all applicable county, state and
federal laws and regulations, the director is authorized to inspect all phases
of solid waste management within the jurisdiction of Iowa City. In all cases
where such inspections reveal that the storage, collection, transportation,
processing, disposal, recycling or reuse of solid waste are in violation of
this article or rules promulgated pursuant hereto and/or are in violation of
state or federal law, such violation shall constitute a nuisance and/or an
environmental infraction under both state and local law. In such event, the
city may, at its option, elect to carry out any one or all of the following
remedies:
         a.   Prosecute environmental infractions under subsection
1-4-2A of this code, definition of "environmental infraction";
         b.   Withhold solid waste management services from that person,
dwelling, commercial or industrial, business, institution or government entity;
         c.   Deny or revoke any permit under this article;
         d.   Terminate a service account;
         e.   Dispose of any nonconforming solid waste container; or
         f.   Abate the nuisance in accordance with title 6, chapter 1 of this
code; or
         g.   Abate the nuisance under the code of Iowa, as amended.
      2.   Election of any one of these remedies by the city shall not preclude
the city from pursuing any other remedy, and such remedies are deemed
cumulative and not exclusive. (1978 Code §15-4)
16-3H-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The director may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and
necessary rules and regulations governing, but not limited to:
      1.   Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size, weight and shape thereof.
      2.   Weight and size limitations on bundles of solid waste too large for
solid waste containers.
      3.   Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of solid waste containers.
      4.   Schedules and routes for collection and transportation of solid
waste by city personnel.
      5.   Collection points of solid waste containers.
      6.   Special identification requirements for use of solid waste
containers. (1978 Code §15-5)
      7.   Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste,
including the right to determine that certain waste poses a health or safety
risk and declare it unacceptable for disposal at the landfill. (Ord. 16-4683,
11-1-2016)
      8.   Storage of solid waste.
      9.   Records of quantity and types of solid waste received at disposal
facilities.
      10.   Handling of hazardous wastes, special wastes, toxic wastes,
sludges, ashes, agricultural waste, construction waste, bulky items, tires,
automobiles, oils, greases, yard waste, batteries, appliances and recyclables.
(1978 Code §15-5)
      11.   Special carryout service for the elderly and disabled. (1978 Code
§15-5; amd. 1994 Code)
      12.   Collection of residential solid waste resulting from the operation
and maintenance of more than four (4) dwelling units.
      13.   Billing and collection of disposal service charges at the landfill.
      14.   Hours of operation for the landfill.
   B.   A copy of any and all rules and regulations issued under the provisions
of this section shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be
available for public inspection during normal business hours. (1978 Code §15-5)
16-3H-6: PROHIBITED PRACTICES 1 :
It shall be prohibited for any person or operator or any agent or
representative thereof to:
   A.   Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than in a solid
waste container either owned by the depositor or properly and lawfully leased
by the depositor.
   B.   Interfere in any manner with the collection, storage or transportation
of solid waste, interfere with the equipment for the use of such collection,
storage or transportation or interfere with solid waste collectors in the
lawful performance of their duties.
   C.   Throw, cast, place, lay or permit placement of any refuse into or on
any receptacle specifically designated by the City or private entity as a
receptacle to be used only for deposit of recyclable or reusable waste.
   D.   Deposit recyclables or reusable waste in containers or at locations not
specifically designated for such waste.
   E.   Litter. (1978 Code §15-6)
   F.   Place the following items in the trash to be landfilled: tires; yard
waste; corrugated cardboard; computer monitors; televisions; appliances; lead
acid batteries; and oil and oil filters. (Ord. 17-4715, 7-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-1-2A of this code.
16-3H-7: STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Containers Required: It shall be the obligation of any owner to provide
and maintain containers for the proper storage of all refuse and residential
recycling materials for each dwelling and/or premises in accordance with the
rules and regulations established by the Director in accordance with section
16-3H-5 of this article.
   B.   Required Use And Maintenance Of Containers And Surrounding Areas: It
shall be the obligation of the occupant of every dwelling, or institutional,
commercial, industrial, or agricultural establishment to place all refuse and
recycling materials to be collected in the appropriate containers according to
the provisions of this article, to maintain said containers and surrounding
areas in a reasonably clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times, and to
deliver said containers to the designated collection point.
   C.   Location Of Solid Waste Containers:
      1.   Residential solid waste containers, including those for refuse and
recycling materials, shall be stored upon private property.
      2.   Commercial refuse containers and large scale residential recycling
material containers shall be stored upon private property, except as allowed by
subsection D of this section or where the owner of the container and the owner
of the premises have been granted written permission from the Director, by way
of written agreement, to use public property for such purposes.
      3.   The storage site for all solid waste containers shall be well
drained and shall be fully accessible to collection equipment, to public health
personnel, and to fire inspection personnel.
      4.   Commercial solid waste containers shall not be placed in the area
between any building and the street, including areas commonly referred to as
"parking" between the curb and the private property line. In cases where a
container cannot physically be located anywhere except between the building and
street, the Director may approve storage in such location if properly screened.
Containers located within fifty feet (50') of a street right-of-way must be
screened from view from the right- of-way.
      5.   In the event a solid waste container becomes a nuisance, the City
may require the entire container storage area to be enclosed by a fence or
structure sufficient to prevent litter. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
   D.   Downtown Solid Waste Container:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall place or maintain any solid waste
container on the public right-of-way in the downtown without first obtaining a
permit. "Downtown" means the area in central Iowa City as defined in the
resolution adopting the solid waste container permit system. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-
1-2016; amd. Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-2017)
      2.   Permit: A permit system shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 16-
4683, 11-1-2016)
      3.   Administrative Rules: The City Manager or designee is authorized to
establish administrative rules not inconsistent with any ordinance to carry out
the provisions of this subsection. A copy of said rules shall be on file with
the City Clerk and available on the City's website. (Ord. 17-4689, 1-17-2017)
16-3H-8: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Collection By The City Of Iowa City:
      1.   Collection Of Residential Refuse:
         a.   The City shall collect all residential refuse, as defined herein.
The City shall make such collections once per week whenever reasonably
possible. Private collection of residential refuse is prohibited. The
responsible party will be billed for collection and disposal in the amount
provided in the schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
         b.   The Director may exempt certain dwellings from the City's
mandatory collection herein if the Director determines that the dwelling and an
adjacent establishment which generates commercial solid waste is part of one
(1) complex of buildings, which together serve a unified purpose.
      2.   Collection Of Residential Yard Waste And Food Waste:
         a.   Residential yard waste and food waste may be collected by the
City in the same manner as residential refuse and in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A1 of this section.
         b.   The City shall not collect residential yard waste not properly
stored and separated in accordance with this article.
         c.   The City shall not collect untreated wood waste generated by
commercial tree service operations.
      3.   Collection Of Residential Recycling Materials, Small Scale:
         a.   Residential recycling materials, small scale may be collected by
the City in the same manner as residential refuse and in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A1 of this section. The City shall not collect such
waste not properly stored and separated in accordance with this article.
      4.   Collection Of Bulky Solid Waste:
         a.   Bulky solid waste may only be collected by the City upon prior
request made to the City, and approval of said request. The City reserves the
right to refuse to collect bulky solid waste that exceeds reasonable
limitations of weight and bulk, as determined by the Director.
      5.   Certain Wastes Not Subject To Collection:
         a.   The City will not collect special waste; lead acid batteries;
waste oil; or any waste material designated in the rules and regulations
established by the Director in accordance with section
16-3H-5 of this article.
         b.   The City shall not collect any commercial solid waste, excepting
collection from the City's own property, nor shall the City collect any
residential solid waste from any dwelling units within a structure which
contain the operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional,
agricultural or other establishment and which generates commercial, industrial,
institutional or agricultural waste or any combination thereof or which
operation generates other than residential solid waste.
         c.   No person or operator shall obtain or attempt to obtain City
collection of solid waste or other substances or materials herein declared not
subject to collection. Any such separate attempt and/or action by such person
shall constitute a separate offense of this provision and section
16-3H-4 of this article. The City's costs for retrieving such substances or
materials from the collection vehicle or from the City's disposal site and/or
for cleaning up the collection vehicle or disposal site shall be chargeable to
the person for the solid waste collection account for the residence where such
substances or materials were placed for collection or where actually collected.
      6.   Times Of Collection And Location Of Containers:
         a.   Containers for residential refuse, recycling, yard waste, food
waste, untreated wood waste bundles, and any other solid waste permitted to be
collected by the City shall be placed for collection at the curb on the street
upon which the residence fronts. Placement of solid waste at the curb for
collection shall occur prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the regularly
scheduled collection day but shall not occur before three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
on the day before the regularly scheduled collection day. Containers shall be
removed from the curb on the same day collection is made and returned to their
storage location.
         b.   Each type of waste listed above must be physically separated in
order to enable the solid waste collector to easily identify differing
contents, as well as differing containers. Yard waste, food waste and recycling
materials containers must be clearly marked as such.
   B.   Private Solid Waste Collection And Transport:
      1.   Collection Of Residential Recycling Materials, Large Scale:
         a.   The owner(s) of any residence that does not front a public street
or any residential premises with more than four (4) dwellings shall provide
recycling material collection, which shall be collected at least once per week
by a private solid waste collector.
      2.   Collection Of Commercial Refuse:
         a.   Private solid waste collectors shall be responsible for the
collection of commercial refuse from the point of collection to the
transportation vehicles, but only if the waste was stored in compliance with
section
16-3H-7 of this article.
      3.   Transport:
         a.   Any spillage or litter caused by or resulting from the collection
activities of the private solid waste collector shall forthwith be retrieved by
and properly disposed of by the collector.
         b.   All loads must be fully secured, enclosed or covered, in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Director in
accordance with section
16-3H-5 of this article, so loose materials cannot fall or be blown from the
vehicle.
         c.   Any vehicle arriving at the Iowa City Landfill and Recycling
Center with unsecured loads will be charged a fee provided in the schedule of
fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code, in addition to the regular disposal and
recycling rates.
      4.   Storage And Maintenance Of Vehicles:
         a.   All solid waste transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a
safe, clean and sanitary condition and shall be constructed, maintained and
operated to prevent spillage of solid waste with watertight bodies and covers.
Said covers shall either be an integral part of the vehicle with only loading
hoppers exposed or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with
fasteners designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle. If the
cover is separate, it shall be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting
solid waste. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hoppers.
         b.   Storage of solid waste transportation vehicles is prohibited in
all residential zones.
   C.   Residential Collection Fees: The fees for the City's collection of
residential solid waste shall be as provided in the schedule of fees, title 3,
chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
16-3H-9: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Disposal Facilities: Solid waste shall be deposited at a processing
facility or disposal area consistent with all requirements of local, State and
Federal law.
   B.   Hazardous Or Special Waste: Disposal of hazardous or "special waste"
defined herein or as set forth in the rules and regulations established by the
Director in accordance with section
16-3H-5 of this article, shall be disposed of in accordance with said rules and
regulations.
   C.   Disposal Of Waste Oil: Waste oil may be disposed by delivering same to
locations approved by the Director. (Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
   D.   Disposal Restrictions At The Landfill:
      1.   Only persons or operators residing or operating within the landfill
service area may dispose of solid waste at the landfill, and only provided that
such solid waste was generated by activities or operations occurring within the
landfill service area.
      2.   The following materials may not be disposed of at the landfill, but
may be recycled at the landfill: tires; yard waste; corrugated cardboard;
computer monitors; televisions; and appliances. The person disposing of such
items shall be responsible for separating these items from other solid waste
materials and shall be responsible for delivering and unloading the items at
the recycling sites designated by the City. (Ord. 17-4715, 7-18-2017)
   E.   Improper Disposal Or Disposal Of Prohibited Or Hazardous Waste:
      1.   It is prohibited for any person or operator to dispose or attempt to
dispose of any waste at the landfill in a manner or location other than that
provided for herein, by the Director, or as directed by landfill personnel.
      2.   Violations of any solid waste disposal requirement shall constitute
either a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, and each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
      3.   The City's costs for retrieving such substances or materials from
the landfill disposal site and/or for any costs incurred by the City for
cleaning up the disposal site shall be chargeable to the responsible party.
Repeated violations of this provision or of regulations adopted by the Director
pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be sufficient cause for the
City's revocation of the landfill disposal privileges of the responsible party.
   F.   Disposal Fees: The fees for disposal of solid waste shall be as
provided in schedule of fees, title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 16-4683,
11-1-2016)
16-3H-10: LITTERING:
   A.   Restricted And Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
      1.   Littering Generally: No person shall throw, sweep or deposit litter
on or upon any public place within the City, except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection and disposal.
      2.   Operation Of Trucks Causing Litter:
         a.   No vehicle carrying a load of materials shall be driven or moved
on any State highway, County road or City street unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except sand or other materials may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, and water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a street or roadway in order to clean or maintain such street
or roadway.
         b.   It shall be prohibited for vehicles to deposit substantial and
unreasonable quantities of mud, gravel or other materials from their wheels or
track onto paved public streets or roadways.
      3.   Depositing Litter On Private Property: No person shall throw or
deposit litter on any private property within the City, whether owned by such
person or not, except the owner, operator or person in control of private
property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
natural elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon
private property.
   B.   Placement Of Solid Waste In Public Receptacles: Persons placing solid
waste in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in
such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the natural
elements upon any public place or upon private property. No person shall place
residential refuse in solid waste containers owned by the City of Iowa City.
(Ord. 16-4683, 11-1-2016)
CHAPTER 4
STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
SECTION:
16-4-1: Standards Adopted For Iowa City
16-4-2: Standards Adopted For Extraterritorial Areas
16-4-3: Copies On File
16-4-1: STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR IOWA CITY:
The "Design Standards For Public Works Improvements In Iowa City" is hereby
adopted, by reference, as the standard for all designing, planning and
construction of any and all public improvements in the city. (Res. 75-120; amd.
1994 Code)
16-4-2: STANDARDS ADOPTED FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL AREAS:
An addition to "Design Standards For Public Works Improvements", "Section XI -
Design Standards For New Developments Located Outside The City Limits Of Iowa
City, But Within The Two Mile Extraterritorial Limit" is hereby adopted, by
reference. (Res. 78-66, 2-28-1978; amd. 1994 Code)
16-4-3: COPIES ON FILE:
Copies of the design standards, additions and revisions thereto, as adopted in
this chapter, are on file in the office of the city engineer. (Res. 75-120;
amd. Res. 78-66, 2-28-1978; Res. 81-252, 9-22-1981; 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PENALTIES
SECTION:
16-5-1: Penalties For Violation Of This Title
16-5-1: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
TITLE 17
BUILDING AND HOUSING
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
17-1-1: Codes Adopted
17-1-2: Interpretation Of Building Code Provisions
17-1-3: Amendments To Code
17-1-4: Penalties For Violations
17-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
   Subject to the following amendments, the 2024 edition of the International
Building Code (IBC) including Appendix K, electrical administrative process,
and 2024 edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) including Appendix
BE, radon control methods, and Appendix BO, Existing Buildings and Structures,
are adopted. Additionally, the City further adopts, Section 103.6(1)(a) of the
Iowa Code (the Iowa State Electrical Code), Section 105.4(1)(a) of the Iowa
Code (the Iowa State Mechanical Code and the Iowa State Plumbing Code).
Collectively, they shall be known as the Iowa City Building Code or the
Building Code. Interpretations of the Building Official may be guided by
publications of the International Code Council, Inc., or the International
Existing Building Code.
(Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4903, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25-4948, 4-1- 2025)
17-1-2: INTERPRETATION OF BUILDING CODE PROVISIONS:
   The provisions of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of Iowa City.
(Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4903, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25- 4948, 4-1-2025)
17-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the 2024 edition of the International Building Code
and 2024 edition of the International Residential Code are amended as follows:
   Section R101.1 of the IRC and 101.1 IBC. Delete Section R101.1 of the IRC
and 101.1 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
      R101.1/101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code
of Iowa City, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   Section R105.2 of the IRC and 105.2 of the IBC. Amend Section R105.2 of the
IRC and 105.2 of the IBC by adding the following exemptions to Building:
      R105.2/105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. A permit shall not be required for
the following:
      Building
      14.   For structures regulated by the IRC the reapplication of shingles
provided
      The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or is not an
Iowa City Historic Landmark.
      Note: Applying solid sheathing over space sheathing is exempt from a
permit.
      15.   For structures regulated by the IRC reapplication of siding
provided: The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, or a
Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
      16.   For structures regulated by the IRC replacing windows provided:
      a.   Replacement window(s) is in compliance with Appendix BO.
      b.   The structure is not in a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, or a
Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
      17.   For structures regulated by the IRC replacing exterior doors,
including garage doors, provided:
      a.   Replacement door(s) is in compliance with Appendix BO.
      b.   Doors are not street facing doors in a structure located in a
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or are not an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
      Note: screen and storm doors do not require a permit regardless of the
location.
      18.   The removal of any portion of a building (i.e. porch, porch
railing, decorative brackets and trim, dormers, chimneys, etc.) provided the
structure is not located within a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or a
Conservation District Overlay Zone, or is an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
   Section 105.8 of the IBC and R105.10 of the IRC. Add two new Sections 105.8
and 105.8.1 to the IBC and R105.10 and R105.10.1 to the IRC as follows:
      105.8(IBC) R105.10(IRC) Demolition permits required. A demolition permit
shall be required as follows:
      1.   For the removal of any building or structure.
      2.   For the removal of any portion of a building (i.e. porch, porch
railing, decorative brackets and trim, dormers, chimneys, etc.) that is located
within a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or a Conservation District Overlay
Zone, or is an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
      105.8.1(IBC) and R105.10.1 Requirements.
      1.   The applicant for any demolition permit shall state on the
application the proposed disposal plans for all demolition materials.
      2.   No demolition permit shall be issued until seven (7) working days
after the date an application has been properly filed and said demolition
permit shall not be effective until applicant has posted the premises to be
demolished with a notice to be provided by the City and as directed by the
City.
         Exceptions:
         1.   Accessory buildings as defined in the Iowa City Zoning Ordinance
provided they are not located within a Historic Preservation Overlay Zone or a
Conservation District Overlay Zone or is an Iowa City Historic Landmark.
         2.   Dangerous buildings.
   Section 105.9 of the IBC and R105.11 of the IRC. Add two new Sections 105.9
to the IBC and R105.11 to the IRC as follows:
      105.9 (IBC) and R105.11 (IRC) Permittee:
         1.   An electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit may be issued to any
person holding a valid master license for the respective trade as described in
Section 17-11-1 of the Iowa City Code, or to any company who employs a duly
licensed master in the respective trade on a full-time basis who supervises the
work of the apprentice and or journeymen during the company's normal business
hours.
         2.   Homeowners of owner occupied, detached single family dwellings
qualifying for the homestead tax exemption may acquire an electrical, plumbing
and/or mechanical permits for their residence and accessory structures (not an
apartment or rental unit or apartment building), not to include electrical
dwelling service upgrade or replacement. Owner occupied means the dwelling is
the owner's principal residence.
   Section R108.3 of the IRC and Section 109.3 of the IBC. Delete Section
R108.3 of the IRC and Section 109.3 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      R108.3 (IRC) 109.3 (IBC) Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are
required to be submitted by Section 106 and the value of the proposed building
or work exceeds fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), a plan review fee shall be
paid before the permit may be issued. Should the project be abandoned and the
permit not issued after the plan review has been started, the plan review fee
shall still be due and payable. The plan review fee shall be as set forth by
resolution of City Council.
   Section R108.5 of the IRC and Section 109.6 of the IBC: Delete Section
R108.5 in the IRC and Section 109.6 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      R108.5 (IRC) 109.6 IBC Refunds: The Building Official may authorize the
refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except
upon written application filed by the original permittee within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of fee payment.
   Section R108.6 of the IRC and Section 109.4 of the IBC. Delete Section 108.6
of the IRC and Section 109.4 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      R108.6 (IRC) 109.4 (IBC) Work commencing before permit issuance: Any
person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical
or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
fee equal to the amount of the permit fee if a permit were issued. This fee
shall be collected whether or not a permit is issued. This fee is in addition
to the required permit fee. The payment of such fee shall not exempt any person
from compliance with all other provisions of this Code or from any penalty
prescribed by law. Only the Building Official may reduce this fee when it is
demonstrated that an emergency existed that required the work to be done
without a permit.
   Section R108.7 of the IRC and Section 109.7 of the IBC. Add two new Sections
R108.7 to the IRC and 109.7 to the IBC as follows:
      R108.7 (IRC) and 109.7 (IBC) Reinspection Fees:
      A re-inspection fee may be accessed for each inspection or reinspection
when such work or portion of such work for which the inspection was scheduled
is not complete or when corrections cited are not made. Reinspection fees may
be assessed when plans necessary to complete the inspection are not readily
available to the inspector, access is not provided on the date for which the
inspection was scheduled, or when there are deviations from plans requiring
additional plan review. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring
reinspection fees the first time a project is rejected for failure to comply
with requirements of this code, but as a method to control the practice of
scheduling inspections before the project is ready for scheduled inspections.
   Section R112 of the IRC and Section 113 of the IBC. Delete Section R112 of
the IRC and Section 113 of the IBC and insert in lieu thereof the following:
      R112 (IRC) and 113 (IBC) Appeals: See Title 17 Chapter 12 Appeals in the
City Code.
   Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
      Authority Having Jurisdiction. The organization, office, or individual
responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a
procedure.
   Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
      Chief Electrical Inspector. A building inspector who either is the
authority having jurisdiction or is designated by the authority having
jurisdiction and is responsible for administering the requirements of this
code.
   Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
      Electrical Inspector. A building inspector authorized to perform
electrical inspections.
   Section 202 of both the IBC and IRC. Add new definition as follows:
      Emergency Communications Center. Shall mean the Johnson County Joint
Emergency Communications Center.
   Section 202 of the IBC and IRC. Modify definition as follows:
      Habitable space: Add a sentence to the end of the definition of habitable
space or room to read as follows: Basement areas finished to a degree to
encourage their use as anything other than storage or mechanical rooms shall be
considered habitable space.
   Section R202 of the IRC. Delete definition of Accessory Structure and insert
in lieu thereof the following: Accessory Structure. See Title 14 Chapter 9
Article A Zoning Definitions in the City Code.
   Table R301.2 (1) of the IRC Modify by inserting data in the table as
follows:
 
       Wind Design                Subject to damage from                 Flood
                                                                         hazards
             Topographic
Ground       effects,    Seismic                            Ice barrier            Air      Mean
snow   Speed special     design              Frost          underlayment      FIRM freezing annual
load   (mph) wind        category Weathering line  Termite  required     NFIP Maps index    temp
             region, or                      depth
             wind-borne
             debris zone
                                                   Moderate              5/   2/
34     109   No          A        Severe     42"   heavy    Yes          22/  16/  2000     50°F
                                                                         77   07
 
 
MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA
                                   Indoor   Indoor      Outdoor
          Altitude    Coincident   Winter   Winter      Winter      Heating
Elevation Correction  Wet Bulb     Design   Design Dry- Design Dry- Temperature
          Factor                   Relative Bulb        Bulb        Difference
                                   Humidity Temperature Temperature
661'      N/A         76°         39%      70°        -6°        76°
                                   Indoor   Indoor      Outdoor
                      Summer       Summer   Summer      Summer      Cooling
Latitude  Daily Range Design Gains Design   Design Dry- Design Dry- Temperature
                                   Relative Bulb        Bulb        Difference
                                   Humidity Temperature Temperature
41°      M           53°         50%      75°        89°        14°
 
   Section R302.5.1 of the IRC. Modify Section R302.5.1 of the IRC by deleting
the last sentence.
   Section R302.13 of the IRC. Delete Section R302.13 of the IRC entirely.
   Section 305.2.3 of the IBC. Delete Section 305.2.3 of the IBC and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
      305.2.3 Eight or Fewer Children in a Dwelling Unit. A facility such as
the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer children receiving
such day care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with
the International Residential Code.
      Exception: Day care facilities that provide custodial care for l6 or
fewer persons for less than 24-hours per day in a single-family dwelling, and
where registered with the State of Iowa Department of Human Services as child
development homes on or before January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with
the International Residential Code.
   Section R306 of the IRC. Delete section R306 of the IRC and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      R306. See Title 14 Chapter 5J Flood Plain Management Standards in the
City Code.
      R306.1 Flood Resistive Materials. Building materials and installation
methods used for flooring and interior and exterior walls and wall coverings
below the elevation required in Title 14 Chapter 5J Flood Plain Management
Standards in the City Code shall be flood damage-resistant materials that
conform to the provisions of FEMA TB-2.
   Section R309 of the IRC: Delete Section R309 of the IRC entirely.
   Section 310.4.1 of the IBC. Delete Section 310.4.1 of the IBC and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
      310.4.1 Care Facilities Within A Dwelling Unit. Care facilities within a
dwelling unit shall be in accordance with section 305.2.3.
   Section R316 of the IRC. Delete Section R316 of the IRC entirely
   Section R319.6 Exception 3 of the IRC. Delete Section 319.6 Exception 3 of
the IRC entirely.
   Section R319.7 of the IRC. Delete Section R310.7 in the IRC and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
      R319.7 Alterations or repairs of basements in structures built after May
10, 1989. An emergency escape and rescue opening is not required where existing
basements undergo alterations or repairs.
      Alterations or repairs in structures built prior to May 10, 1989 shall
conform R319.5 and Appendix BO Section BO102.6 Replacement windows.
      Exception: New sleeping rooms created in an existing basement shall be
provided with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section
R310.1 though R310.6
   Section R322.4 of the IRC. Add Section R322.4 in the IRC as follows:
      R322.4 Accessibility for projects other than those mentioned in Section
R322.1 through R322.3.
      R 322.4.1 Scope. The provisions of this section are enacted to implement
universal design features that provide accessibility, usability and visit-
ability for all.
      R322.4.2 Definition. Public funds shall mean funding or assistance from
the City of Iowa City or any agent thereof through any of the following means:
      1.   a building contract or similar contractual agreement involving a
City-funded program or fund;
      2.   any real estate received by the owner through a subsidy, lease, or
donation by the City or its agents;
      3.   preferential tax treatment, bond assistance, mortgage assistance, or
similar financial advantages from the City or its agents;
      4.   disbursement of federal or state construction funds including a
Community Development Block Grant; or
      5.   a City contract to provide funding or a financial benefit for
housing.
      R322.4.3 Applicability. The amendment applies to new one- and two-family
dwellings and is not required for new townhouses, accessory dwelling units or
existing structures for repairs, alterations, change of occupancy or additions
unless the square footage of the addition is more than 25% of the existing
structure, then, the addition must comply.
      Exception: Applies to new townhouses constructed using public funds.
      The minimum usability requirements are as follows:
      1.   Step-less entrance: At least one building entrance must be designed,
without encroaching into any required parking space, that complies with the
Iowa City Building Code standard for an accessible entrance on an accessible
route served by a ramp in accordance with section R318.8 or a no-step entrance.
The accessible route must extend from a vehicular drop-off, or parking to a
building entrance. The entry door must have a minimum net clear opening of
thirty-two inches (32").
      If public funds are used the step-less entrance must be provided.
      Exception:
      The building official may waive this requirement based upon the
determination that strict compliance is financially or environmentally
impractical.
      2.   Interior doors: At least one bedroom and one bathroom (if either are
provided) and all other passage doorway header widths, on the level served by
the designed step-less entrance, must be framed to accommodate a minimum 38"
clear rough opening. The framing for the doorway width opening may be reduced
to accommodate any door size
      Exception:
      1.   If public funds are used the minimum door clear opening shall be
thirty-two inches (32") when the door is open ninety degrees (90), measured
between the face of the door and the opposite stop.
      2.   Doors serving closets twenty-four inches (24") or less in depth need
not be framed to 38" clear opening width.
      Note: A 34" door hung in the standard manner provides an acceptable 32"
opening.
      3.   Sanitation facilities: There must be at least one bathroom
containing a water closet (toilet) and lavatory (sink) on the level of the
dwelling to be accessed by the designed step-less entrance. The room shall have
a minimum thirty inches (30") by forty-eight inches (48") clear floor space at
the water closet and lavatory. The clear floor space can be shared by both
fixtures.
      The plans must show a shower, bathtub or combination tub/shower can be
provided within the room or an adjoining room without removing part of the
concrete floor to provide necessary plumbing to the future plumbing fixture(s).
      If public funds are used a shower, bathtub or combination tub/shower
shall be provided within the room.
      Exceptions:
      The building official may waive this requirement based on the
determination that strict compliance is financially impractical.
      4.   Wall reinforcement: A bathroom must be provided with wood blocking
installed within wall framing to support grab bars as needed. The wood
blocking, when measured to the center, will be located between thirty-three
inches (33") and thirty-six inches (36") above the finished floor. The wood
blocking must be in all walls adjacent to and behind a toilet.
      Exception: Backing is not required behind pre-manufactured showers and
bathtubs.
      5.   Decks: All exterior decks surfaces adjacent to the level served by
the designed step-less entrance must be built within four inches (4") of the
dwellings finish floor level.
      Note: At grade patios are exempt from this requirement.
      6.   Switch and outlet requirements: All wall switches, controlling light
fixtures, fans, all temperature control devices and all receptacles shall be
located in an area between fifteen (15) and forty-eight (48) inches above
finished floor. The height will be determined by measuring from the finished
floor to the center of the device. When the control or receptacle placement is
prohibited by the height of the window or design feature, alternative locations
may be approved by the building official.
      7.   Electrical panel requirements: Electrical panels on the level of the
dwelling to be accessed by the designed step-less entrance shall be located so
that the individual circuit breakers are located between 15" and 54 " above the
floor.
   Section R328 of the IRC. Delete Section R328 of the IRC entirely.
   Section R403.1.4.1 of the IRC. Modify by deleting all exceptions and
inserting in lieu thereof the following:
      Exceptions:
      1.   One story detached accessory buildings of wood or steel frame
construction not used for human occupancy and not exceeding one thousand
(1,000) square feet in floor area may be constructed using slab on grade
construction as follows. The slab shall be three and one-half inches thick,
poured monolithically with thickened perimeter footings extending twelve inches
(12") below finish grade and be twelve inches (12") wide at the base. The top
of the foundation shall not be less than six inches (6") above finish grade.
Reinforcement of the slab, including the thickened portion, shall be minimum
6x6-10/10 welded wire mesh, #4 deformed reinforcing bars at twenty-four inches
(24") on center each way or fiber mesh reinforced concrete.
      2.   Freestanding accessory structures not used for human occupancy and
not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet in floor area or less and an eave
height of ten (10) feet or less above grade may be constructed on wood plate or
skids.
   Section 403.5.6 of the IBC: Add a new Section 403.5.6 as follows:
      403.5.6 Emergency escape and rescue. Emergency escape and rescue openings
specified in Section 1031 are not required.
   Section R404.1.1 of the IRC: Amend Section R404.1.1 of the IRC by adding an
Exception after number 2 as follows:
      Exception: Foundation walls with unbalanced lateral forces created by
finish grade, i.e. walkout basements which are exempt from the Iowa
Architectural Act shall be designed by a licensed structural engineer or
constructed in accordance with the Table R404.1.1(5) and diagram as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8c6ed5386b362473fd9105889959ec9c0ba92124/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3791.png]
   Section 502.1 of the IBC (F). Delete Section 502.1 in its entirety and
insert in lieu thereof the following:
      502.1 New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that
is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address
numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be
spelled out. Numbers shall be sized as specified in Table 502.1. Measurements
to determine the minimum number size shall be measured from the approved
address location to the center line of the street for which the premises is
addressed. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot
be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be
used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
Table 502.1
Minimum Address Size a,b,c,d
 
Distance from the centerline of Minimum Height (in) Minimum Stroke Width (in)
the Public Way (ft)
Less than 100                   4                   1/2
100 199                         6                   3/4
200 299                         8                   1
For each additional 100         Increase 2          Increase ½
a) Exterior suite identification, minimum height shall be 4 inches and stroke
width shall be ½ inch.
b) Interior suite identification, minimum height shall be 3 inches and stroke
width shall be ¼ inch.
c) Measurements to determine the minimum number or letter size shall be
measured from the approved address location to the center line of the street
for which the premise is addressed.
d) Minimum height and minimum stroke may be increased by the Code Official.
 
   Section R507.10.2 of the IRC. Delete Section 507.10.2 entirely.
   Section R807.1 of the IRC. Modify by adding a sentence at the end of the
second paragraph as follows:
      The opening shall not be located in a closet, bathroom, mechanical room,
laundry room, or similar room or location.
   Section 902.1.3 of the IBC. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read
as follows: The fire pump room or automatic sprinkler riser room shall have a
supervised room temperature sensor.
   Section 902.1.4 of the IBC. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read
as follows: Emergency lighting shall be provided in the fire pump room or
automatic sprinkler riser room.
   Section 903.3.5 of the IBC (F). Delete Section 903.5 of the IBC and insert
in lieu thereof the following:
      903.3.5 Water Supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems
shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1.
The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with
the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. The
backflow preventor shall include a detector (water meter) unless the fire code
official approves an exception in consultation with the water supply utility.
For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for
design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and
daily pressure fluctuation based on information from the water supply authority
and as approved by the fire code official.
   Section 903.3.5.1 of the IBC (F).Delete Section 903.5.1 of the IBC and
insert in lieu thereof the following:
      903.3.5.1 A single domestic and automatic fire sprinkler system water
supply. If the city water provider requires a single domestic and automatic
fire sprinkler system supply, then the water supply shall be split outside of
the building and shall have a shutoff provided for the domestic service after
the split outside of the building. The total domestic demand is required to be
added to the fire sprinkler demand.
   Section 903.3.5.2 of the IBC (F). Delete section 903.3.5.2 of the IBC and
insert in lieu thereof the following:
      903.3.5.2 Water supply safety margin. The fire sprinkler system
hydraulically calculated demand per NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R including required hose
stream allowances, and domestic water demand if required by section 903.3.5.1,
must be a minimum 10%, but not less than 5 psi below the water supply flow test
curve, the flow test must have been conducted within 90 days of fire sprinkler
plan submittal to the city and third party reviewer (if applicable) or as
deemed current and approved by the local water jurisdiction. The base of riser
psi at the time of acceptance test shall also be 10% but not less than 5 psi
above the most demanding hydraulically calculated pressure.
   Section 903.4.1 of the IBC (F). Delete exception number 5 without
substitution.   
   Section 903.4.3 of the IBC(F). Delete the section 903.4.3 and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      903.4.3 Alarms. An approved weatherproof horn/strobe device shall be
mounted directly above the fire department connection between seven (7) and ten
(10) feet in height above grade. The water-flow alarm device shall be activated
by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest
orifice size installed in the system. Approved and supervised audible visual
notification appliances shall be installed on each level of the interior of the
building as required by the fire code official and NFPA 72. Where a fire alarm
system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate
the building fire alarm system.
      Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one-and two-family
dwellings.
   Section 903.5.1 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 905.1 to read as follows:
      Section 903.5.1 Inspector's test valve. An inspector's test valve is
required at the most remote location in each fire sprinkler system or tenant/
floor control valve space, for use at the acceptance test and to remove air
from the system after maintenance work is done on the system.
   Section 903.5.2 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 903.5.2 to read as
follows:
      Section 903.5.2 Forward Flow Testing. Automatic sprinkler systems shall
be provided with an external outlet to perform forward flow testing as required
by NFPA 25. Control valve shall be supervised. The outlet shall be signed as
testing and have male threads.
   Section 903.6 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 903.6 to the IBC to read as
follows:
      903.6 Zones. Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area
permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and shall provide a sprinkler control valve
and waterflow device for each normally occupied floor. Except by approval of
the Fire Code Official, all control and drain valves shall be located in the
sprinkler riser room or in the stairwell of a multi-story building provided
with standpipes, mounted no higher than 6 feet from floor.
   Section 903.7 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 903.7 to the IBC to read as
follows:
      Section 903.7 Drains. As required by the Fire Code Official, all drains
and testing piping serving automatic sprinkler systems and standpipes shall be
piped to the exterior of the building.
      Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one-and two-family
dwellings.
   Section 904.14.5 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 904.14.5 to the IBC to
read as follows:
      Section 904.14.5 System Annunciation. Automatic fire extinguishing
systems installed with commercial cooking systems installed in buildings that
do not have a fire alarm system shall be connected to an approved audible and
visible emergency notifications device to warn of system discharge. The horn/
strobe and signage shall be installed in a location approved by the Fire Code
Official, which will be typically in the kitchen.
   Section 904.16 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 904.16 to the IBC to read
as follows:
      904.16 Ventilation Operations. The ventilation system shall shut down the
make-up air to the hood and continue to exhaust upon activation of the hood
fire extinguishing system.
   Section 905.1.1 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 905.1.1 to the IBC to read
as follows:
      905.1.1 Delete all references to Class II standpipe systems and replace
with Class III standpipe systems.
   Section 905.3.8 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 905.3.8 to read as
follows:
      905.3.8 Additional Standpipe Systems: Additional standpipe systems may be
added to new buildings or structures as deemed necessary by the fire code
official.
   Section 905.4 of the IBC (F). Amend section 905.4 by deleting #1 and insert
in lieu thereof the following:
      1.   In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be
provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be
located at intermediate landings between stories, unless otherwise approved by
the fire code official.
   Section 906.1 of the IBC (F). Delete the exception without substitution.
   Section 906.1 Item 1 of the IBC (F). Delete the exceptions without
substitution.
   Section 906.3 of the IBC (F). Add a sentence to the end of the section to
read as follows:
      The minimum rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class
A, Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 2A-10 B C
   Section 907.1.4 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.1.4 to read as
follows:
      907.1.4 Fire alarm control panels and Fire alarm annunciator panels.
Installation of fire alarm control panels and fire alarm annunciator panels
shall be installed in accordance with section 907.1.4.1 through 907.1.4.5.
   Section 907.1.4.1 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.1.4.1 to read as
follows:
      907.1.4.1 Fire Alarm Panel Height: Installation of fire alarm panels
shall not exceed 6 feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the
panel. Exception: Panel height may be altered by the Fire Code Official.
   Section 907.1.4.2 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 901.1.4.2 to read as
follows:
      901.1.4.2 Number of Fire Alarm Control Panels in Buildings: Only one
listed fire alarm control panel shall be allowed per building and shall lock in
the alarm until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the operation
of an audible - alarm silencing switch. This control panel shall only receive
alarm signals from fire protection equipment.
   Section 907.1.4.3 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.1.4.3 to read as
follows:
      907.1.4.3 Combination Fire/Security Alarm System Panels. A listed
combination fire/security alarm system panel that meets all the requirements of
this code and amendments may be permitted by approval of the fire code
official. The fire/security panel shall be capable of providing a signal that
can differentiate between the fire and security alarm.
   Section 907.1.4.4 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.1.4.4 to read as
follows:
      907.1.4.4 Password/PIN Protection Prohibited: Fire alarm control panels
and/or fire alarm annunciator panels that require a password/PIN to silence an
alarm/supervisory/trouble signal and/or to reset an alarm/supervisory/trouble
signal shall be prohibited.
   Section 907.1.4.5 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.1.4.5 to read as
follows:
      907.1.4.5 Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels: The fire code official can
require the addition of fire alarm annunciator panels based on the size of
building and access to the building. These panels shall meet the requirements
of Sections 907.1.4 and 907.2.
   Section 907.2 of the IBC (F). Delete section 907.2 and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures. An approved and
addressable manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system
installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be
provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1
through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with 907.5
unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. Not
fewer than one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location
to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm system employing automatic fire
detectors or water-flow devices. Where other sections of this code allow
elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box
shall be installed.
      Exceptions:
      1)   The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems
dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.
      2)   The manual fire alarm box is required for Group R-2 occupancies to
provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a
sprinkler system impairment event. The manual fire alarm box shall not be
located in an area that is accessible to the public.
      3)   Multi-tenant buildings required to have a manual/automatic fire
alarms system shall install one manual pull station per tenant space.
      4)   Visual notification appliances are not required within self-storage
units.
   Section 907.2.1.3 of the IBC [F]. Add a new section 907.2.1.3 to read as
follows:
      Group A Occupancies. In Group A occupancies, the activation of the fire
alarm or fire sprinkler system, shall automatically shut down or stop music,
sound systems, conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions and
initiate illumination of all the means of exit egress components.
   Section 907.2.9.1 [F] Delete exception 2 without substitution.
   Section 907. 2.11.2 of the IBC (F). Modify 907.2.11.2 by adding a fourth
location requirement as follows:
      4.   Supervised smoke alarms shall be installed in all common corridors
and at the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in Groups R-2, R-3, R-
4 and I-1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within fifteen
(15) feet of the end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is
located for each thirty (30) feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by
the code.
   Section 907.2.13.2 of the IBC (F). Delete 907.2.13.2 without substitution.
   Section 907.4.2 of the IBC (F). Modify 907.4.2 by adding a sentence to the
end of the section to read as follows:
      Where, in the opinion of the fire code official, manual fire alarm boxes
may be used to cause false fire alarms, the fire code official is authorized to
modify the requirements for manual fire alarm boxes.
   Section 907.6.3 of the IBC (F). Delete 907.6.3 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      907.6.3 Initiating device identification. The fire alarm system shall
identify the specific initiating device with an alphanumeric address
description showing location, type of device, and status including indication
of normal, alarm, trouble, and supervisory, as appropriate. Alphanumeric
descriptions and locations shall be reported to the emergency communications
center upon activation of an alarm condition as specified by the fire code
official.
      Exception:
      1.   Special initiation devices that do not support individual device
identification.
   Section 907.6.4 of the IBC (F). Modify 907.6.4 by deleting the exception and
inserting in lieu thereof the following exception:
      Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area
permitted by NFPA 13 and shall provide a sprinkler control valve and waterflow
device for each normally occupied floor.
   Section 907.6.4.3 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.6.4.3 to read as
follows:
      Section 907.6.4.3 Zone and address location labeling. Fire alarm and/or
annunciator panels shall have all zones and address points plainly and
permanently labeled as to their location on the outside of the panel or on an
easily readable map of the building if no display is present.
   Section 907.6.6 of the IBC (F). Delete 907.6.6 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarms required by this chapter, the
International Building Code, or the Fire Code Official, an approved UL listed
Central Station service in accordance with NFPA 72 shall monitor fire alarm
systems to provide for the immediate and automatic notification to the
emergency communications center. Each initiating device shall report an address
point and an alpha/numeric descriptor showing location, type of device and
status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status,
as appropriate. Alpha/numeric descriptor shall be required to be reported to
the emergency communications center upon activation of alarm conditions as
specified by the fire code official.
      Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for:
      1.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section
907.2.11.
      2.   Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings
      4.   Fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings
   Section 907.7.4 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 907.7.4 to read as
follows:
      907.7.4 Device/Zone Map. An easily readable fire alarm device and/ or
zone map of the building shall be permanently mounted in or near the fire alarm
control panel and documentation cabinet showing the location of all initiating
devices when required by the fire code official.
   Section 907.9 of the IBC (F). Add a new Section 907.9 as follows:
      907.9 Approved hold open devices. When installed in buildings that have a
fire alarm system and /or sprinkler system, all approved hold open devices
shall release upon activation of the fire alarm and/or sprinkler water-flow
activation.
   Section 912.4.1 of the IBC (F). Delete the section 912.4.1 and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
      Section 912.4.1 Locking fire department connection caps. Locking fire
department connection caps approved by the fire department are required for all
new construction that have a water-based fire protection system and existing
structures that have a water-based fire protection system shall be required
immediately after conducting the five-year obstruction and maintenance testing,
or if one or more of the fire department caps are missing.
   Section 912.7 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 912.7 to read as follows:
      907.7 Fire Department Connection Height. The fire department connection
shall be located not less than 18 inches from the bottom of the cap(s) and not
more than 3 feet from the top of the cap(s) above the level of the adjacent
grade or access level. Deviation from this height may be granted by the Code
Official for just cause.
   Section 912.8 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 912.8 to read as follows:
      912.8 Size. Minimum fire department connection size shall be 2 ½" inch
National Standard Thread siamese connection.
   Section 913.6 of the IBC (F). Add a new section 913.6 to read as follows:
      913.6 Control device. All fire pumps shall be provided with a control
device to maintain supply suction pressure greater than 20 psi. Suction
pressure sustaining devices may include a discharge side suction pressure
sustaining valve, a pump drive control system responsive to suction pressure
(i.e. a VFD with pressure transducer), or a tank with associated fill circuit.
Devices must be fire rated and installed per NFPA and utility standards. This
section is retroactive and applicable to existing fire pumps. Plans to update
existing systems or exceptions to the requirement will be at the discretion of
the fire code official in consultation with the water supply utility.
   Section 1011.3 of the IBC. Modify 1011.3 by adding a third exception as
follows:
      Exception:
      3.   Stairs within individual dwelling units of residential Group R
occupancies that existed prior to 8/28/02 (adoption of the 2000 IRC) are
permitted a 78-inch (6'-6") headroom clearance.
   Section 1023.4 of the IBC. Modify 1023.4 by adding a fourth unnumbered
paragraph as follows:
      Fire door assemblies that provide access to a non-pressurized interior
exit of R-2 occupancies shall also be automatic closing by actuation of a smoke
detector.
   Section 1030.2 of the IBC (F). Modify 1030.2 by adding a new exception as
follows:
      EXCEPTION:
      1)   The main entrance/exit of A-2 occupancies shall be of a width that
accommodates not less than two-thirds of the total occupant load.
   Section 1031.2 of the IBC. Modify 1031.2 by deleting the exceptions and
inserting in lieu thereof the following:
      EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   The emergency escape and rescue opening is permitted to open onto a
balcony within an atrium in accordance with the requirements of Section 404
provided the balcony provides access to an exit and the dwelling unit or
sleeping room has a means of egress that is not open to the atrium.
      2.   All group R-2 occupancies other than hotels and motels and buildings
regulated by Section 403 must be provided with emergency escape & rescue
openings, regardless of what Tables 1006.3.4(1) and 1006.3.4(2) allow
      3.   Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements
or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that opens
directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior exit balcony that
opens to a public way.
      4.   Sleeping rooms in fire stations where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
903.3.1.1.
   Section 1031.7 of the IBC. Add a new Section 1031.7 to read as follows:
      1030.7. Emergency escape windows under decks, porches and cantilevers
shall be fully openable and provide a path not less than 36 inches in height
and 36 inches in width to a yard or court.
   Chapter 11 of the IRC. Delete Chapter 11 in its entirety and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency, Section N1101. Energy efficiency for the
design and construction of building regulated by this code shall be as required
by 661-303 of the Iowa State Administrative Code.
   Chapter 11 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 11 in its entirety and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      Chapter 11 Accessibility, Section 1101. Buildings or portions of
buildings shall be accessible to persons with disabilities as required by 661-
302 of the Iowa State Administrative Code.
   Section 1209.2 of the IBC. Modify 1209.2 by adding a second unnumbered
paragraph as follows:
      The opening shall be located in a corridor, hallway, or other readily
accessible location. The opening shall not be located in a closet, bathroom,
mechanical room, laundry room, or similar room or location. Attics with a
maximum vertical height of less than thirty inches need not be provided with
access openings.
   Chapter 13 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 13 in its entirety and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency, Section 1301. Energy efficiency for the
design and construction of building regulated by this code shall be as required
by 661-303 of the Iowa State Administrative Code.
   Section 1612.2 of the IBC. Delete 1612.2 of the IBC and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      1612.2 Design and Construction. The design and construction of buildings
and structures located in flood hazard areas, shall be in accordance with
Chapter 5 of ASCE 7, ASCE 24 and Title 14, Chapter 5 Article J Flood Plain
Management Standards in the City Code.
   Section 1612.3 of the IBC. Amend 1612.3 by inserting:
      Jurisdiction: City of Iowa City, Iowa
      Date: February 16, 2007
   Section 1705.18 of the IBC. Delete 1705.18 and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      1705.18 Fire-resistant penetrations and joints. In high-rise buildings,
in buildings assigned a Risk Category III or IV, or Group R occupancies over 3
stories in height, special inspections for through penetrations, membrane
penetration firestops, fire-resistant joint systems and perimeter fire
containment systems that are tested and listed in accordance with Sections
714.4.1.2, 714.5.1.2, 715.3.1 and 715.4 shall be in accordance with Section
1705.18.1 or 1705.18.2.
   Part V Mechanical, Chapters 12 through 23 inclusive of the IRC. Delete Part
V Mechanical Chapters 12 through 23 inclusive and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      Part V Mechanical, Chapter 12
      Section M1201 GENERAL
      M1201.1 Mechanical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Mechanical
Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Mechanical Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended.
   Part VI Fuel Gas, Chapter 24 of the IRC. Delete Part VI Fuel Gas Chapter 24
and insert in lieu thereof the following:
      Part VI Fuel Gas, Chapter 24
      G2401 GENERAL
      G2401.1 Fuel Gas systems shall comply with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Plumbing Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended.
   Part VII Plumbing, Chapters 25 through 33 inclusive of the IRC. Delete Part
VII Plumbing Chapters 25 through 33 inclusive and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      Part VII Plumbing, Chapter 25
      P2501 GENERAL
      P2501.1 Plumbing systems shall comply with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Plumbing Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended.
   Chapter 27 of the IBC. Amend Section 2701 by deleting and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
      2701 GENERAL
      2701.1 Electrical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Electrical
Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Electrical Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended
and Appendix K as amended.
   Chapter 28 of the IBC. Delete chapter 28 and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems
      2801.1 Mechanical systems shall comply the Iowa State Mechanical Code
with the following amendments:
      Administrative Provisions. The Mechanical Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended.
      2801.2 Commercial Kitchen Hood Exhaust Termination:
      In addition to the code requirements for commercial kitchen hood exhaust
termination locations, the following shall apply:
      1.   For new construction, change in occupancy or change in use, that
requires a new commercial kitchen hood or revisions to an existing commercial
kitchen hood, the new or existing commercial kitchen hood exhaust duct shall
terminate as follows: Above the roof level without passing through an exterior
wall; or
      2.   Through an alley facing exterior wall provided the termination is
above the roof level; or
      3.    To an alley right of way per 3202.3.2 of the International Building
Code.
   Chapter 29 of the IBC. Delete Chapter 29 and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
      2901.1 Plumbing systems shall comply with the Iowa State Plumbing Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Plumbing Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended.
   Section 3002.4 of the IBC. Delete 3002.4 and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher.
      In buildings four or more stories above, or four or more stories below,
grade plane, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department
emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and
arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84 inches (610
mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the
horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol
for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less
than 3 inches (76 mm) high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the
hoistway door frame.
   Part VIII Electrical, Chapters 34 through 43 inclusive of the IRC. Delete
Part VIII Electrical Chapters 34 through 43 inclusive of the IRC and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
      Part VIII Electrical, Chapter 34
      E3401 GENERAL
      E3401.1 Electrical systems shall comply with the Iowa State Electrical
Code.
      Administrative Provisions. The Electrical Code shall be administered in
accordance with administrative provisions in chapter 1 of this code as amended
and Appendix K of the IBC as amended.
   Appendix K of the IBC.
   Section K103.2 of the IBC. Work exempt from permit. Delete K103.2 and insert
in lieu thereof the following:
      K103.2 Work exempt from permit. See section 105.2 in both the IRC and
IBC.
   Section K106.5 of the IBC. Add a new Section K106. 5 as follows:
      K106. 5 Energy Connections; An electrical system or equipment regulated
by this code for which a permit is required shall not be connected to a source
of energy or power until approved by the building official.
   Section K106.6 of the IBC. Add a new Section K106. 6 as follows:
      K106. 6 Temporary Energy Connections. The building official may authorize
the temporary connection of the electrical system or equipment to the source of
energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for use under a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
   Appendix BE of the IRC. Delete BE104 of the IRC entirely.
   Appendix BO of the IRC.
   Section BO102.6 of the IRC. Delete BO102.6 and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
      BO102.6 Replacement windows and doors. Regardless of the category of
work, where an existing window or door, including the sash and glazed portion,
or safety glazing is replaced, the replacement window, door or safety glazing
shall comply with the requirements of Sections BO102.6.1 through BO102.6.3, as
applicable.
   Section BO102.6.1 of the IRC. Delete BO102.6.1 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      BO102.6.1 Energy efficiency. Replacement windows or doors shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 11.
   Section BO105.8.1 of the IRC. Delete BO105.8.1 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      BO105.8.1 Stair width. Existing basement and attic stairs and handrails
not otherwise being altered or modified shall be permitted to maintain their
current clear width at, above and below existing handrails.
   Section BO105.8.2 of the IRC. Delete BO105.8.2 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      BO105.8.2 Stair headroom. Headroom height on existing basement or attic
stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing
stairway or attic finished headroom. Existing basement or attic stairs not
otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current finished
headroom.
   Section BO105.8.3 of the IRC. Delete BO105.8.3 and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
      BO105.8.3 Stair landing. Landings serving existing basement or attic
stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing
stairway landing depth and width. Existing basement or attic stairs not
otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current landing
depth and width.
(Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4903, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25-4948, 4-1-2025)
17-1-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of the City Code.
(Ord. 19-4777, 2-5-2019; amd. Ord. 23-4903, 6-20-2023; Ord. 25-4948, 4-1-2025)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 5
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
17-5-1: Short Title
17-5-2: Purpose
17-5-3: Definitions
17-5-4: Scope Of Provisions
17-5-5: Compliance With State Law
17-5-6: Administration And Enforcement Official
17-5-7: Inspections
17-5-8: Access By Owner Or Operator For Maintenance
17-5-9: Emergency Orders
17-5-10: Placarding Of Structures; Condemnation Referrals
17-5-11: Rent Abatement
17-5-12: Rules And Regulations
17-5-13: Appeals Board; Variances And Appeals
17-5-14: Informational Disclosure And Acknowledgement Form
17-5-15: Designation And Registration Of Designated Agent
17-5-16: Certificate Of Structure Compliance And Rental Permit
17-5-17: Minimum Structure Standards For All Dwellings
17-5-18: Minimum Structure Standards For All Rental Housing
17-5-19: Responsibilities Of Owners Relating To The Maintenance And Occupancy
Of Premises
17-5-20: Responsibilities Of Occupants Relating To The Maintenance And
Occupancy Of Premises
17-5-21: Title 24 Of The Code Of Federal Regulations; Sections 882.109(a)
Through (l); "Housing Quality Standards"
17-5-22: Penalties For Violation
17-5-23: Appendices
17-5-24: Fees
17-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and designated as the IOWA CITY HOUSING CODE,
hereinafter referred to as "the Housing Code". (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-2: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to ensure that
housing facilities and conditions are of the quality necessary to protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of not only those persons utilizing the
housing, but the general public as well. It is hereby further declared that the
purpose of this chapter is to determine the responsibilities of owners,
operators, occupants and the City necessary to maintain and administer the
standards of this chapter. (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Whenever the
words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", "type III
dwelling unit" or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed
as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". Whenever the
term "dwelling unit(s)" is used in this chapter, it shall include type III
dwelling unit(s).
   ACCEPTABLE OR APPROVED: In substantial compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING/USE/STRUCTURE: A building, structure, or use which:
   A.   Is subordinate to the principal use of the property and contributes to
the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, customers, or employees of
the principal use; and
   B.   Is under the same ownership as the principal use or uses on the
property; and
   C.   Does not include structures, structural features, or activities
inconsistent with the uses to which they are accessory; and
   D.   Except for off street parking located on a separate lot as approved
through a special exception, is located on the same lot as the principal use or
uses to which it is accessory.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): A dwelling unit that is accessory to an
owner- occupied single-family or duplex use.
   ADJOINING GRADE: The elevation of the ground which extends five feet (5')
from the perimeter of the dwelling.
   APPROVED: See definition of acceptable or approved.
   APPURTENANCE: That which is directly or indirectly connected or accessory to
a thing.
   ATTIC: Any story situated, wholly or partly, within the roof and so
designed, arranged or built to be used for business, storage or habitation.
   BASEMENT: A portion or story of a building, next below the first or main
floor, which may or may not be considered habitable space.
   BATH: A bathtub or shower stall installed in compliance with the Iowa City
Plumbing Code.
   BEDROOM/SLEEPING ROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling used or intended
to be used for sleeping. Minimum size requirements for bedrooms are set forth
in sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter.
   CELLAR: A space below the first or main floor, used or intended to be used
for storage and location for heating equipment and shall not be considered
habitable space.
   CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM: A single system supplying heat to one or more
dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.
   CERTIFICATE OF STRUCTURE COMPLIANCE: A permanent document showing that the
structure for which it is issued was in compliance with the provisions of
sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter at the time of issuance.
   CHIEF: The administrative head of the Fire Department.
   CODE COMPLIANCE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT: A written agreement that shall include
a list of specific actions and a specific schedule of deadlines for actions to
abate the current violation and avoid further Code violations. It may also
include provisions for periodic reassessment of the agreement or any written
modification of the agreement.
   COMMUNAL: Used or shared by or intended to be used or shared by the
occupants of two (2) or more rooming units or two (2) or more dwelling units.
   CONDOMINIUM: A dwelling unit in compliance or conformance with the
requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
   COOPERATIVE: A dwelling unit in compliance or conformance with the
requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
   COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
dwelling. A court not extending to the street or front or rear yard is an inner
court. A court extending to the street or front yard or rear yard is an outer
court.
   DESIGNATED AGENT: The person designated by owner(s) of rental property who
are not residents of Johnson County, as well as condominium associations, who
has authority to act on the owners' behalf to accept service of legal processes
and notices and to authorize repairs as required.
   DINING ROOM: A habitable room used or intended to be used for the purpose of
eating but not for cooking or the preparation of meals.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Housing and Inspection Services.
   DUPLEX: A structure in which there are two (2) dwelling units within a
single building, and both dwelling units are located on the same lot.
   DWELLING: Any building, structure or manufactured housing, except temporary
housing, wholly or partly, used or intended to be used for living or sleeping
by human occupants and includes any appurtenances attached thereto.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE: See definition of multiple dwelling.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: See definition of single-family dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms
located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating of meals and
sanitation.
   EGRESS: An arrangement of exit routes to provide a means of exit from
buildings and/or premises.
   EXIT: A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, exterior exit balconies,
ramps, stairways, smokeproof enclosures, horizontal exit, exit passageway, exit
court, walkways, sidewalks and yards.
   EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the inspector.
   FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE: A building used as a residence by a chapter of a
fraternal or sororal nonprofit organization recognized by the University of
Iowa. For purposes of this Code, a fraternity/sorority house shall be
considered a rooming house. Occupancy classification for State of Iowa Fire
Code is "dormitory".
   GUEST: An individual who shares a dwelling on a temporary basis for not more
than thirty (30) days in any given calendar year; or a person who stays in a
hospitality oriented retail use.
   HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling having a
minimum of seventy (70) square feet of total floor area with not less than
seven feet (7') in any horizontal dimension, used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet
rooms, pantries, laundries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets, storage
spaces, stairways and recreation rooms in basements (see definition of
recreation room in basement). Notwithstanding the foregoing, bedrooms must meet
the dimensional requirements as set forth in sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter.
   INFESTATION: The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such quantities as would be considered unsanitary.
   INSPECTOR: The official or officials of the City who administer the
provisions of the Housing, Building, Nuisance and Zoning Codes, together with
duly authorized representative(s) and/or agent(s).
   KITCHEN: A room used or intended to be used for cooking or the preparation
of meals.
   KITCHEN SINK: A basin for washing utensils used for cooking, eating and
drinking, located in a kitchen and connected to both hot and cold water lines.
   KITCHENETTE: A food preparation area not less than forty (40) square feet in
area.
   LAVATORY: A hand washing basin connected to both hot and cold water lines
and separate and distinct from a kitchen sink.
   LIVING ROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling unit used or intended to be
used primarily for general living purposes.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT: A person who is physically present in the dwelling and is engaged
in activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, sleeping,
cooking, eating, and sanitation, for at least thirty one (31) days in any
calendar year or who is a tenant.
   OPERATOR: Any person who rents to another or who has custody or control of a
building or parts thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or
who has custody or control of the premises.
   OWNER: Any person who has custody and/or control of any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit by virtue of a contractual interest in or legal or
equitable title to said dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit as guardian or
conservator.
   OWNER OCCUPANT: An owner who is physically present in the dwelling and is
engaged in activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, sleeping,
cooking, eating, and sanitation, for at least ninety (90) days in any calendar
year.
   PATIO: A covered or uncovered, surfaced outdoor living area located at grade
and accessible from a dwelling.
   PERMIT: See definition of rental permit.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust
or estate.
   PLACARD: A display document showing that the unit for which it is issued has
been determined to be unfit for human habitation.
   PLUMBING: Means and includes any or all of the following supplied facilities
and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, solid waste
disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, water heating devices, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar
supplied fixture, together with all connections to water, sanitary sewer or gas
services.
   PORCH: A platform completely covered by a roof located and attached to a
building.
   PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, including a building(s) and/or
accessory structure(s) thereon.
   PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit a person or persons
to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference by
unwanted persons.
   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN: The property management action plan shall
be a detailed written response from the property owner or owner's designated
agent describing the manner in which the property owner will, within their
legal authority, make a good faith effort to prevent nuisance activities from
continuing. The plan shall be filed with the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services for approval within ten (10) working days from the date of
the notice of violation sent to the owner or owner's designated agent.
   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: A cash deposit, certified check
or irrevocable standby letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of
the enforcement costs, to be determined by the City Manager or designee.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any parcel of land, unobstructed from the ground to the sky,
more than ten feet (10') in width, dedicated to the free passage of the general
public.
   RECREATION ROOM IN BASEMENT: A room located in a basement used for general
recreation purposes and not used, nor intended to be used, for sleeping. This
room shall be in addition to the minimum space and facility requirements for a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   REGULATIONS: See definition of rules and regulations.
   RENTAL PERMIT: A document, issued periodically, which grants the owner or
operator the option of letting a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or type
III dwelling unit for rental purposes and showing that the dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, or type III dwelling unit for which it is issued was in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter at the time of
issuance.
   RENTAL PROPERTY: Any dwelling not owner occupied, regardless whether rent is
paid.
   ROOMER: An occupant of a rooming unit who is not an owner occupant.
   ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling containing two (2) or more rooming units or type
III dwelling units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to four (4)
or more roomers. Occupants of units specifically designated as type III
dwelling units within a rooming house shall be included in the roomer count.
Any dwelling with a combination of dwelling units, rooming units, and type III
dwelling units is considered a nonconforming rooming house. A rooming house is
classified as an independent group living use in title 14 of this Code.
   ROOMING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms
located within a group living use, as defined in title 14 of this Code, and
forming a single private unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
used by a roomer or roomers for living and sleeping, but not cooking.
   RUBBISH: Inorganic waste material consisting of combustible and/or
noncombustible materials.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS: Those administrative procedures adopted by the
Director for the efficient internal management of the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services. All rules and regulations shall be limited to departmental
administrative and procedural matters, rather than substantive matters and
shall not be inconsistent with this chapter.
   SHARED LIVING SPACE: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms, not including bedrooms, located within a household living use, as
defined in title 14 of this Code.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure containing one dwelling unit.
   SOLID WASTE: Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food and shall also mean combustible
waste material. The term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings and other combustible
materials.
   SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A watertight container that is constructed of metal
or other durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being
serviced without creating unsanitary conditions.
   SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, motor home or other structure used for
human shelter and designed to be transportable and not attached to the ground,
to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises. Such
temporary housing may occur for no more than twenty one (21) consecutive days
nor exceed a total of forty five (45) days in any calendar year.
   TENANT: Any occupant of a dwelling unit who is not an owner or operator of
said dwelling unit or who is entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a
dwelling unit to the exclusion of another.
   TO LET: The granting, either in writing or orally, by the owner or operator
to another the right to possess a dwelling, a dwelling unit, a rooming unit, or
a type III dwelling unit.
   TOILET: A water closet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, of such
shape and form and holding a sufficient quantity of water so that no fecal
matter will collect on the surface of the bowl and equipped with a flushing rim
or flushing rims.
   TYPE III DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which
are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating of
meals but does not have a toilet or bath available for the exclusive use of the
occupants thereof. (1978 Code §17-2; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 02-4052, 11-5-2002;
Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003; Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff.
1-1-2018; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 23-4917, 11-21-2023; Ord. 25-4943, 1-7-
2025)
17-5-4: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dwellings within the
jurisdiction of the City used or intended to be used for human occupancy,
except said provisions shall not be applicable to "temporary housing", as
defined herein. (1978 Code §17-1)
17-5-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The City, in compliance with the requirements of the Code of Iowa, as amended,
hereby adopts the December 17, 1979, version of the "Housing Quality Standards"
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(24 CFR section 882.109[a] through [l]) as the adopted Model Housing Code for
the City, as amended. The City has integrated the housing quality standard in
sections
17-5-1 through
17-5-20 of this chapter, which provisions, to be enforced by the City, are as
stringent as, or more stringent than, those in the Model Housing Code as
adopted. (1978 Code §17-1; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The inspector is hereby authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
the housing code and to make inspections to determine the condition of all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, structures and premises located
within the city, in order that the inspector may perform the duty of
safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and
of the general public under the provisions of the housing code. (1978 Code §17-
3)
17-5-7: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspection Of Owner Occupied, Single-Family Dwellings: Inspections of
owner occupied, single-family dwellings shall occur only upon request or
complaint to the inspector, and only the standards of sections
17-5-17,
17-5-19 and
17-5-20 of this chapter shall be applicable.
   B.   Inspections Of Structure Items: The provisions of sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter in effect at the time of issuance of a certificate of
structure compliance shall be the only structure standards applicable to a
dwelling. Upon the issuance of a certificate of structure compliance, there
shall be no further inspection and enforcement of the structure items under
sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter.
   C.   Maintenance Inspections: Inspections of the provisions of section
17-5-19 of this chapter shall be conducted upon request, on a complaint basis
and/or through a program of regular rental inspections. Regular inspections
shall be conducted as determined by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Right To Access By Inspector:
      1.   The inspector is hereby authorized to conduct consensual inspections
of any dwelling within Iowa City in order to perform the duty of safeguarding
the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants or the public. Whenever
necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the housing
code or whenever the inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises any condition
which makes such unit or premises in violation of any provision of the housing
code or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of a provision of
the housing code may exist, the inspector may enter such unit or premises at
all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon
the inspector by the housing code, provided if such unit or premises be
occupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and
request entry. The inspector and/or authorized representative shall, at such
time: a) identify themselves and their positions; and b) explain why entry is
sought.
      2.   If entry is refused, the inspector shall request that the inspection
be conducted at a reasonable time, suitable to the owner or occupant. If the
request for future entry is refused, the inspector shall, at that time or at a
later time, explain to the owner and/or occupant that: a) the occupant may
refuse, without penalty, entry without a search warrant; and b) the inspector
may apply to the magistrate for a search warrant.
   E.   Search Warrant: If consent to inspect a building is withheld by any
person having the lawful right to exclude, the inspector may apply to a
magistrate of the Iowa district court in and for county for a search warrant of
the building. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or
control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure or premises
shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to properly
permit entry therein by the inspector or authorized representative for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the housing code. (1978 Code
§17-3)
17-5-8: ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR FOR MAINTENANCE:
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall, upon proper
notice, give access to the owner, operator or agent or employee to any part of
such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at all reasonable times
for the purpose of effecting such maintenance, making such repairs or making
such alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with, or any lawful
notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of the housing code. (1978
Code §17-3)
17-5-9: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Whenever the inspector, in the enforcement of the housing code, finds that a
condition exists which requires immediate action to protect the health or
safety of the occupants and/or the general public, the inspector may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such a condition
and requiring that action be taken such as the inspector deems necessary to
abate the condition. If necessary, the director may order that the premises be
vacated forthwith, and said premises shall not be reoccupied until the order to
make repairs has been complied with. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately or in the time and manner
prescribed by the order itself. (1978 Code §17-3)
Notwithstanding section
17-5-11 of this chapter, rent shall be abated if the inspector issues an
emergency order for failure to comply with this chapter and the owner fails to
repair the condition giving rise to the order within five (5) days. Rent
abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the tenant. The
effective date of the abatement is the date the inspector issues the emergency
order. Notice to the owner and tenant of the rent abatement shall be given in
the same manner as in section
17-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
17-5-10: PLACARDING OF STRUCTURES; CONDEMNATION REFERRALS:
   A.   Placarding Procedures: Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
found to be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin
infested that it creates a hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or
of the public shall be determined to be unfit for human habitation and shall be
so designated and placarded by the Director.
   B.   Order To Vacate Placarded Dwelling: Any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or any portion thereof placarded as being unfit for human
habitation by the Director shall be vacated immediately or as ordered by the
Director. (1978 Code §17-3)
   C.   Approval Required To Reoccupy Placarded Dwelling: No dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit or portion thereof which has been placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall be used for human habitation again until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Director. The
Director shall remove such placard whenever the defect(s) for which the
dwelling was placarded has been eliminated.
   D.   Removal Of Placard Prohibited: No person shall deface or remove a
placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which has been deemed
unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in
subsection C of this section. (1978 Code §17-3; amd. 1994 Code)
   E.   Condemnation Referral: After a reasonable period of time after a
property has been placarded and no remedial action begun, the City may pursue
condemnation consistent with this Code and the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-4648, 11-
10-2015)
   F.   Rent Abatement: Notwithstanding section
17-5-11 of this chapter, rent shall be abated if the Director placards the
dwelling unit for violation of this chapter for more than five (5) consecutive
days. Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the tenant.
The effective date of the abatement is the date the dwelling unit was
placarded. Notice to the owner and tenant of the rent abatement shall be given
in the same manner as in section
17-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
17-5-11: RENT ABATEMENT:
   A.   The building official may order rent abated when the building official
determines that the owner has, after issuance of a notice of violation of this
chapter:
      1.   Failed to provide an essential service (water, sewer, electricity,
heat);
      2.   Failed to remedy a condition that poses a substantial risk to the
health or safety of the tenant; or
      3.   Rented a dwelling unit without a rental permit.
   B.   Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the
tenant. Rent shall be abated until the condition for which rent abatement was
ordered has, in the judgment of the building official, been remedied.
   C.   The building official shall provide a copy of the rent abatement order
to the owner at the address on the rental permit and to the tenant by U.S. mail
and by posting the entrance door to dwelling unit. Notice of termination of the
rent abatement order will be given in the same manner. (Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-
2017)
17-5-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The inspector shall make all rules and regulations available to the general
public. Standard forms and blank notices shall also be available upon request.
(1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-13: APPEALS BOARD; VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Jurisdiction Of Appeals Board:
      1.   Appeals to the Appeals Board may be taken by any person affected by
any decision of the Director or designee or by any written notice. Any person
wishing to seek a variance to this chapter may petition the Appeals Board for
relief. (Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003)
      2.   If the Appeals Board sustains or modifies a decision or a notice, it
shall be deemed to be an order, and the owner, operator or occupant, as the
case may require, shall comply with all provisions of such order within a
reasonable period of time which shall be determined by the Appeals Board. (1978
Code §17-3; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-2003)
   B.   Appeals Board Procedures:
      1.   The Appeals Board, upon receipt of an appeal request and payment of
the filing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, shall set a
time and a place for the hearing. The applicant shall be advised, in writing,
of such time and place at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of
the hearing.
      2.   At such a hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity to be
heard and to show cause as to why such notice or order should be modified,
extended, revoked or why a variance should be granted.
      3.   The Appeals Board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify, extend
or revoke a notice to grant or deny a variance.
      4.   The appeals board may grant variances or extensions of time to make
repairs. In the event that an extension and/or variance is granted, the appeals
board shall observe the following conditions:
         a.   In lieu of or in addition to administrative extensions, the
appeals board may grant an extension or extensions of time for the compliance
of any order or notice, provided the appeals board makes specific findings of
fact based on evidence relating to the following:
            (1)   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order; and
            (2)   Such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
         b.   Except under extraordinary circumstances, the extension or sum of
extensions shall not exceed eighteen (18) months.
         c.   The appeals board may grant a variance in a specific case and
from a specific provision of this chapter, subject to appropriate conditions,
and provided the appeals board makes specific findings of fact based on the
evidence presented on the record as a whole and relate to the following:
            (1)   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out a strict letter of any notice or order; and
            (2)   Due to the particular circumstances presented, the effect of
the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
            (3)   An extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for
these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in this arbitrary effect;
and
            (4)   Such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
         d.   Upon appeal or by petition, the appeals board shall consider the
adoption of a general variance. The appeals board, by a majority vote, may
establish a general variance for existing structures which cannot practicably
meet the standards of the code. Prior to considering any general variance,
public notice shall be given. A general variance, if granted, shall:
            (1)   State in what manner the variance from the specific provision
(s) is to be allowed; and
            (2)   State the conditions under which the variance is to be made;
and
            (3)   Be based upon specific findings of fact based on evidence
related to the following:
               (A)   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
in carrying out the strict letter of the specific provision, common to
dwellings, dwelling units or rooming units to which the variance will apply;
and
               (B)   Such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
         e.   The effective date of the variance shall be thirty (30) calendar
days after notification to the city council unless vetoed by an extraordinary
majority of the city council during said thirty (30) day period. (1978 Code
§17-3; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-14: INFORMATIONAL DISCLOSURE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM:
Beginning with written or oral rental agreements entered into after the
effective date hereof, the owner or operator and all tenants, excluding minor
dependents of a tenant under the lease, shall execute an informational
disclosure and acknowledgement form, which is prepared by the city department
of housing inspection services, that provides the following:
   A.   The maximum occupancy limit of the dwelling unit as established by the
city if said limit is available. The maximum occupancy limit is available for
purposes of this section if it is on the housing and inspection services web
page on the city web site at the link entitled "rental permit". Owners,
operators, and tenants may access said limit via the internet or by telephoning
the housing and inspection services department or by visiting housing and
inspection services department personally. Owners, operators, and tenants have
the affirmative duty to determine whether the maximum occupancy limit is
available.
   B.   The names of the tenants, pursuant to the rental agreement, who may
occupy said unit.
   C.   Acknowledgment that the owner, operator, and tenant are responsible for
complying with the maximum occupancy limits prescribed by this Code and that
violation of the maximum occupancy limits can result in a fine to the owner,
operator, and/or tenant. The informational disclosure and acknowledgment form
shall further contain a statement that nothing in the document shall prevent an
owner or operator from limiting the number of tenants in a dwelling unit to
less than the maximum allowable occupancy permitted by this Code.
   D.   Identification of specific nonhabitable spaces and rooms that cannot be
used for sleeping purposes.
   E.   Acknowledgment of allowed parking, if any, and acknowledgment that
there is no parking on the grass or on the public sidewalk.
   F.   Trash and recycling requirements, but only if the rental property is
four (4) dwelling units or less.
   G.   A recitation of the language of section
8-5-5 of this Code, the crime of disorderly house.
   H.   City website address.
   I.   Contact information for the City of Iowa City Neighborhood Services
Coordinator.
   J.   Information on where to locate the Iowa Residential Landlord Tenant Law
1  including a website.
   K.   Who is responsible for snow removal and lawn mowing. (Ord. 02-4052, 11-
5-2002)
   L.   Information concerning the Iowa law on rental deposits as follows: 1)
the right of the landlord to withhold from the rental deposit such amounts as
are reasonably necessary to restore the premises to the condition at the
commencement of the tenancy, including the university off campus website or
another website that provides a checklist for documenting the condition of the
premises; and 2) the requirement that the tenant provide the landlord with the
tenant's mailing address or delivery instructions for return of the rental
deposit. (Ord. 11-4430, 5-17-2011)
   M.   Notification of the availability of a map showing whether the unit is
in a floodplain and a link to the map. (Ord. 16-4670, 7-19-2016)
The owner or operator shall provide a photocopy of the executed informational
disclosure and acknowledgment to the inspector upon request. (Ord. 02-4052, 11-
5-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 562A.
17-5-15: DESIGNATION AND REGISTRATION OF DESIGNATED AGENT:
Owners of rental property not residing in the County and/or condominium
associations shall designate and register with the City in the Office of the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services a "designated agent" located in
the County and empowered to represent a property owner(s) in matters concerning
compliance with the Iowa City Housing Code and as defined in section
17-5-3 of this chapter. Failure to designate and register a designated agent is
a violation of this chapter and may result in revocation of a rental permit.
(1978 Code §17-3)
17-5-16: CERTIFICATE OF STRUCTURE COMPLIANCE AND RENTAL PERMIT:
   A.   Certificate And Permit Required For Rental Property: It shall be a
violation of this Code for any person to let to another any dwelling, dwelling
unit, duplex, multiple dwelling, rooming unit, type III dwelling unit, or
rooming house, except the owner occupant who lets to no more than one tenant,
unless:
      1.   The owner or operator holds a valid certificate of structure
compliance, issued by the City, applicable to those portions of the specific
structure used for residential rental purposes.
      2.   The owner or operator holds a valid rental permit, issued by the
City in the name of the owner or operator, applicable to those portions of the
specific structure used for residential rental purposes.
The one tenant exception provided herein is limited to one tenant per dwelling
unit regardless of the number of owner occupants. By way of illustration, if
there are two (2) owner occupants in a single-family dwelling, a rental permit
is required if there are two (2) or more tenants.
   B.   Certificate Of Structure Compliance:
      1.   Scope Of Certificate; Transfers; Contents: The certificate of
structure compliance shall be a permanent document, except as noted below,
which, when issued, shall satisfy the requirements of sections 17-5-17 and 17-
5-18 of this chapter. The certificate shall be transferable at the time of a
change in ownership and shall remain a part of the Iowa City property file as a
matter of public record. The certificate, in and of itself, shall not be
interpreted as granting the owner or operator the privilege of letting the
structure for residential occupancy but must be accompanied by a valid rental
permit. The certificate of structure compliance shall state the date of
issuance, type of structure for which the certificate is being issued and
street address of the structure to which it is applicable. All dwelling units
and rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid certificate
of structure compliance or application for the same on file with the City and
fees paid may be ordered vacated.
      2.   Application For Certificate: The owner or operator shall file, in
duplicate, an application for a certificate of structure compliance with the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services on application forms provided by
the inspector.
      3.   Issuance Of Certificate: When the provisions of sections
17-5-17 and
17-5-18 of this chapter have been complied with by the owner or operator, the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services shall issue a certificate of
structure compliance upon payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
      4.   Revocation Of Certificate: The certificate of structure compliance
shall be permanent, except when there has been fraud, collusion or illegality
in the inspection process applicable to this certificate of structure
compliance or when there exists a material and substantial noncompliance with
section
17-5-17 or
17-5-18 of this chapter which directly affects the health and/or safety of the
occupants therein. The inspector or any other individual who believes that
there exists grounds for revocation may petition the Appeals Board to revoke
the certificate of structure compliance. The burden of proof shall be upon the
party seeking the revocation. The owner or operator of the affected property
shall be properly notified of the petition for revocation and shall be notified
of the date, place and time of the Appeals Board's consideration of the
petition and may appear and defend. Upon final determination by the Appeals
Board, a certificate of structure compliance may be modified to reflect the
compliance of each dwelling unit and/or rooming unit with sections
17-5-17 and/or
17-5-18 of this chapter or may be revoked in whole or in part.
   C.   Rental Permit:
      1.   Scope Of Permit; Transfers; Contents: A rental permit shall be a
document indicating compliance with section
17-5-19 of this chapter at the time of issuance and shall be valid for a
specified period of time. The document shall be transferable from one owner or
operator to another at any time prior to its expiration, termination or
revocation. The owner or operator shall notify the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services of any change of interest or ownership in the property
within thirty (30) calendar days of any conveyance or transfer of interest
affecting the property and provide the name and address of all persons who have
acquired an interest therein. In the event that the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services has not been notified of such conveyance or transfer within
the designated period of time, the rental permit shall be transferred from one
owner or operator to another only upon payment of a fee, the amount of which
shall be established by resolution of the City Council which shall be assessed
to the new owner or operator. The rental permit shall state the date of
issuance, the address of the structure to which it is applicable, the name of
the new owner or operator to which it is applicable, and its new expiration
date. The rental permit shall also state the maximum occupancy and the
telephone number for the property owner or designated agent. All dwelling units
and rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid rental
permit may be ordered vacated.
      2.   Application For Permit: The owner or operator shall file, in
duplicate, an application for rental permit with the Department of Housing and
Inspection Services on application forms provided by the inspector.
      3.   Issuance Of Permit:
         a.   When all provisions of section
17-5-19 of this chapter have been complied with by the owner or operator, the
Department of Housing and Inspection Services shall issue a rental permit upon
payment of all permit and reinspection fees, the amounts of which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council. However, unless the Director
determines there is good cause, the rental permit shall not be issued if there
are any open building permits on the property, if there are any unpaid
judgments entered against the owner in a Municipal infraction for a Code
violation on the property or on any other rental property of the owner, or if
the owner has failed to cure a violation on the property or on any other rental
property of the owner as ordered by the court.
         b.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter:
            (1)   The City shall not issue a rental permit for any single-
family dwelling or duplex to an owner occupant unless said owner has provided
written documentation showing a bona fide intent, as reasonably determined by
the Director, to vacate the dwelling for a minimum period of one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days.
            (2)   Such documentation shall include, but is not limited to:
transfer of employment, acceptance of new employment, military orders,
acceptance to an educational institution, executed purchase agreement for a
single-family or other residential unit, executed lease for a single-family or
other residential unit, and marriage license.
            (3)   The rental permit shall be revoked if the owner fails to
vacate the dwelling within one hundred eighty (180) days of its issuance.
            (4)   No rental permit issued to an owner occupant between January
1, 2018 and the effective date of this subsection C3b shall be renewed unless
the owner occupant meets the requirements set forth herein.
            (5)   With respect to this provision, the Board of Appeals does not
have authority to hear an appeal of a decision to deny or revoke a rental
permit, grant a variance, or grant any other relief.
      4.   Expiration Of Permit; Extensions: Rental permits shall be valid
through the expiration date contained thereon. However, extensions shall be
granted to cover any time period between the stated expiration date and the
period of time permitted by the inspector to remedy any violations cited
subsequent to a maintenance inspection, provided a rental application is on
file with fees paid, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months.
      5.   Required Procedures Prior To Commencement Of Rental Permit
Sanctions:
         a.   Following a violation that serves as a basis for rental permit
sanctions, written notice shall be given by the City to the owner or owner's
designated agent of the premises at which the Code violations occurred. The
notice is to be sent by regular mail.
         b.   Following a second violation that serves as a basis for rental
permit sanctions within a twelve (12) month period, the City shall schedule a
Code compliance settlement meeting involving landlords, tenants, and others
whose corrective action is considered necessary by the City to abate and avoid
further Code violations. The notice of the meeting is to be sent by regular
mail within ten (10) working days of the City providing notice to the owner or
owner's agent as required above.
            (1)   The desired outcome of the Code compliance settlement meeting
will be to obtain a Code compliance settlement agreement in which relevant
parties, including the owner or owner's designated agent and the tenant(s),
agree to take corrective action to abate and avoid further Code violations.
            (2)   The owner, owner's designated agent, and/or tenant is in
violation of this provision under the following circumstances:
               (A)   Does not attend a Code compliance settlement meeting.
               (B)   Fails or refuses to sign a Code compliance settlement
agreement within forty eight (48) hours of receiving the proposed agreement
from the City.
               (C)   Subsequently fails or refuses to comply with any
conditions or requirements set forth in a Code compliance settlement agreement.
            (3)   Violation of this provision authorizes the City to impose
rental permit sanctions. The City in its determination may consider, without
limitation, the following factors:
               (A)   Level of cooperation of the parties in attempting to
resolve issues.
               (B)   Level of disturbance associated with the violations.
               (C)   Impact of violations upon neighbors or other victims.
               (D)   Degree to which parties have taken reasonable steps to try
and resolve problems.
               (E)   History of City and State Code violations.
            (4)   Violation of this provision authorizes the City to issue
Municipal infraction citations to any tenant, whose corrective action is
considered necessary by the City to abate and avoid further Code violations,
who fails to attend, refuses to sign or subsequently fails or refuses to comply
with conditions or requirements set forth in a Code compliance settlement
agreement.
         c.   Effective July 1, 2018, the twelve (12) month period of time in
subsection C5b of this section shall be twenty four (24) months.
      6.   Defenses To An Enforcement Action Of The Provisions Of This Section:
It shall be a defense to an enforcement action pursuant to the provisions of
this section if an owner or owner's designated agent has:
         a.   Reported the violation to law enforcement;
         b.   Evicted or attempted to evict by commencing and pursuing with due
diligence all legal remedies to evict those tenants charged with one of the
specified violations. It is not the intention of this provision to apply to
tenants who have not been charged with one of the specified violations;
         c.   Undertaken and pursued with due diligence, reasonable means to
avoid a recurrence of Code violations on the premises by the present and future
tenants or occupants of the premises; or
         d.   Executed a property management action plan.
The defenses set forth in this section shall not be available to any person who
fails to attend a Code compliance settlement meeting.
      7.   Rental Permit Sanctions:
Comment: Sanctions may be applied to an individual dwelling unit, the entire
rental dwelling, or the premises. Each separate violation shall count as a
basis for a rental permit sanction unless the owner qualifies for a defense to
enforcement under subsection C6 of this section. The following sanctions may be
imposed upon a rental permit:
         a.   Reduced term rental permit (1 year rental permit);
         b.   Suspension of rental permit; and
         c.   Revocation of rental permit.
      8.   Reduced Term Rental Permits: The Director may issue a reduced term
rental permit with conditions for any of the following reasons:
         a.   The owner, any occupant, and/or any of their guests on two (2) or
more separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period of time have been
issued criminal complaints for violations of the following provisions of the
Iowa Code, this Code or United States Code on the premises of a rental
property:
            (1)   Iowa Code chapter 124, sections 401 and 403 (controlled
substance).
            (2)   Iowa Code chapter 708, sections 708.1 (assault), 708.3
(assault while participating in a felony), 708.4 (wilful injury), 708.6
(terrorism), 708.11 (stalking).
            (3)   Iowa Code chapter 724, sections 724.3 (unauthorized
possession of offensive weapons), 724.16 (trafficking in stolen weapons),
724.30 (reckless use of a firearm).
            (4)   Iowa Code chapter 123, sections 123.46 (consumption or
intoxication in public places), 123.47 (possession of alcohol under legal age).
            (5)   Iowa Code chapter 716, sections 716.3 (criminal mischief in
the first degree), 716.4 (criminal mischief in the second degree), 716.5
(criminal mischief in the third degree), 716.6 (criminal mischief in the fourth
degree), 716.6A (criminal mischief in violation of individual rights), 716.7
(trespass).
            (6)   Iowa Code chapter 719, section 719.1 (interference with
official acts).
            (7)   Iowa Code chapter 723, sections 723.1 (riot), 723.4
(disorderly conduct).
            (8)   Title 13, United States Code, sections 841, 842, 843, 844,
846, 856, and 861 (controlled substances).
            (9)   Section
4-5-3, "Consumption Or Possession In Public Places And City Buildings", of this
Code.
            (10)   Section
4-5-4, "Regulation Of Persons Under Legal Age", of this Code.
            (11)   Title 6, chapter 4, "Noise Control", of this Code.
            (12)   Section
8-5-1, "Disorderly Conduct", of this Code.
            (13)   Subsection
8-5-3C, "Obstructing Officers", of this Code.
            (14)   Section
8-5-4, "Damaging, Defacing Property", of this Code.
            (15)   Section
8-5-5, "Keeping Disorderly House", of this Code.
            (16)   Section
8-5-6, "Indecent Exposure", of this Code.
            (17)   Section
8-5-13, "Public Urination And Defecation", of this Code.
         b.   The owner, any occupant, and/or any of their guests on three (3)
or more separate occasions within a period of twelve (12) months have been
issued Municipal citations or written notices of violations for the following
provisions of this Code on the premises of a rental property:
            (1)   This title, "Building And Housing".
            (2)   Title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code.
            (3)   Title 6, chapter 1, "Nuisances", of this Code.
            (4)   Title 6, chapter 3, "Weed Control", of this Code.
            (5)   Title 6, chapter 9, "Graffiti", of this Code.
         c.   On two (2) or more separate occasions within a twelve (12) month
period of time, there is a founded complaint against a tenant. "Founded
complaint" means the issuance of a Municipal infraction against a tenant for
violation of subsection
 8-5-5C, "Civil Sanction", of this Code or evidence sufficient to issue a
criminal complaint for violation of subsection
 8-5-5A, "Simple Misdemeanor", of this Code had a police officer been able to
identify a tenant who was present.
The reduced term rental permit will be a one year rental permit required to be
renewed annually. This sanction shall be in effect for a period of not less
than four (4) years and annual licensing inspections and fees are required. The
Director may require any of the following with the issuance of a reduced term
rental permit: compliance with Iowa Code and/or City codes; submittal of a copy
of the current lease agreement; payment of all City fees; payment of all court
costs and fines; execution of a property management action plan; provision of a
property management performance guarantee; and any other information the City
deems necessary for enforcement of any provision of the Iowa Code or this Code.
         d.   Effective July 1, 2018, the twelve (12) month period of time in
subsections C8a, C8b, and C8c of this section shall be twenty four (24) months.
      9.   Basis For Suspension Of Rental Permit: The Director may suspend a
rental permit for any of the following reasons:
         a.   Failure to comply with the conditions of the reduced term rental
permit.
         b.   Failure to comply with a court decision concerning the violation
of any provision of section
17-5-19 of this chapter.
         c.   Adjudication by the court that the owner, owner's designated
agent, or persons acting on behalf of the owner has: 1) violated the maximum
occupancy provisions of this Code; 2) illegally used or allowed the illegal use
of nonhabitable or nonoccupiable space; or 3) illegally converted space to
habitable use.
         d.   Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
         e.   Failure to comply with any emergency order or placarding of a
structure.
         f.   Additional violations by the tenants or owner of the Iowa Code,
this Code, or United States Code occur within one year of the conditions
imposed pursuant to the reduced term rental permit.
         g.   Failure by the owner to pay a judgment or to cure a violation as
ordered by the court in a Municipal infraction for a Code violation on the
property or on any other rental property of the owner. The rental permit shall
be reinstated upon payment of the judgment or abatement of the violation.
A rental permit shall be suspended for no more than one hundred eighty (180)
days beginning from the date of the Director's decision or a court ruling on a
Municipal infraction and no later than at the end of the current lease period
unless a property management plan is executed.
      10.   Basis For Revocation Of Rental Permit: The Director may revoke a
rental permit for any of the following reasons:
         a.   Failure to comply with an order to abate a dangerous building.
         b.   Failure to comply with an emergency order or placarding of a
structure.
         c.   Failure to comply with suspension of rental permit.
         d.   More than one basis for rental permit suspension within two (2)
years of the reinstated permit previously having been suspended.
         e.   The owner or owner's designated agent convicted for making false
statements on a rental permit application, and/or informational disclosure and
acknowledgment form.
A rental permit shall be revoked for not less than one year beginning from the
date of the Director's decision or a court ruling on a Municipal infraction.
      11.   Reinstatement Of Rental Permit:
         a.   Suspended Permit: A suspended permit shall be reinstated upon
completion of the suspension period and execution of a property management
action plan.
         b.   Revoked Permit: An application for a new permit may be made after
one year from the date revocation was effective. The application shall be
processed in the same manner as an initial rental permit application, and
requires execution of a property management action plan.
         c.   Transfer Of Ownership: Transfer of ownership does not modify or
alter any sanction imposed unless approved by the City or unless the transfer
is an arm's length transaction between disinterested parties as determined by
the City.
      12.   Exemption: Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the rental
permit sanctions are inapplicable to victims of abuse or crime as provided in
HF 493 (2016) to be codified at section 562A.27B of the Iowa Code.
      13.   Temporary Rental Permits: The City may issue a temporary rental
permit for a maximum of twenty four (24) months if the owner is an individual:
a) 1) who has been occupying the dwelling; 2) who intends to return to the
dwelling; and 3) whose absence is due to a sabbatical, an extended vacation,
spending winter months in a warmer climate, military service, a volunteer
commitment, employment, or substantially similar reason; or b) who occupied the
dwelling at the time of death and the owner's heir(s) occupies or intends to
occupy the dwelling.
   D.   Hearing Upon Denial Of Certificate Or Permit: Any person whose
application for a certificate of structure compliance or rental permit has been
denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the
Appeals Board. Application for the appeal hearing must be made within ten (10)
calendar days of receipt of the written notice of denial.
   E.   Short-Term Rentals. The requirements for a short-term rental property
are as follows:
      1.   Short-term rental property means: Any individually or collectively
owned single-family house or dwelling unit; any unit or group of units in a
condominium, cooperative, or timeshare; or an owner-occupied residential home
that is offered for a fee of thirty (30) days or less. Short-term rental
property does not include a unit that is used for any retail, restaurant,
banquet space, event center, or other similar use.
      2.   It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to let to
another a short-term rental property unless the owner or operator holds a valid
rental permit issued by the City.
      3.   All provisions in Sections 17-5-16A, B, C, and D of this chapter
apply to short-term rental permits except that no application or inspection fee
may be charged.
      4.   The owner or operator shall provide a "designated agent" as set
forth in Section
17-5-15 of this chapter. (1978 Code §17-4; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 03-4082, 5-20-
2003; Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; Ord. 12-4468, 3-20-2012; Ord. 12-4496, 9-18-2012;
Ord. 16-4669, 7-19-2016; Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 18-4769,
9-18-2018; Ord. 20-4832, 10-20-2020; Ord. 23-4892, 1-10-2023)
17-5-17: MINIMUM STRUCTURE STANDARDS FOR ALL DWELLINGS:
   A.   Safety Of Supplied Facility: Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or required utility shall be constructed and/or installed so that it
will function safely.
   B.   Kitchens: Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen room or kitchenette
equipped with the following:
      1.   An approved kitchen sink.
      2.   Space capable of properly accommodating a refrigerator and a stove
or range.
      3.   Proper access terminals to utilities necessary to properly operate a
refrigerator and stove or range.
      4.   Adequate space for the storage and preparation of food.
   C.   Toilets, Baths And Lavatories:
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall contain the following:
         a.   A toilet.
         b.   A bath.
         c.   A lavatory basin within or adjacent to the room containing the
toilet.
      2.   Every toilet and every bath shall be contained within a room or
within separate rooms which afford privacy for a person within said rooms.
(1978 Code §
   D.   Water Heating Facilities: Every kitchen sink, bath and lavatory basin
required in accordance with the provisions of the housing code shall be
properly connected with supplied water heating facilities. Every supplied water
heating facility shall be properly connected and shall be capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at every kitchen sink and lavatory basin required under the provisions of
the housing code at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten degrees
Fahrenheit (110°F) (43°C). Such supplied water heating facilities shall be
capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the required space
heating facilities are not in operation. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
   E.   Connection Of Sanitary Facilities To Water And Sanitary Sewer Systems:
Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin, bath and clothes washer shall be
properly connected to an approved water and sanitary sewer system.
   F.   Exits:
      1.   Every structure containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units or
structure containing a rooming unit or rooming units or a combination thereof
shall comply with the following exit requirements:
         a.   Every structure or usable portion thereof shall have at least one
exit.
         b.   Single-family and duplex structures over three thousand (3,000)
square feet in gross floor area shall have access to two (2) exits.
         c.   Multiple dwellings and rooming houses with an occupant load of
ten (10) or more shall have access to two (2) exits.
         d.   Where only one exit is required, it shall be a continuous and
unobstructed means of egress which discharges directly or via corridors or
stairways to a public way. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
         e.   Where at least two (2) exits are required, they shall be
independent, unobstructed means of egress remote from each other, and both
shall discharge directly or via corridors or stairways or both to a public way
or yard. If both means of egress are designated to a common corridor, they
shall be in opposite directions immediately upon exiting the dwelling unit or
rooming unit, except a common path of travel may be permitted for the first
twenty feet (20'). Dead end corridors shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in
length. Any existing fire escape shall not be deemed a sufficient means of
egress unless it is in compliance with appendix A of this chapter. Any new fire
escape must meet the requirements of the city building and fire codes. (Ord.
08-4315, 9-9-2008)
         f.   Basements and floors above the second story shall have not less
than two (2) exits, except when such floors or basements are used exclusively
for the service of the building. Dwelling units and/or rooming units in a
basement may have access to only one common exit when the occupant load served
by that exit does not exceed ten (10). Escape and rescue window(s) must be
supplied for each sleeping room. Such window(s) shall comply with the building
code specifications. Existing third floor and attic areas less than five
hundred (500) square feet may be used as habitable rooms if the following
conditions are met: 1) one exit fully meets building code requirements to the
outside of the building; 2) the other exit can be an attic fire escape 1 . If
access to the attic fire escape is through a window, such window must meet the
building code requirements for escape and rescue windows.
         g.   Every doorway providing ingress or egress from any dwelling unit,
rooming unit or habitable room shall be at least six feet, four inches high and
two feet, four inches wide (6'4" x 2'4").
      2.   Every means of egress shall comply with the following requirements:
         a.   Stairways: All stairways comprised of four (4) or more risers
shall be provided with a substantial and safe handrail. New construction or
remodeling shall comply with the city building code.
         b.   Guardrails: All unenclosed floor and roof openings, open and
glazed sides of landings and ramps, balconies or porches which are more than
thirty inches (30") above grade or above the floor below and any roof used for
other than service of the building shall be protected by a substantial and safe
guardrail. New construction or remodeling shall comply with the city building
code.
         c.   Riser And Tread: Every stairway shall have a uniform riser height
and uniform tread width which shall be adequate for safe use. (1978 Code §17-5;
amd. 1994 Code)
         d.   Exits: Doors and windows readily accessible from outside the unit
shall be lockable from inside the unit. Double cylinder deadbolts may not be
used on doors located in habitable areas or on any exit door. Exit doors shall
be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge
or effort. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
         e.   Escape Window: In basement units where one means of egress is a
window, such window shall have an unobstructed opening no less in area than
that required in the building and/or fire codes. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994
Code)
   G.   Natural Light:
      1.   Every habitable room, except a kitchen, shall have at least one
window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total glazed
window or skylight area, for every habitable room, except the kitchen, shall be
at least eight percent (8%) of the floor area of such room.
      2.   For the purpose of determining natural light and natural ventilation
requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when
one-half (1/2) of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and
provides an opening of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the floor area of the
interior room or twenty five (25) square feet, whichever is greater.
   H.   Ventilation:
      1.   Interior Air Quality: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be
free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sanitary
sewer gas, fuel gas, dust and other harmful air pollutants.
      2.   Natural Ventilation:
         a.   Every window or other device with openings to the outdoor space,
used for ventilation, shall be supplied with screens of not less than sixteen
(16) mesh per inch. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
         b.   The total openable window area, as measured between stops, in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor
area of such room. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-1995)
         c.   Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit
to outdoor space, the use of which is necessary to meet the minimum ventilation
requirements of this code, shall have a supplied screen or screens and a self-
closing device.
         d.   Every cellar window, soffit or roof vent used or intended to be
used for ventilation and every other opening to a cellar, crawl space or
interior roof area which might provide an entry for rodents or birds shall be
supplied with a heavy wire screen of not larger than one-fourth inch (1/4")
mesh or such device as will effectively prevent entrance.
         e.   For natural ventilation, every bathroom or toilet compartment
shall have at least one openable window facing directly to the outdoors and at
least forty five percent (45%) of the window must be openable.
      3.   Mechanical Ventilation:
         a.   In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation, adequate
ventilation may be a system of mechanical ventilation which provides not less
than two (2) air changes per hour in all habitable rooms and/or bathrooms or
toilet compartments.
         b.   No mechanical exhaust system, exhausting vapors, gases or odors
shall be discharged into an attic, crawl space or cellar unless such attic,
crawl space or cellar is adequately vented to the outside.
         c.   Any kitchen or kitchenette lacking natural ventilation shall be
equipped with a system of mechanical ventilation which provides at least two
(2) air changes per hour in said room. The system shall exhaust and discharge
directly to outside air.
   I.   Heating:
      1.   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a temperature of at least sixty
eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°) (20°C) and shall be capable of maintaining in
all said locations a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°)
(18°C) at a distance of three feet (3') above the floor level at all times.
Such heating facilities shall be so designed and equipped that heat, as herein
specified, is available for all dwelling units and rooming units.
      2.   Every central heating unit, space heater, water heater and cooking
appliance shall be located and installed in such a manner so as to afford
reasonable protection against involvement of egress facilities or egress routes
in the event of uncontrolled fire in the structure.
      3.   Every fuel burning heating unit or water heater shall be effectively
vented in a safe manner to a chimney or duct leading to the exterior of the
building. The chimney, duct and vent shall be of such design as to assure
proper draft and shall be adequately supported. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994
Code)
      4.   No fuel burning appliance shall be located within any sleeping room
or bathroom unless provided with adequate ducting for air supply from the
exterior, and the combustion chamber for such heating unit shall be sealed from
the room in an airtight manner.
      5.   Every steam or hot water boiler and every water heater shall be
protected against overheating by appropriate pressure and temperature limit
controls. Such controls shall have a properly installed extension pipe on the
pressure relief valve. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
      6.   Every fuel burning space heating unit and water heater shall be
equipped with an electronic ignition or with a pilot light and an automatic
control to interrupt the flow of fuel to the unit in the event of a failure of
the ignition device. All such heating units shall have a limit control to
prevent overheating.
   J.   Electrical Requirements:
      1.   Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate floor
type or wall type electric double convenience outlets which shall be situated a
distance apart equivalent to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the
perimeter of the room. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly
installed.
      2.   Every habitable room, toilet room, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room, basement and cellar shall contain at least one supplied ceiling type or
wall type electric light fixture or switched outlet. Every such outlet and
fixture shall be properly installed.
      3.   Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent
wiring. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
   K.   Minimum Space, Use And Location Requirements:
      1.   Floor Area Per Occupant:
         a.   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred twenty
(120) square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant thereof and
at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of habitable floor space for
every additional occupant thereof.
         b.   The floor area of that part of a room where the ceiling height is
less than five feet (5') shall not be considered when computing the total floor
area of the room. (Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
      2.   Maximum Occupancy: (Rep. by Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
      3.   Sleeping Rooms: In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms and
every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant
shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
forty (40) square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof,
except two (2) bedroom manufactured housing shall be required to have only one
bedroom in compliance with this section.
      4.   Ceiling Height: The ceiling height of every habitable room shall be
at least seven feet (7').
         a.   In any habitable room where the ceiling is a part of a sloping
roof, at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of
at least seven feet (7'). "Floor area", as stated above, shall mean the area of
the floor where the vertical measurement from floor to ceiling is five feet
(5') or more.
         b.   Obstructions of space by such items as water and gas pipes and
cabinetry shall be permitted when such obstructions are located within two feet
(2') of a partition or wall, do not interfere with normal ingress and egress,
would not interfere with an emergency ingress or egress and are approved by the
inspector. Obstruction of ceiling space shall be permitted when such
obstruction is located at a height of not less than six feet four inches (6'4")
from the floor and which does not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the cubic area of the space within a room further than six feet four inches
(6'4") from the floor. (1978 Code §17-5; amd. 1994 Code)
   L.   Fire Protection Equipment: All fire extinguishers and early warning
fire protection systems shall be properly installed according to the City Fire,
Building and Housing Codes. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  17-5-23 , appendix A of this chapter.
17-5-18: MINIMUM STRUCTURE STANDARDS FOR ALL RENTAL HOUSING:
   A.   Direct Access: Access to each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not
require first entering any other dwelling unit or rooming unit, except access
to rooming units may be through a living room or kitchen of a unit occupied by
the owner-operator of the structure. No dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements
that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by
occupants of more than one sleeping room or type III dwelling unit is available
only by going through another sleeping room or type III dwelling unit, nor
shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room or type III
dwelling unit is available only by going through another sleeping room or type
III dwelling unit. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as
the only passageway to any habitable room, hallway, basement, cellar or to the
exterior of the dwelling unit or rooming unit. (1978 Code §17-6)
   B.   Lighting Of Public Halls And Stairways:
      1.   Public passageways and stairways in dwellings accommodating two (2)
dwelling units or rooming units shall be provided with a convenient wall
mounted light switch(es) which activates an adequate lighting system.
      2.   Public passageways and stairways in buildings accommodating three
(3) or more dwelling units or rooming units shall be lighted at all times with
an artificial lighting system, in accordance with the City Building Code.
   C.   Fire Extinguishers: Fire extinguishers which are approved by the Fire
Marshal shall be provided within every single-family dwelling, dwelling unit
within a duplex and dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. Multiple
dwellings shall have fire extinguishers located within each laundry room and
central mechanical room; except where these rooms are contiguous, they may be
served by one fire extinguisher. Laundry rooms and central mechanical rooms
which are equipped with an automatic sprinkler system are exempt. The minimum
size fire extinguisher is a five (5) pound 2A 10BC. Fire extinguishers must be
properly mounted and in an area of easy access. Rooming houses are required to
have a five (5) pound 2A 10BC rated fire extinguisher supplied on each floor
level, including habitable basement areas, and in each kitchen. Fire
extinguishers supplied in areas of public access shall be contained within an
approved tamperproof cabinet.
   D.   Early Warning Fire Protection System:
      1.   All dwelling units and rooming units shall be provided with smoke
detectors as approved by the Fire Marshal. Smoke detectors shall be installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Dwelling units shall have
smoke detectors located on each floor level, including basements, in each
bedroom, and hallways serving bedrooms. Multi-family and rooming houses shall
have smoke detectors in common corridors, stair towers and stairways
constructed prior to 1978. Smoke detectors shall be operable at all times, and
when actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm for the dwelling unit(s) or
rooming unit(s). An owner or owner's agent of a multiple unit residential
building, rooming house, duplex or single-family dwelling shall supply light
emitting smoke detectors, upon request, for a tenant with a hearing impairment.
New construction and remodeling shall be in accordance with the City Building
Code.
      2.   Newly constructed dwellings with four (4) or more bedrooms shall
have interconnected smoke alarms (hardwired or wireless). Existing dwellings
that add one or more bedrooms shall have interconnected smoke alarms (hardwired
or wireless).
   E.   Toilets, Lavatory Basins And Baths:
      1.   At least one toilet and one lavatory basin shall be supplied for
each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a dwelling
containing a rooming unit or units and/or type III dwelling unit or units,
including members of the operator's family whenever they share the said
facilities, provided in a rooming house or where rooms or type III dwelling
units are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than
one-half (½) of the number of required toilets.
      2.   At least one bath shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or
fraction thereof residing within a dwelling containing a rooming unit or units
and/or type III dwelling unit or units, including members of the operator's
family whenever they share the use of said facilities.
      3.   Communal toilets and baths shall be located on the same floor or the
floor immediately above or below the rooming unit or type III dwelling unit.
(1978 Code §17-6)
   F.   Lead Based Paint: Every owner or operator of a dwelling unit or rooming
unit being let for rent and/or occupancy shall certify that the dwelling is in
accordance with HUD lead based paint regulations, 24 CFR, part 35, issued
pursuant to the Lead Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, as amended.
   G.   Communal Kitchens: If a communal kitchen is supplied, it shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen shall be sixty (60)
square feet.
      2.   The minimum floor area of a communal kitchen in which roomers are
permitted to prepare and eat meals shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   It shall contain a refrigerator with an adequate food storage
capacity.
      4.   It shall contain an approved kitchen sink.
      5.   It shall contain a stove or range.
      6.   It shall include at least one cabinet of adequate size suitable for
the storage of food and eating and cooking utensils.
      7.   It shall contain at least six (6) square feet of surface area easily
cleanable and suitable for the preparation of food.
      8.   It shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of
the facilities if a communal dining room is not supplied.
      9.   Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to
the occupants of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen, without
going outside the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming
unit of another occupant.
   H.   Communal Dining Rooms: Every dwelling or rooming house, within which
the occupant of any rooming unit is permitted to prepare meals or cook within a
communal kitchen containing less than one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area, as provided in subsection G of this section, shall contain a communal
dining room which complies with all of the following requirements:
      1.   Every communal dining room shall be located on the same floor of the
rooming house as the communal kitchen, and such dining room shall be as nearly
adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable.
      2.   Every communal dining room shall be located within a room accessible
to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing such dining room, without going
outside the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit
of another occupant.
      3.   It shall contain a table and adequate chairs for the normal use of
the facilities.
      4.   Every communal dining room shall contain not less than seventy (70)
square feet of floor area.
   I.   Shades, Draperies And Window Coverings:
      1.   Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in rooming units
and furnished dwelling units shall be supplied with shades, draperies or other
devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the
occupants.
      2.   Every window in rooms used for sleeping purposes in unfurnished
dwelling units shall be supplied with hardware necessary to support shades,
draperies or other devices or materials which, when properly used, will afford
privacy to the occupants.
   J.   Kitchen Stoves And Refrigerators: Kitchens or kitchenettes in multiple
dwellings, rooming houses and duplexes shall be supplied with a stove or range
and a refrigerator by the owner or operator.
   K.   Tie Downs: In the case of manufactured housing, the housing shall be
securely anchored by a tie down device which distributes and transfers the load
posed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind
overturning and sliding. (1978 Code §17-6)
   L.   Bedrooms; Maximum Allowed: Bedrooms cannot exceed thirty five percent
(35%) of the finished floor area of a single-family dwelling, duplex unit, or
accessory dwelling unit, not including floor area of a recreation room in the
basement. Any existing single family or duplex unit that contained lawful
bedroom space that exceeded this percentage cap prior to January 1, 2018 may
continue to be used as bedroom space. However, additional bedroom space may not
be added unless the unit is brought into full compliance with this standard.
This dimensional standard is subject to administrative review.
   M.   Bedrooms; Minimum Size: Bedrooms shall have a minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of total floor area. The floor area of that bedroom where the
ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered when
computing the total floor area of the bedroom. These dimensional requirements
are subject to administrative review. Any lawful bedroom/sleeping room greater
than or equal to seventy (70) square feet in existence prior to January 1, 2018
may continue to be used as a bedroom/sleeping room. However, if and when it is
brought into compliance with the current minimum dimensional requirements, it
may not be converted back to a substandard size.
   N.   Dimensional Requirements: Within household living uses, as defined in
title 14 of this Code, a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of shared
living space shall be provided for every bedroom within the dwelling unit. By
way of illustration, for a two-bedroom single-family dwelling, there must be at
least two hundred (200) square feet of shared living space within the dwelling.
Any lawful dwelling unit in existence prior to January 1, 2018 that is not in
compliance with this provision may continue as currently configured. However,
if and when the shared living space is brought into compliance with the current
minimum dimensional requirements, it may not be converted back to a substandard
size. Any change that would increase the noncompliance with this provision is
not allowed. This dimensional requirement is subject to administrative review.
   O.   Duplex; Units To Be Separated: The two (2) dwelling units of a duplex
must be physically and permanently separated, and the separation must be
continually maintained. By way of illustration, a duplex shall not have a door
that opens from one duplex unit directly into the other duplex unit.
   P.   Deadbolt Locks Required: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall
have a deadbolt lock that can be operated from inside and locked from the
outside.
      "Deadbolt" means a locking mechanism where the bolt cannot be moved to an
open position except by rotating the locked cylinder.
   Q.   Improved Surface In Rear Yard; Restrictions: After November 21, 2017,
an improved surface shall not be constructed, installed, or established on the
rear yard of a single-family dwelling or a duplex, except within the first
twenty feet (20') of lot depth as measured from the rear lot line and setback
at least five feet (5') from abutting properties. The remainder of the rear
yard shall remain landscaped open space, free of impervious surface. This
provision shall not apply to allowed accessory structures. Rear yard shall have
the meaning as defined in title 14 of this Code. Improved surface means
asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, manufactured paving
materials (such as brick), or similar hard surface. Patios are allowed. Patios
constructed, installed, or established after December 10, 2024, cannot be
greater than four hundred (400) square feet or greater than fifty percent (50%)
of the rear yard, whichever is less, and cannot be constructed contiguous to
any parking spaces.
   R.   Administrative Review: In an administrative review, the Director or
designee may grant a minor adjustment to the dimensional requirement if in
conformance with the purposes of this chapter. Minor adjustments shall be noted
in the property file maintained by the Neighborhood and Development Services
Department.
   S.   Regulation Of Noncompliant Situations:
      1.   Existing single family dwellings and duplex units that are
noncompliant with the open space requirement set forth in sections 14-2A-4 and
14-2B-4 of this Code, may not be enlarged unless the subject property is
brought into compliance with said standard.
      2.   Existing single family dwellings and duplex units that are
noncompliant with the number of required parking spaces are allowed an
occupancy of no less than three (3) adults or in the case of a one-bedroom
unit, two (2) adults.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a new rental permit for a single family
dwelling or two-family dwelling unit, the property must be brought into
compliance with the open space requirement and the required number of parking
spaces. If it is not feasible to fully meet the parking standards due to
existing buildings on the property, occupancy will be limited according to
subsection S2 of this section. In cases where it is not feasible to fully meet
the open space standard due to existing buildings on the property, occupancy is
limited to one adult per one hundred (100) square feet of usable open space
provided, but may be further limited based on other factors, such as available
parking.
   T.   Radon Testing: This provision applies to all applications for new
rental permits filed on or after July 1, 2021 and all renewals of rental
permits that expire on or after July 1, 2021.
      1.   All single-family and duplex units shall be tested for radon.
      2.   Radon test or tested means a test performed by a radon measurement
specialist certified by the State of Iowa. Radon mitigation system means a
system installed by a radon mitigation specialist certified by the State of
Iowa.
      3.   If the radon test result is less than four (4) picoCuries per liter
(pCi/L), the unit shall be retested in eight (8) years unless there is a
habitable bedroom in the basement. If the test result is less than four (4)
picoCuries per liter (pCi/L) and there is a habitable room in the basement, the
unit shall be retested in four (4) years.
      4.   If the test result is equal to or greater than four (4) picoCuries
per liter (pCi/L), a radon mitigation system shall be installed and the unit
tested within ninety (90) days, unless the director or designee provides an
extension in writing for good cause. After the radon mitigation system is
installed, the unit shall be retested every eight (8) years thereafter.
      5.   If the unit has an existing radon mitigation system on July 1, 2020,
the unit shall be tested within eight (8) years of the date the last radon test
was performed.
      6.   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, a prior radon test will
be accepted if the radon test was performed within two (2) years of the filing
of the application for a new rental permit or within two (2) years of the
expiration of the expired permit. The unit shall be tested within eight (8)
years of the date that the prior radar test was performed.
      7.   The owner shall provide a copy of all radon test results to the
City.
   U.   Motorized vehicles cannot be parked on patios, except during tailgating
events. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 17-4734, 12-19-2017,
eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 18-4744, 4-2-2018; Ord. 19-4816, 12-17-2019; Ord. 23-4917,
11-21-2023; Ord. 25-4943, 1-7-2025)
17-5-19: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
OF PREMISES:
   A.   Maintenance Of Structure:
      1.   Structure:
         a.   Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair, step,
elevator, handrail, guardrail, porch, sidewalk and appurtenance thereto shall
be maintained in a safe and sound condition and shall be capable of supporting
the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
         b.   Every structure shall be maintained in compliance with section
661 chapter 5 of the Iowa Administrative Code ("State Fire Code"), as amended,
and the Building Codes in effect at the time the building was constructed. If
the use or occupancy is changed compliance with currently adopted codes is
required.
         c.   The required occupancy separations shall be provided and
maintained in all structures having mixed or multiple occupancies. The one hour
occupancy separation between dwellings and garages shall be provided regardless
of the date of construction and may be limited to the installation of materials
approved for one hour fire resistive construction on the garage side and a
tightfitting, twenty (20) minute rated door or approved equivalent opening
protection as required by the City Building Code.
      2.   Exterior:
         a.   Condition: Every foundation, floor, exterior wall, exterior door,
window and roof shall be maintained in a weathertight, watertight, rodentproof
and insectproof condition. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
         b.   Exterior Screening: In Historic and Conservation Districts,
porches and decks less than five feet (5') above grade and visible from the
right-of-way shall have under porch and under deck screening. The screening
shall be required to be complementary to the dwelling as approved by the City.
      3.   Doors: Every door, door hinge, door latch, door lock or any
associated door hardware shall be maintained in good and functional condition,
and every door, when closed, shall fit well within its frame.
      4.   Windows: Every window, existing storm window, window latch, window
lock, aperture covering and any associated hardware shall be maintained in good
and functional condition and shall fit well with its frame.
      5.   Interior: Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling and other
interior surface shall be maintained so as to permit it to be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition. All building interior public and service areas shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition.
   B.   Accessory Structure: Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window,
exterior door and appurtenance of every accessory structure shall be so
maintained as to prevent the structure from becoming a harborage for vermin and
shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   C.   Rainwater Drainage System: All gutters, downspouts and associated or
other roof drainage equipment on the premises shall be maintained in a good
state of repair and so installed as to direct water away from the structure(s).
All cisterns or similar water storage facilities shall be securely covered or
protected.
   D.   Grading, Drainage And Landscaping Of Premises: Every premises shall be
graded and maintained so as no stagnant water will accumulate or stand thereon
1 . Every premises shall be graded and drained in a manner to cause the flow of
rainwater or other surface water away from the structure(s). Every premises
shall be continuously maintained by suitable landscaping with grass, trees,
shrubs, planted ground cover or other landscaping materials. Landscaping shall
be designed and maintained to prevent erosion and control dust. This chapter
shall not affect the existence of approved stormwater detention systems 2 .
   E.   Chimneys And Flue Piping: Every chimney and all flue piping shall be
adequately supported, maintained clean and in a good state of repair. (1978
Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
   F.   Exterior Surfaces:
      1.   All exterior painted surfaces of a dwelling and its accessory
structures, fences, porches and similar appurtenances shall be painted in a
uniform, color consistent, and complete fashion. All painted surfaces shall be
properly prepped to allow for paint to adhere and remain painted regardless if
items are subject to decay or deterioration. (Guidelines for the removal of
lead based paint are located in section
17-5-23, appendix B of this chapter.)
      2.   All exterior surfaces, regardless of material composition, shall be
maintained in a good, safe, and sanitary condition.
      3.   In historic and conservation districts, bare treated lumber is a
prohibited finish for wood surfaces visible from the street.
   G.   Exits:
      1.   Every means of egress shall be maintained in good condition and
shall be free of obstruction at all times. Fire escapes, exit corridors, exit
stairways and escape and rescue windows and any other means of egress shall be
maintained in a good state of repair at all times. Exit signs, emergency
lighting, early warning systems and sprinkler systems shall be maintained in
good condition at all times. Required fire doors shall be maintained self-
closing and self-latching as required by the city building code.
      2.   Fire drills shall be conducted once per academic semester for all
fraternities and sororities as approved by the fire department 3 .
   H.   Screens And Storm Windows: On structures having interchangeable storm
windows and screens, the owner or operator of the premises shall be responsible
for hanging all screens and storm windows, except when written agreement
between the owner and the occupant provides otherwise. Screens shall be
provided no later than May 1 of each year, and storm windows shall be provided
no later than November 1 of each year. All windows manufactured to be operable
for ventilation shall be provided with screens of not less than sixteen (16)
mesh per square inch. However, windows in areas not accessible to tenants or
areas which are exclusively service areas shall be exempted from screen
requirements. All single pane windows which serve habitable rooms and bathrooms
shall be provided with storm windows. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
   I.   Electrical System: The electrical system of every dwelling or accessory
structure shall not, by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of
insulation, improper fusing or for any other cause, expose the occupants to
hazards of electrical shock or fire, and every electrical receptacle, switch
and fixture shall be complete as manufactured and maintained in a good and safe
working condition. Only approved extension cords and multiplug adapters or
other devices approved by the inspector shall be allowed. All electrical wiring
newly installed or replaced shall be in compliance with the city electrical
code. All receptacles in kitchens and bathrooms shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter for personnel.
   J.   Plumbing System: Every supplied plumbing fixture, water piping and
waste piping shall be maintained in a good and sanitary condition. All plumbing
installed or replaced shall be so designed as to prevent contamination of the
water supply through backflow, back siphonage or cross connection. All plumbing
newly installed or replaced shall be in compliance with the city plumbing code.
A minimum water pressure of fifteen (15) pounds shall be maintained to all open
outlets at all times.
   K.   Gas Piping And Appliances: All gas piping shall be properly installed,
properly supported and shall be maintained free of leaks, corrosion or
obstruction so as to reduce gas pressure or volume. Every gas appliance shall
be connected to a gas line with solid metal piping or approved listed metal
appliance connector preceded by an approved listed shutoff valve. Gas pressure
shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open gas valves at
all times. All gas piping shall be in compliance with the city plumbing code.
   L.   Heating And Cooling Equipment: The heating equipment of each dwelling
shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be capable of
heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to the
minimum temperature required by this code. Supplied cooling equipment shall be
maintained in a good and safe working condition. However, heating and supplied
cooling equipment shall not be required to be maintained in operational
condition during that time of the year when said equipment is not normally
used. No combustible material shall be stored within three feet (3') of a fuel
burning furnace and/or fuel burning hot water heater. Carbon monoxide alarms
shall be provided in dwelling units which contain fuel fired appliances or have
an attached garage with an opening that communicates with the dwelling unit.
   M.   Kitchen And Bathroom Flooring: Every toilet room, bathroom and kitchen
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition.
   N.   Supplied Facilities:
      1.   Every facility, utility and piece of equipment required by this
code, including a radon mitigation system, and/or present in the unit and/or
designated for the exclusive use of the occupants of said unit, at the time
that either the rental agreement is signed or possession is given, shall
function safely and shall be maintained in proper working condition.
Maintenance of facilities, utilities and equipment not required by this code
shall be the owner's responsibility unless stated to the contrary in the rental
agreement.
      2.   No supplied facility, including a radon mitigation system, shall be
removed, shut off or disconnected from any occupied dwelling unit or rooming
unit except for such temporary interruption(s) as may be necessary while actual
repairs, replacements or alterations are being made.
   O.   Equipment Rooms: Boiler rooms, mechanical rooms and electrical panel
rooms shall not be used for the storage of combustible material or equipment. A
minimum three foot (3') clearance shall be maintained in front of electrical
panels and disconnects.
   P.   Pest Extermination: Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more
dwelling units or rooming units of any dwelling or in the shared or public
parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units or more than
one rooming unit, the extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
   Q.   Fire Protection:
      1.   All fire extinguishing devices and all early warning fire protection
systems shall be maintained in good working condition at all times. All fire
protection equipment and early warning equipment shall be maintained in
compliance with the city fire code and subsections
 17-5-18C and D of this chapter. Buildings which are required to have an
automatic fire alarm system shall have that alarm system tested annually by a
qualified alarm technician to certify that the alarm system is in compliance
with the current standard of NFPA 72, as amended. Buildings which are required
to have an automatic sprinkling system shall have that system tested biennially
by a qualified sprinkler system technician to certify that the system is in
compliance with the current standard of NFPA chapter 25, as amended.
      2.   Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all buildings in
such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the public way
fronting the property, and from the vehicle access area if vehicle access is
from other than the front of the building. Said numbers and letters shall
contrast with their background and shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in
height. Where access to or within a multi-family structure or any area is
unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is
necessary for life saving and firefighting purposes, a key box shall be
installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a type approved by the
fire chief and shall contain keys and/or access code(s) necessary to gain
access. If applicable, a key switch may be installed in an approved location.
   R.   Guardrails And Handrails: All guardrails and handrails shall be
maintained in a safe and sound condition at all times. Guardrails shall be
provided where there is an abrupt elevation change exceeding thirty inches
(30") adjacent to pedestrian areas. Guardrails and handrails which are newly
installed or replaced shall comply with the city building code.
   S.   Sealed Passages: All pipe passages, chutes and similar openings through
walls, floors or ceilings shall be adequately closed or sealed to prevent the
spread of fire or the passage of vermin.
   T.   Trees And Plant Materials: All trees and plant materials shall be
maintained in a manner which prevents damage or decay to a structure(s). Trees
required by the Iowa City tree ordinance shall be maintained 4 .
   U.   Clean Units: No owner or operator shall permit occupancy of any vacant
dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean, safe, sanitary and fit for
human occupancy. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
   V.   Exterior Area Maintenance:
      1.   a.   Maintenance Responsibility: Every owner or operator shall be
responsible for maintaining the exterior areas in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994 Code)
         b.   Outdoor Storage: The storage of trash bags, landscaping,
construction, or compost material or any other similar materials determined by
the city to create a substantial interference with the use of enjoyment of the
property shall not be permitted in areas visible from the street facing right
of way.
      2.   Fences, screening, and retaining walls shall be maintained in a
safe, structurally sound manner and shall comply with the Iowa City zoning
ordinance. All wood or painted surfaces shall be painted and/or stained in a
uniform, color consistent, and complete fashion. All other surfaces shall be
maintained in a uniform, color consistent, and complete fashion. At the
discretion of the director of neighborhood and development services or
designee, landscaping timbers and other related items may be exempt from this
provision.
      3.   No owner or operator shall keep, store or maintain outdoors any
indoor upholstered furniture, household furniture or household furnishing not
manufactured for outdoor use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs
and couches. "Upholstered furniture" means any furniture constructed with
stuffing or cushions or springs, not intended for outdoor use. The term
"outdoor" includes a porch. However, the use, storage or placement of household
appliances, household furniture or household furnishings on a porch is not
prohibited if the porch is completely enclosed by fully intact glass or fully
intact screens. The following shall constitute an affirmative defense to any
alleged violation of this provision: a) that the furniture was temporarily
placed outside during the move of a resident; or b) that the furniture was
temporarily placed outside during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage
sale and that a sign visible from the right of way is placed on or near the
furniture indicating that it is for sale. The second defense is not available
if the furniture is located outside for more than two (2) days in any six (6)
month period.
      4.   The storage and use of furniture on surfaces thirty inches (30")
above grade, which include, but are not limited to, decks and roofs, without
guardrails is prohibited.
   W.   Solid Waste Facilities:
      1.   Every owner of a dwelling or rental structure shall supply adequate
facilities for the disposal of solid waste which are approved by the inspector
and/or are in compliance with the Iowa City solid waste ordinance 1 .
      2.   All solid waste facilities located at multi-family dwellings shall
be screened with materials that are complementary to the dwelling as approved
by the city.
   X.   Occupancy Requirements:
      1.   A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by a number of persons greater
than allowed by the Iowa City zoning ordinance. (1978 Code §17-7; amd. 1994
Code)
      2.   No room shall be used as a habitable room unless certified as a
habitable room at the time the certificate of structure compliance is issued or
amended.
   Y.   Cooking In Rooming Units: No owner or operator shall knowingly allow
the use of cooking equipment within any rooming unit. (1978 Code §17-7; amd.
1994 Code)
   Z.   Duplex; Units To Be Separated: The two (2) dwelling units of a duplex
must be physically and permanently separated, and the separation must be
continually maintained. By way of illustration, a duplex shall not have a door
that opens from one duplex unit directly into the other duplex unit.
   AA.   Deadbolt Locks Required: Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall
have a deadbolt lock that can be operated from inside and locked from the
outside. "Deadbolt" means a locking mechanism where the bolt cannot be moved to
an open position except by rotating the locked cylinder. (Ord. 95-3681, 6-27-
1995; amd. Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008; Ord. 15-4648, 11-10-2015; Ord. 18-4761, 7-
17-2018; amd. Ord. 19-4816, 12-17-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   6-1-2E of this code.
2 2. See title 16, chapter 3, article G of this code.
3 3. See section
  7-1-2 of this code, amendment to fire code §405.2.
4 1. See title 10, chapter 8 and title 14, chapter 5, article E of this code.
1 1. See title 16, chapter 3, article H of this code.
17-5-20: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE AND
OCCUPANCY OF PREMISES:
   A.   Controlled Area:
      1.   Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall keep in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit
or premises thereof which the occupant occupies and controls.
      2.   Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and
sanitary.
      3.   Every wall and ceiling shall be kept reasonably clean and free of
dirt or greasy film.
      4.   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or
handling of solid waste.
      5.   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or
handling of dangerous or hazardous materials. (1978 Code §17-8; amd. 1994 Code)
      6.   No occupant shall keep, store or maintain outdoors any indoor
upholstered furniture, household furniture or household furnishing not
manufactured for outdoor use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs
and couches. "Upholstered furniture" means any furniture constructed with
stuffing or cushions or springs, not intended for outdoor use. The term
"outdoor" includes a porch. However, the use, storage or placement of household
appliances, household furniture or household furnishings on a porch is not
prohibited if the porch is completely enclosed by fully intact glass or fully
intact screens. The following shall constitute an affirmative defense to any
alleged violation of this provision: a) that the furniture was temporarily
placed outside during the move of a resident; or b) that the furniture was
temporarily placed outside during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage
sale and that a sign visible from the right-of-way is placed on or near the
furniture indicating that it is for sale. The second defense is not available
if the furniture is located outside for more than two (2) days in any six (6)
month period. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
   B.   Plumbing Fixtures: The occupants of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper
operation thereof.
   C.   Extermination Of Pests: Every occupant of a single-family dwelling
shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other
pests therein or on the premises; every occupant of a dwelling containing more
than one dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for such
extermination within the unit occupied whenever said unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
reasonably rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
   D.   Storage And Disposal Of Solid Waste: Every occupant of a dwelling shall
dispose of solid waste and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in the supplied disposal facilities or storage containers
required by this Code 1 .
   E.   Use And Operation Of Supplied Heating Facilities: Every occupant of a
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care, proper use and proper operation of supplied heating
facilities. No combustible material shall be stored within three feet (3') of a
fuel burning furnace and/or fuel burning water heater.
   F.   Electrical Wiring: No temporary wiring shall be used. Approved
extension cords may be used but shall not lie beneath floor coverings or extend
through doorways, transoms or similar apertures and structural elements or
attached thereto. The occupant shall not overload the circuitry of the dwelling
unit or rooming unit.
   G.   Supplied Facilities: Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and proper
operation thereof.
   H.   Cooking Or Eating In Rooming Units: No occupant of a rooming unit shall
prepare or eat meals or store cooking utensils in the rooming unit unless an
approved kitchen or dining room is contained within the rooming unit. The
cooking and eating of meals may take place in dwellings containing a rooming
unit or units if the provisions of subsections
17-5-18G and H of this chapter are complied with.
   I.   Occupancy Control:
      1.   A dwelling unit shall not be occupied by a number of persons greater
than allowed by the city zoning ordinance.
      2.   No room shall be used as a habitable room unless certified as a
habitable room at the time the certificate of structure compliance is issued or
amended.
   J.   Fire Protection Equipment: All fire extinguishers and early warning
fire protection systems shall be maintained in good working condition at all
times. fire extinguishers shall be mounted and meet the requirements of the
city fire code. (1978 Code §17-8; amd. 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  16-3H-7 of this Code.
17-5-21: TITLE 24 OF THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS; SECTIONS 882.109(a)
THROUGH (l); "HOUSING QUALITY STANDARDS":
Housing used in this program shall meet the performance requirements set forth
in this section. In addition, the housing shall meet the acceptability criteria
set forth in this section except for such variations as are proposed by the PHA
and approved by HUD. Local climatic or geological conditions or local codes are
examples which may justify such variations. The term "this program" shall be
interpreted to mean the section VIII housing assistance payments program.
Further, in accordance with the code of Iowa, as amended, this section has
provided the basis for provisions of the Iowa City housing code.
   A.   Sanitary Facilities:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall include its own
facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy and
are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: A flush toilet in a separate, private room,
a fixed basin with hot and cold running water shall be present in the dwelling
unit, all in proper operating condition. These facilities shall utilize an
approved public or private disposal system.
   B.   Food Preparation And Solid Waste Disposal:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall contain suitable
space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner.
There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of
food wastes and solid waste, including facilities for temporary storage where
necessary.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The unit shall contain the following
equipment in proper operating condition: Cooking stove or range and a
refrigerator of appropriate size for the unit, supplied by either the owner or
the family, and a kitchen sink with hot and cold running water. The sink shall
drain into an approved public or private system. Adequate space for the
storage, preparation and serving of food shall be provided. There shall be
adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and
solid waste, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary, e.g.,
garbage cans.
   C.   Space And Security:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall afford the family
adequate space and security.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: A living room, kitchen area and bathroom
shall be present, and the dwelling unit shall contain at least one sleeping or
living/sleeping room of appropriate size for each two (2) persons. Exterior
doors and windows accessible from outside the unit shall be lockable.
   D.   Thermal Environment:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall have and be capable
of maintaining a thermal environment healthy for the human body.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The dwelling unit shall contain safe heating
and/or cooling facilities which are in proper operating condition and can
provide adequate heat and/or cooling to each room in the dwelling unit
appropriate for the climate to assure a healthy living environment. Unvented
room heaters which burn gas, oil or kerosene are unacceptable.
   E.   Illumination And Electricity:
      1.   Performance Requirement: Each room shall have adequate natural or
artificial illumination to permit normal indoor activities and to support the
health and safety of occupants. Sufficient electrical sources shall be provided
to permit use of essential electrical appliances while assuring safety from
fire.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: Living and sleeping rooms shall include at
least one window. A ceiling type or wall type light fixture shall be present
and working in the bathroom and kitchen area. At least two (2) electrical
outlets, one of which may be an overhead light, shall be present and operable
in the living area, kitchen area and each bedroom area.
   F.   Structure And Materials:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be structurally
sound so as not to pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants
and so as to protect the occupants from the environment.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: Ceilings, walls and floors shall not have
any serious defects, such as severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose
surface materials, severe buckling or noticeable movement under walking stress,
missing parts or other serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm, and
the roof shall be weathertight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall
surface shall not have any serious defects, such as serious leaning, buckling,
sagging, cracks or holes, loose siding or other serious damage. The condition
and equipment of interior and exterior stairways, halls, porches and walkways
shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators
shall be maintained in safe and operating condition. In the case of a
manufactured housing, the housing shall be securely anchored by a tiedown
device which distributes and transfers the load posed by the unit to
appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding.
   G.   Interior Air Quality:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be free of
pollutants in the air at levels which threaten the health of the occupants.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: Dwelling units shall be free from dangerous
levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sanitary sewer gas, fuel gas,
dust and other harmful air pollutants. Air circulation shall be adequate
throughout the unit. Bathroom areas shall have at least one openable window or
other adequate exhaust ventilation.
   H.   Water Supply:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The water supply shall be free from
contamination.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The unit shall be served by an approved
public or private potable water supply.
   I.   Lead Based Paint:
      1.   Performance Requirement:
         a.   The dwelling unit shall be in compliance with HUD lead based
paint regulations, 24 CFR, part 35, issued pursuant to the lead based paint
poisoning prevention act, 42 USC 4801, as amended, and the owner shall provide
a certification that the dwelling is in accordance with such HUD regulations.
         b.   If the property was constructed prior to 1950, the family, upon
occupancy, shall have been furnished the notice required by HUD lead based
paint regulations and procedures regarding the hazards of lead based paint
poisoning, the symptoms and treatment of lead poisoning and the precautions to
be taken against lead poisoning.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: Same as performance requirement.
   J.   Access:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The dwelling unit shall be usable and
capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private
properties, and the building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case
of fire.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The dwelling unit shall be usable and
capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private
properties. The building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case of
fire, such as fire stairs or egress through windows.
   K.   Site And Neighborhood:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The site and neighborhood shall be
reasonably free from disturbing noises and reverberations and other hazards to
the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The site and neighborhood shall not be
subject to serious adverse environmental conditions, natural or human made,
such as dangerous walks, steps, instability, flooding, poor drainage, septic
tank backups, sanitary sewage hazards or mudslides; abnormal air pollution,
smoke or dust; excessive noise, vibrations or vehicular traffic; excessive
accumulation of trash; vermin or rodent infestations; or fire hazards.
   L.   Sanitary Condition:
      1.   Performance Requirement: The unit and its equipment shall be in
sanitary condition.
      2.   Acceptability Criteria: The unit and its equipment shall be free of
vermin and rodent infestation. (1978 Code §17-9; amd. 1994 Code)
17-5-22: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable by a
penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 02-4044, 10-8-2002)
17-5-23: APPENDICES:
APPENDIX A
ATTIC FIRE ESCAPE
Balconies.
Material. All balconies for ladder fire escapes installed must be of wrought
iron or mild steel, not less than 28 inches deep and 6 feet long.
Frame. The balcony frame shall be made continuous of not less than 11/4 x 11/
4 x 1/4-inch angle iron securely riveted or welded together, with crossbars
every 2 feet, said bars to be punched 1/2-inch square every 11/4 inches center
to center, and 1/2-inch square iron with corners upward forced through the
same, leaving a manhole of not less than 24 x 24 inches located to clear side
of exit to balcony by at least 6 inches. The crossbars to be securely riveted,
welded or bolted to the angle iron frame. Said crossbars must be not less than
13/4 x 3/3-inch iron. Balconies over 30 inches wide must have at least one 11/
4 x 1/4-inch T-iron lengthwise through the balcony.
Posts. Said balconies shall have a 11/4 x 11/4 x 1/4-inch angle iron post every
3 feet, bolted to the balcony.
Rails. Balconies to be equipped with 3 rails of angle iron or pipe. Angle iron
to be 13/4 x 13/4 x 1/4-inch. Pipe rail to be 3/4-inch inside diameter pipe.
Top rail to be not less than 3 feet and bottom rail not more than 8 inches
above balcony with intermediate rail space equally between the two. All railing
to be continuous, except the space occupied by ladder, where railings shall be
securely bolted to sides of ladder.
Rails shall enter the wall at each end at least 4 inches and top rail to be
securely braced to balcony with 11/2 x 1/4-inch bar.
Brackets for balconies of ladder escapes.
Material. There shall be not less than 3, 1-inch square or 1-inch diameter
round mild steel brackets to every 6-foot balcony, brackets to be spaced not to
exceed 3 feet apart.
Fastenings. Top bar of said bracket must pass through the wall of the building
and be bolted on the inside with a nut and 4 x 4 x 3/8-inch plate iron washer
back of nut. Where walls are of frame construction or veneered, said brackets
must be secured by a 4 x 3/8-inch plate, or 2, 2 x 5/16-inch iron bars securely
spiked to each studding on inside of wall and running the full length of
balcony.
Angle. The angle of brackets to be about 45 degrees and not less than 30
degrees and pass into the wall at least 4 inches at bottom.
Ladders.
Material. Rungs of ladders to be 1/2-inch square iron, with the corners upward.
Every rung to be welded and to be 14-inch centers. All ladders must be 18
inches between side guards, which shall be not less than 2 x 5/16-inch iron.
Location. All such ladders, when installed on buildings, to be placed to the
side of the windows, opposite the wall or pier, securely fastened with hook
bolts, on the inside of each side bar, to the balconies and not less than 24
inches away from the wall, and to start 61/2 feet from the ground.
General requirements.
Use of other materials. Materials of the following types and meeting the
following specifications may be used.
Balconies may be constructed of serrated or antiskid open type steel grating.
The material from which the sections are made shall not be less than 12-gauge
thickness.
Openings in the surface shall not be more than 7/8-inch wide and 11/2 inches
long or less than 1/2-inch wide and 11/2 inches long. All sections shall be
capable of supporting a uniform superimposed load of 100 pounds per square foot
without causing a deflection in excess of 1/240 of the span.
Bolts. All bolts used in general construction shall be not less than 1/2-inch
diameter.
Material. The use of secondhand material will not be permitted and will be
condemned if found in fire escape construction.
Fittings. No cast iron fittings shall be used.
Holes in masonry. All holes in masonry must be filled with Portland cement
mortar.
Painting. All work must be painted with not less than 2 coats of paint, one of
iron oxide and linseed oil in shop, and one of graphite and linseed oil after
installation. The field coat shall be different color than shop coat.
Factor of safety. Balconies and stairways shall be capable of sustaining a live
load of 100 pounds to the square foot. Fire escapes shall have a factor of
safety of not less than 4.
Maintenance and painting. All outside fire escapes shall be scraped and painted
as often as necessary to maintain them in proper condition at all times.
All outside fire escapes shall be kept clear of obstructions.
All outside fire escapes shall be promptly cleaned after snow or ice has
accumulated thereon.
No obstructions, such as telephone or lighting wires, shall be permitted on or
near outside fire escapes. Electric light or power wires shall not be directly
over or within 3 feet of outside fire escapes or balconies unless such wires
are enclosed in rigid conduit. (1994 Code)
APPENDIX B
GUIDELINES FOR ELIMINATING LEAD BASED PAINT HAZARDS
These guidelines are derived from documents published by the Iowa department of
public health childhood lead poisoning prevention program entitled "eliminating
lead based paint hazards".
      1.   Remove lead based paint carefully! You should never dry scrape or
dry sand lead based paint on the inside or outside of your home. Always mist
surfaces with water before scraping or sanding them. Use a tarp or piece of
plastic to catch paint chips when you are working on the outside of your house.
This will keep paint chips from falling on the soil. If you are working
outside, close windows to prevent lead dust from entering the home.
      2.   Do not sandblast or waterblast lead based paint on the outside of
your home. You do not want the paint chips to end up all over your yard or the
neighbor's yard. Sandblasting and waterblasting is safe only if you have a
special machine that will catch the paint chips.
      3.   Remove furniture, drapes, and if possible, carpet from the room you
will work in before starting work. Cover the floor and furniture that cannot be
removed from the room with a sheet of six (6) mil plastic. Seal each room from
the rest of the house with plastic while working in it. Be careful not to track
dust and paint chips into other areas of the home.
      4.   Wear a negative pressure, half mask respirator with a magenta
(purple) HEPA filtration canister. You can buy these respirators at auto parts
stores (used for brake and clutch work). The respirator will say "HEPA Filters
- Asbestos Approved". Be sure to read the instructions for positive and
negative face fit tests and for cleaning the respirator. If the respirator does
not fit properly, it will not protect you. It will also not protect you if it
is dirty. These masks do not protect against organic vapors from heat guns or
paint strippers. So, use heat guns and paint strippers only where there is good
ventilation. This will help disperse any organic vapors from the strippers or
from heating the paint.
      5.   Replace the filters on the respirator if they are damaged. You
should also replace them if it gets hard to breathe. This means that the
filters are plugging. Wash the face piece (without the filters) with mild soap.
Store the respirator in a bag outside of the work area.
      6.   If you have asthma, emphysema, or heart problems, do not try to wear
a respirator. Take off the respirator immediately if you feel short of breath.
If you have a perforated eardrum that has not been repaired, this respirator
will not protect you from inhaling lead dust.
      7.   If you will be using a heat gun, make sure it is a low temperature
heat gun that operates below one thousand one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,100°F).
      8.   Do not eat, drink, or smoke until you have left the work area and
thoroughly washed your hands and face. Take a shower, wash your hair, and
change clothes before coming in contact with others.
      9.   Keep pregnant women and children out of the room if you are working
on a small project. A small project would be working on only a few surfaces in
one room at a time. For larger projects, keep pregnant women and children out
of the home until you complete the job.
      10.   After you complete the job, wash all surfaces thoroughly with any
household detergent. Vacuum with a HEPA vacuum or a regular vacuum with
microfilter bags. Shampoo carpets using a machine that pumps liquid into the
carpet and pulls it back out.
      11.   Place paint chips, dust, and pieces of wood in a plastic bag at the
end of each day. Put this with your garbage that will go to the landfill.
After you complete work to eliminate lead based paint hazards, you must
maintain the remaining lead based paint in good condition. You should also
frequently clean the house. Wash floors, window sills, areas between the
windows, and other places where dust and dirt accumulate at least once a week.
Check the condition of lead based paint frequently. You need to repair paint
when it begins to deteriorate. (Ord. 08-4315, 9-9-2008)
17-5-24: FEES:
The Department of Housing and Inspection Services is authorized to assess
permit and reinspection fees, the amounts of which shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. (1978 Code §17-3; amd. Ord. 17-4727, 10-3-2017)
CHAPTER 6
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 7
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
17-7-1: Definitions
17-7-2: Building Mover's License
17-7-3: Permit Requirements
17-7-4: Limitations On Buildings To Be Moved
17-7-5: Building Permit Prerequisite To Moving Building
17-7-6: Deposit And Insurance Requirements
17-7-7: Disposition Of Fees And Deposits
17-7-8: Building Moving Operations
17-7-9: Duties Of Permittee
17-7-10: Enforcement
17-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy which, when loaded on any carrier of any kind, has a loaded
height exceeding thirteen feet (13') and a loaded width exceeding twelve feet
(12').
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The official designated by the city manager to enforce
this title. (1978 Code §8-58)
17-7-2: BUILDING MOVER'S LICENSE:
Before engaging in the operation of moving buildings, every person shall obtain
a license therefor. Such persons shall pay a license fee as set by resolution
of the city council. Upon payment of a license fee, the building official shall
issue such license as is covered by the fee. (1978 Code §8-77)
17-7-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No licensee under this chapter shall move or prepare
for moving any building over, along or across any public highway, street, alley
or other public place in the city without first obtaining a permit from the
building official. (1978 Code §8-78; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application for
such permit with the building official upon forms provided by the building
official.
      2.   The application shall set forth:
         a.   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
address, construction materials and dimensions.
         b.   The public highways, streets, alleys or other public places over,
along or across which the building is proposed to be moved.
         c.   A description of the location and destination, including street
address, to which the building is proposed to be moved.
         d.   The moving date and hours.
         e.   Any additional information which the city shall find necessary to
a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. (1978 Code §8-79;
amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Fee: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set
by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code §8-80)
   D.   Building Permit Prerequisite To Issuance; Time Limit On Permanent
Installation:
      1.   No permit for moving a building to a lot in the city shall be
granted by the building official if a building permit has not been issued for
such building on such lot.
      2.   No building shall be moved to a lot in the city for the purpose of
storing such building on the lot. A building moved to a lot shall be
permanently installed on its new foundation within sixty (60) calendar days of
the date moved onto the lot. (1978 Code §8-81; amd. 1994 Code)
   E.   Standards For Issuance Of Permit: The city shall refuse to issue a
permit required by this chapter if:
      1.   Any application requirements or any fee or deposit requirement has
not been complied with.
      2.   The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering
persons and property in the city.
      3.   The building in its new location would not comply with the building
code, electrical code, plumbing code, zoning ordinance, state energy code and
state handicapped accessibility code or other ordinances in effect at the time
of the application in the governmental jurisdiction where the building is to be
located, all as amended. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the
moving of a building for which an applicant has obtained a building permit
which provides for construction or alterations to the building which will bring
it to code standards.
      4.   For any other reasons, persons or property in the city would be
endangered by the moving of the building. (1978 Code §8-82; amd. 1994 Code)
   F.   Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be issued until forty eight (48)
hours after the time of filing of the completed application, and all fees,
deposits and certificates or certificates of insurance are completed. This time
period shall not commence running until filing of all information, fees,
deposits and certificates of insurance set forth in this chapter are on file
with the city. (1978 Code §8-83; amd. 1994 Code)
   G.   Expiration Of Permit: Any permit granted under this chapter shall
expire if the move is not commenced on the moving date set forth in the
application. (1978 Code §8-84)
17-7-4: LIMITATIONS ON BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED:
   A.   No building shall be prepared for a move or shall be moved upon or
through the streets of the city if the building exceeds thirty four feet (34'),
loaded width, including overhang, or which exceeds thirty feet (30') loaded
height. Said size limitations may be waived by the building official, with the
concurrence of the city forester and the city manager, or designee, if, in
their opinions, the oversized building may be safely moved on the proposed
route without danger to property or public improvements.
   B.   No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city to a
lot in the city if the value of such building before moving is less than forty
percent (40%) of the value of a new building of the same type.
   C.   No building shall be moved in or through the streets of the city to a
lot in the city if such building is in such deteriorated condition that, in the
opinion of the building official, it is unsafe and constitutes a safety hazard.
(1978 Code §8-59; amd. Ord. 97-3765, 1-14-1997)
17-7-5: BUILDING PERMIT PREREQUISITE TO MOVING BUILDING:
No person shall prepare any building for a move nor move any building to any
lot within the city unless said person shall have first obtained a building
permit for such building on such lot. (1978 Code §8-60)
17-7-6: DEPOSIT AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Deposit: Upon receipt of an application for a permit under section
17-7-3 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the applicant to procure from
all appropriate city departments or other governmental bodies, and the utility
companies involved, an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in
removing, trimming, cutting or replacing any property on the route of the move,
including trees on public property above the height of thirteen feet (13'), by
reason of the moving of the building through the city, together with the cost
of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements and
expenses of city personnel and the utility companies occasioned by the moving.
Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall deposit with the city
finance director a sum of money equal to twice the amount of these estimated
city related expenses. Such deposit shall be in cash or by certified check,
cashier's check or such other form as the city finance director may require.
(1978 Code §8-61; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Insurance: Any person filing an application for a permit under section
17-7-3 of this chapter shall file with the department of housing and inspection
services a liability certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in Iowa, protecting the applicant and the city and
its officials, providing for coverage as established by the finance department.
The insurance coverage may be a blanket insurance policy covering any building
moving by the applicant. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of the city,
and the city shall be named insured herein for the use and benefit of any
person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment
of any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages or
losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance or negligence
on the part of the mover in connection with any of the activities or conditions
of the permit. (1978 Code §8-62; amd. 1994 Code)
17-7-7: DISPOSITION OF FEES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Receipt Of Deposits And Fees: The city finance director shall receive
all fees and deposits required by this chapter.
   B.   Return Upon Nonissuance: Upon refusal to issue or nonissuance of a
permit, the building official shall inform the city finance director who, after
being so informed, shall return all deposits to the applicant. Permit fees
filed with the application shall not be returned.
   C.   Return Upon Allowance For Expense: After the building has been moved,
the building official shall prepare a written statement of all expenses
incurred in removing, trimming, cutting or replacing all public property and of
all material used in the making of the removal and the replacement together
with a statement of all damages and costs caused to or inflicted upon the city.
Upon receipt of the building official's statement, the city finance director
shall return to the applicant all deposits after deducting a sum sufficient to
pay for all of the costs, damages and expenses incurred by the city by reason
of the removal of the building. Permit fees filed with the application shall
not be returned. (1978 Code §8-63)
17-7-8: BUILDING MOVING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Designation Of Route: In conjunction with the application for a permit
under section
17-7-3 of this chapter, the applicant shall develop and submit a list of
designated streets over which a building is proposed to be moved, which list
must be approved, in writing, by the city manager, or designee, chief of
police, the fire chief and the city forester. In making their determinations,
said officials shall act to assure reasonable safety to persons and property in
the city, including trees on public property, and to minimize congestion and
traffic hazards on public streets. (1978 Code §8-64; amd. 1994 Code; Ord. 97-
3765, 1-14-1997)
   B.   Time Of Moves: The time of all moves must be approved in advance by the
building official and recorded on the permit. Generally, all building moves may
not commence from private property and enter public property before nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and must be completed and placed on the designated site off
of public property or streets by four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of the same day; or
may not commence before seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and must be completed by six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day. The building official may make
exceptions, for good cause, as to the time of move. (1978 Code §8-65; amd. 1994
Code)
   C.   Nighttime Moving; Lighting Requirements: Building moves during the
nighttime, including one hour or sooner before sunrise and one hour or later
before sunset, must be floodlighted such that the structure being moved is
illuminated sufficiently to permit ready visibility of the top and side
clearance of the structure and any obstruction that may be in the path of
travel. The building official shall approve all lighting in advance of any
move. (1978 Code §8-66)
   D.   Parking Prohibited On Streets: Parking shall be prohibited on streets
included in the routing for the moving of a building. At least forty eight (48)
hours in advance of the time of the moving, the permittee shall post signs
provided by the city, designating the area as a no parking area. The building
official shall ensure that such signs are posted by the permittee in a timely
manner. Such signs shall be removed by the city after the move is completed. If
any vehicle is parked illegally in violation of the provisions of this
subsection, the permittee shall be responsible for the expenses of towing the
vehicle away but may recover said expenses from the violator. The permittee
shall assume all risk of damage to any vehicle either towed away or parked in
such route. (1978 Code §8-69)
   E.   Storage On Public Property Restricted: No building being moved pursuant
to this chapter shall be stored on any public street, highway, place, alley,
park, square, plaza, any city owned right of way or any other public property
owned or controlled by the city. (1978 Code §8-67)
17-7-9: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under section
17-7-3 of this chapter shall:
   A.   Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the
approved, written permit.
   B.   Conduct the move on the date and time stated on the approved permit.
Failure to move on the date and time shall require the applicant to reapply for
a moving permit and receive new signatures of approval as required in
subsection
17-7-8A of this chapter.
   C.   Notify the building official, in writing, of any and all damage done to
public or private property within twenty four (24) hours after the damage or
injury has occurred.
   D.   Comply with the building code, the electrical code, the plumbing code,
the zoning ordinance, the state energy code, the state handicapped
accessibility code and all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended.
   E.   Pay the cost and expenses of the city occasioned by the movement of the
building.
   F.   Remove all debris and materials and fill all excavations to existing
grade at the original site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary
condition within ten (10) calendar days of the moving date. The old basement or
any excavation on the original site shall be fenced in immediately upon removal
of the building and shall remain fenced until the excavation can be filled.
   G.   Plug the sanitary sewer line with a concrete stopper unless otherwise
directed by the city. The plugged sanitary sewer line shall be inspected by the
city before backfilling. The permittee shall arrange to have the water shut off
at the property line and the meter returned to the city. The permittee shall
notify all utilities, including the city, to disconnect all services at least
forty eight (48) hours in advance of said moving.
   H.   Notify telephone, electric and gas company, railroad companies, cable
television and any other utility at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of
the moving of any building that will interfere with the pole, wires, conduit,
cables or other property of the utility, specifying in such notice the highest
part of the building above the surface of the street and the proposed route and
time of moving. The utility shall furnish, at the expense of the permittee, a
competent person to superintend the removal and replacement of such wires,
poles, conduit, cables and other property. The permittee shall, at its own
expense, furnish all the labor, materials and equipment necessary and shall
remove and replace the property as directed by the appropriate utility company.
Only authorized personnel of the utility company shall remove or replace any
wires, poles, conduit, cables and other property. (1978 Code §8-68; amd. 1994
Code)
17-7-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcing Officers:
      1.   The department of housing and inspection services and the police
department and any other appropriate city officers or employees shall enforce
and carry out the requirements of this chapter. Once the structure to be moved
has reached public property, the police department and, specifically, the
officer assigned to provide escort to the move shall be the enforcement officer
of the building move.
      2.   The building official shall assume enforcement responsibilities when
the building is being prepared for the move, while the move is in progress on
the original site and at such time when the structure being moved leaves public
property and is being placed upon a lot within iowa city as set forth in the
moving permit.
   B.   Liability Of Permittee For Expenses: The permittee shall be liable for
any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amount or securities, and
the city attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such amounts, if appropriate.
   C.   Original Premises Left Unsafe: The city shall proceed to do any work
necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition where
the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this title, and the
costs thereof shall be charged against the permittee's deposit. (1978 Code §8-
70; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 8
GRADING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
17-8-1: Purpose
17-8-2: Scope
17-8-3: Definitions
17-8-4: Grading Permit Required
17-8-5: Grading Permit Requirements
17-8-6: Assurance Of Performance
17-8-7: Cuts
17-8-8: Fills
17-8-9: Setbacks
17-8-10: Tree Protection
17-8-11: Drainage And Terracing
17-8-12: Grading Inspection
17-8-13: Completion Of Work
17-8-14: Hazards
17-8-15: Construction Site Erosion And Sediment Control
17-8-16: Enforcement
17-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and safeguard human life, property
and the public welfare and to protect environmentally sensitive areas by
regulating grading on private and public property. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-2: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading
and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, establishes the
administrative procedure for issuance of permits and provides for approval of
plans and specifications and inspection of grading. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Terms not
defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned them in "Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary", as amended.
   APPROVAL: That, in the opinion of the building official, the proposed work
or completed work conforms to this chapter.
   AS GRADED: The extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.
   BEDROCK: In place solid rock.
   BENCH: A relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill
is to be placed.
   BORROW: Earth material acquired from an off site location for use in grading
a site.
   CIVIL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Iowa to
practice in the field of civil engineering.
   CIVIL ENGINEERING: The application of the knowledge of the forces of nature,
principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation,
design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of humankind.
   COMPACTION: The densification of a fill by mechanical means.
   CUT: The portion of land surface or area from which earth material has been
removed or will be removed by excavation.
   EARTH MATERIAL: Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination
thereof.
   ENGINEERED GRADING: Grading of five hundred (500) cubic yards or more and
requires the services of a civil engineer to prepare and certify a grading plan
and to inspect and certify the work completed.
   EROSION: The wearing away of earth material as a result of the movement of
wind, water, ice or any combination thereof.
   EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of earth material.
   EXISTING GRADE: The grade prior to grading.
   FILL: A deposit of earth material placed by mechanical, human made or other
artificial means.
   FINISHED GRADE: The final grade of the site which conforms to the approved
plan.
   GEOLOGIC FACTORS: Factors pertaining to rocks or rock formations as they
might affect the stability of slopes.
   GRADE: The vertical elevation of the ground surface.
   GRADING: Any excavating or filling or a combination thereof and includes
compaction.
   OWNER: Any person, entity, business, firm, corporation, organization,
association, partnership, venture or any combination thereof and any agent,
fiduciary or representative thereof, who owns or purports to own land or real
property located within Iowa City.
   PERSON: Includes individual persons, user, operator, responsible party,
entity, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership, venture or any
combination thereof and any agent, representative or fiduciary thereof.
   PROPERTY: Land and real property, whether public or private, and includes
any and all interests in real property, whether legal, equitable or any
combination thereof.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any area dedicated to the public, including but not limited to
street right of way, sidewalks, alleys and utility easements.
   REGULAR GRADING: Grading involving less than five hundred cubic yards (500
cu yd) which does not require the services of a civil engineer.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any user, possessor, operator, permittee or person who
operates, possesses, occupies, manages or owns real property located within
Iowa City. Responsible party shall also include the person responsible for
assuring compliance with this chapter if notice of violation or noncompliance
has been issued to that person by the building official.
   ROUGH GRADE: The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the
approved plan.
   SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof under the
same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.
   SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as
a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   SOIL: Naturally occurring superficial deposits overlaying bedrock.
   STEEP SLOPE: Property on which the natural terrain is at a slope of twenty
five percent (25%) (4 horizontal to 1 vertical) or steeper.
   TERRACE: A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope
surface of drainage and maintenance purposes. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 95-
3703, 12-19-1995)
17-8-4: GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, owner or responsible party shall do any grading in any areas
described below without first having obtained a grading permit from the
building official: (1978 Code §8-17)
   A.   Property on which the natural terrain is at a horizontal to vertical
slope of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) (25 percent) or steeper and
having a vertical height exceeding ten feet (10'); or (1978 Code §8-17; amd.
Ord. 95-3703, 12-19-1995)
   B.   Flood hazard areas subject to title 14, chapter 5, article J,
"Floodplain Management Standards", of this code; or
   C.   "Wetlands" as defined in the code of federal regulations (33 CFR
328.3), as amended, and regulated by the U.S. army corps of engineers; or
   D.   Property traversed by a drainageway as shown in blue on the U.S.
geological survey quadrangle maps, 1983, as updated. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-5: GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits Required: As provided in section
17-8-4 of this chapter, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining
a grading permit from the building official. A separate permit shall be
required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. (1978 Code §8-
17; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit: The provisions of section 105.5 of the building
code, as amended, are applicable to grading and shall state an estimate of the
cubic yards of earth material to be graded. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
   C.   Plans And Specifications: Each application for a grading permit,
whether regular grading or engineered grading, shall be accompanied by two (2)
sets of plans and specifications. Supporting data consisting of a soils report
and geology report shall be submitted when required by the building official.
When engineered grading is required pursuant to subsection D of this section,
the plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer.
(1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Grading Designation: All grading of five hundred cubic yards (500 cu
yd) or more shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan
prepared by a civil engineer and shall be designated as "engineered grading".
Grading involving less than five hundred cubic yards (500 cu yd) shall be
designated "regular grading" unless the permittee, with the approval of the
building official, chooses to have the grading performed as "engineered
grading" or the building official requires "engineered grading" pursuant to
6subsection G of this section. (Ord. 95-3703, 12-19-1995)
   E.   Information On Plans And Specifications:
      1.   Plans shall be drawn to scale upon stable, reproducible media and
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work
proposed. The plans shall also show, in detail, that the grading activities
will conform to the provisions of the building code, as amended, and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set
of plans shall give the location of the proposed grading work, the name and
address of the person by whom they were prepared and the name and address of
the property owner or of the responsible party for the property.
      2.   The plans shall include the following information:
         a.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
         b.   Names and addresses of adjacent property owners.
         c.   Property limits and accurate topographic map of the existing
terrain with contour intervals of five feet (5') or less and details of area
drainage.
         d.   Limiting dimensions, elevations of finish contours to be achieved
by the grading and proposed drainage channels and related construction.
         e.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices,
including walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed
with, or as part of, the proposed grading work, together with a map showing the
drainage areas and the estimated runoff for a 5-year return and a 100-year
flood event of the area served by any drains to be installed.
         f.   Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the
proposed grading is to be performed, together with any buildings or structures
on property adjacent to the proposed grading to the extent the buildings or
structures are within fifteen feet (15') of the proposed grading. In addition,
location of any property which may be substantially and materially affected by
the proposed grading shall also be noted and shown on the plans.
         g.   Existing trees that are to be retained pursuant to section
17-8-10 of this chapter. Specifications shall contain information covering
construction and material requirements.
         h.   Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil
erosion for the proposed work.
   F.   Engineered Grading Requirements:
      1.   For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility of the civil
engineer to design the grading plan using sound engineering practices and to
incorporate all recommendations from the soils and geology reports into the
grading plan. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the professional
inspection during the grading process and final approval of the grading when
completed. This responsibility includes, but need not be limited to, inspection
and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the grading
area. The civil engineer is the coordinating agent between any responsible
party doing the actual grading work and the building official. Further, the
civil engineer shall be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and
the submission of an updated grading plan upon completion of the work. Finally,
the civil engineer shall submit a statement of compliance pursuant to
subsection
17-8-14A of this chapter.
      2.   Soils and geology reports shall be required as specified in
subsections H and I of this section. During grading, the civil engineer shall
submit all necessary reports, compaction data and soils and geology
recommendations to the building official.
      3.   The civil engineer's inspection and approval concerning the adequacy
and preparation of ground for the proposed grading operations shall include,
but need not be limited to, the adequacy of the ground to receive fill, testing
for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, the design of buttress
fills, where required, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological
matters and the need for subdrains or other ground water drainage devices.
      4.   The building official shall review the grading project at the
various stages of the work in order to monitor compliance with the approved
plans.
   G.   Regular Grading Requirements:
      1.   The building official may require inspection and testing by an
approved testing agency of any proposed or approved grading operation. Any such
required inspection or testing shall be carried out at the building official's
direction.
      2.   When the building official has cause to believe that geologic
factors may be involved in the proposed or regular grading activities, the
grading operation will be required to conform to "engineered grading"
requirements as defined in this chapter.
   H.   Soils Report:
      1.   The soils report required by subsection C of this section shall
include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils,
conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for
corrective measures, including buttress fills, if needed.
      2.   Recommendations included in the report shall be incorporated in the
grading plans or specifications unless the building official has waived all or
some of the recommendations or has approved revised recommendations.
   I.   Geology Report:
      1.   The geology report required by subsection C of this section shall
include an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions and
recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
development.
      2.   Recommendations included in the report shall be incorporated in the
grading plans or specifications unless the building official has waived all or
some of the recommendations or has approved revised recommendations. (1978 Code
§8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
   J.   Issuance: The provisions of section 105.3.1 of the building code, as
amended, are applicable to grading permits. The building official may require
that the grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur
which result from weather generated problems not considered at the time the
permit was issued. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
   K.   Fees: All fees associated with each required permit shall be paid to
the city as established by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code §8-17;
amd. 1994 Code)
17-8-6: ASSURANCE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   When the grading permit is issued, the building official may require
cash escrow, certificate of deposit, performance bonds or an irrevocable letter
of credit in order to assure that the work will be completed in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and to assure all hazardous conditions
are eliminated. Said cash escrows, certificate of deposit, performance bonds or
letters of credit shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%)
of the grading project, but in no event shall the required amount exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or the cash equivalent.
   B.   It is the intent of this section that cash escrow, certificate of
deposit, performance bonds or irrevocable letters of credit shall not be deemed
as a substitution for performance of the work, but that such instruments shall
stand solely as security to assure compliance with the grading requirements
herein. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
17-8-7: CUTS:
   A.   Compliance Required: Unless otherwise recommended in the approved
engineering, soils and/or geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions
of this section.
   B.   Slope: The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use and shall be no steeper than the ratio of three and five-
tenths horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1) unless the owner or responsible party
furnishes a soils or a geology report or both, stating that an investigation of
the site reveals that a cut at a steeper slope will nonetheless be stable and
will not create a hazard to life or to property.
   C.   Drainage And Terracing: Drainage and terracing shall be provided as
required by section
17-8-11 of this chapter. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-8: FILLS:
   A.   Compliance Required: Unless otherwise recommended in the approved
engineering, soils and/or geology report, fills shall conform to the provisions
of this section.
   B.   Fill Location: Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes
steeper than three and five-tenths horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1), except
where the civil engineer determines the slope to be stable.
   C.   Preparation Of Ground: The ground surface shall be prepared to receive
fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable
materials and by scarifying the surface to provide a bond with the new fill.
Where slopes are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) and the
height of the fill location is greater than ten feet (10'), the ground surface
shall be prepared by benching into material deemed competent for such benching
by a civil engineer. The bench under the top of fill on a slope steeper than
five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) shall be at least ten feet (10') wide.
The area beyond the top of fill shall either be sloped for sheet overflow or a
paved drain provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the
top of fill shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. However, in such event, the
cut shall be approved by a civil engineer as a suitable foundation for fill.
   D.   Fill Material: Vegetative materials shall not be permitted in fills
except in the top one foot (1') of fill. Except as permitted by the building
official, no rock or similar irreducible material shall be placed within two
feet (2') of the finished grade. Where an excessive amount of irreducible
material is found, it may be placed in the fill in horizontal layers not
exceeding four feet (4') in thickness. Each layer shall be leveled and smoothed
by choking the surface of the irreducible material with soil or fine fragments
of rock. (1978 Code §8-17)
   E.   Compaction: All fills on slopes of six horizontal to one vertical (6:1)
or steeper shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of maximum
density as determined by section J107 of the building code or equivalent ASTM
standards, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004)
   F.   Slope: The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than three and five-tenths
horizontal to one vertical (3.5:1) unless the owner or responsible party
furnishes a soils or a geology report or both, stating that the site has been
investigated and that based on their best information, knowledge and belief,
fill at a slope steeper than three and five-tenths horizontal to one vertical
(3.5:1) will nonetheless be stable and will not create a hazard to life or
property.
   G.   Drainage And Terracing: Drainage and terracing shall be provided for
all fills. Areas above fill slopes and all terrace surfaces shall be graded and
finished, as required by section
17-8-11 of this chapter. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-9: SETBACKS:
   A.   General Requirements: Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site
boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be
horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. Setback
dimensions shall be as shown in figure J108.1 of the 2003 international
building code, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-15-2004)
   B.   Top Of Cut Slope: The top of cut slope shall be made no closer to a
site boundary line than one-fifth (1/5) of the vertical height of cut, with a
minimum of two feet (2') and a maximum of ten feet (10'). The setback may need
to be increased for any required interceptor drains.
   C.   Toe Of Fill Slope: The toe of fill slope shall be made no closer to the
site boundary line than one-half (1/2) the height of slope, with a minimum of
two feet (2') and a maximum of twenty feet (20'). Where a fill slope is to be
located near the site boundary and the adjacent off site property is already
developed, special precautions may be required if, in the opinion of the
building official, such precautions are necessary to protect the adjoining
property from damage. These precautions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Additional setbacks.
      2.   Provision for retaining walls or slough walls.
      3.   Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to
minimize erosion.
      4.   Provisions for the control of surface waters.
   D.   Modification Of Slope Location: The building official may approve
alternate setbacks. The building official may also require an investigation and
recommendation by a civil engineer if, in the opinion of the building official,
such investigation is reasonably necessary to demonstrate the grading has
complied with the intent of this section. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-10: TREE PROTECTION:
Trees that are to be retained shall be protected from injury during any grading
work. Woodland and tree protection measures shall be shown on the grading plan
and should comply with the Iowa City tree protection guidelines. (Ord. 95-3703,
12-19-1995)
17-8-11: DRAINAGE AND TERRACING:
   A.   Compliance Required: Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading
plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this
section for cut or fill slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical (6:
1).
   B.   Terrace:
      1.   In order to control surface drainage and debris, terraces at least
six feet (6') in width shall be established at not more than thirty foot (30')
vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes. Where only one terrace is
required, it shall be established at midheight. For cut or fill slopes greater
than sixty feet (60') and up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in vertical
height, one terrace at approximately midheight shall be twelve feet (12') in
width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one
hundred twenty feet (120') in height shall be designed by the civil engineer
and approved by the building official. Suitable access shall be provided to
permit proper cleaning and maintenance.
      2.   Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of three
percent (3%) and must be stabilized with an approved erosion free channel. Said
swales or ditches shall also have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one
foot (1') and a minimum width of five feet (5') unless a civil engineer can
demonstrate a smaller channel is appropriate. (1978 Code §8-17)
      3.   The capacity of a swale or ditch shall be adequate to convey the
100-year flood event for the tributary area. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Subsurface Drainage: Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with
subsurface drainage, where such drainage is reasonably necessary to achieve
stability.
   D.   Disposal:
      1.   All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the
nearest approved drainageway. Erosion in the area of discharge shall be
prevented by installing nonerosive down drains or other devices, as needed.
      2.   Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent (2%)
from the building pad toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the
building official.
      3.   The gradient from the building pad may be one percent (1%) if all of
the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:
         a.   Proposed fills are no greater than ten feet (10') in maximum
depth.
         b.   Proposed finish cuts or fill slope faces have a vertical height
no greater than ten feet (10').
         c.   Existing slope faces which have a slope face steeper than ten
horizontally to one vertically (10:1) shall have a vertical height no greater
than ten feet (10').
   E.   Interceptor Drains: Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top
of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage has been channelized and there
is a potential for continued erosion. (1978 Code §8-17)
17-8-12: GRADING INSPECTION:
   A.   General Requirements: All grading operations for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. When required
by the building official, special inspection of grading operations and special
testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17 of
the international building code, as amended. (Ord. 04-4146, 11-16-2004; amd.
Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
   B.   Notification Of Noncompliance: If, in the course of fulfilling their
responsibilities under this chapter, the civil engineer or the testing agency
finds that the grading work is not being done in conformance with this chapter
or does not conform to the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be
reported to the owner of the property. If the discrepancies continue, the civil
engineer or the testing agency is responsible for reporting said discrepancies
to the building official.
   C.   Transfer Of Responsibility For Approval: If the civil engineer or the
testing agency of record is changed during the course of any grading work, the
work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept responsibility
for the work and the work is within the competence of the testing agency and/or
the civil engineer. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-13: COMPLETION OF WORK:
   A.   Final Reports: Upon completion of the rough grading work and at final
completion of the grading work, the building official shall require the
following reports, drawings and supplements thereto to be filed in the building
official's office:
      1.   Certification from the civil engineer that the grading work was
completed in substantial compliance with the final approved grading plan, as
updated or revised.
      2.   An updated or revised grading plan prepared by the civil engineer,
showing all revisions approved by the building official. This plan shall
include ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and
elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities installed.
   B.   Notification Of Completion: The owner, responsible party or person
requesting the permit shall notify the building official when the grading
operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given
until all required reports have been submitted and until all grading work has
been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plans, including
installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all
erosion control measures. Upon granting final approval, the building official
shall authorize the release of any escrows to the depositor and issue a
certificate of compliance. (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-14: HAZARDS:
Whenever the building official determines that any existing excavation,
embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to human life,
endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a
public way or drainage channel, the property owner or the responsible party for
the affected property shall, after receipt of notice, in writing, from the
building official, take corrective action to repair or eliminate such
excavation, fill or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard or dangerous
conditions. Said repairs or corrective actions shall, in all respects, be in
compliance with the requirements of the building code, as amended, and shall be
satisfactorily completed within the time period specified in the notice.
Failure to take corrective actions shall be deemed a public offense and shall
be subject to the remedies set out in applicable state and local law for
abatement of nuisances 1 . (1978 Code §8-17; amd. Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
17-8-15: CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   Purpose And Intent:
      1.   The national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit
program administered by the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR)
requires that agencies meeting certain demographic and environmental impact
criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of storm water
from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The city of Iowa City has
been issued such a permit. The city's MS4 permit is on file at the office of
the city clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office
hours.
      2.   The NPDES program requires certain individuals engaged in earth
disturbing activities related to construction on one acre of land or more to
submit an application to the IDNR for an NPDES general permit #2. The NPDES
program and the city's MS4 require the city to adopt an ordinance requiring
proper soil erosion and sediment control on all sites less than one acre if the
earth disturbing activities are part of a larger common plan of development
that would disturb one acre or more. Notwithstanding any provision of this
section, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance
with a state NPDES general permit #2, a city construction site runoff (CSR)
permit, and any other requirement of state or federal law or administrative
rule.
      3.   As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to
undertake primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the
NPDES program by adopting a construction site runoff control ordinance designed
to achieve the following objectives:
         a.   Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
state agency or political subdivision (applicant) required by law or
administrative rule to apply to the IDNR for an NPDES general permit #2 shall
also be required to obtain from the city a permit in addition to and not in
lieu of the NPDES general permit #2; and
         b.   The city shall have primary responsibility for inspection,
monitoring and enforcement procedures to promote applicants' compliance with
state NPDES general permits #2 and CSR permits.
      4.   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the
city in administering and enforcing the NPDES program. The city shall fund its
application, inspection, monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely
by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to the
program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding
established by a separate ordinance.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   All persons required by law or administrative rule to obtain an
NPDES general permit #2 from the IDNR, and persons who will be conducting any
earth disturbing activity on a site less than one acre in size if the earth
disturbing activities are part of a larger common plan of development that
would disturb one acre or more, are required to obtain a CSR permit. "Earth
disturbing activity" means any activity that results in a movement of earth or
a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) or the
existing topography. Earth disturbing activity includes, but is not limited to,
clearing, grading, filling, excavation or addition or replacement of impervious
surface.
      2.   Applications for CSR permits shall be made on forms approved by the
city which may be obtained from the city.
      3.   An applicant for a CSR permit shall pay fees as follows:
         a.   Prior to the issuance of a CSR permit in connection with a
building permit on a platted lot, the applicant shall submit an application
permit fee to the housing and inspection services department in an amount
established by resolution of the city council. If more than three (3)
inspections are required by the terms of this section with respect to said
permit, the applicant shall bear the cost of such inspections, which shall be
the actual cost of the inspections by the city.
         b.   There shall be no permit fee required prior to the issuance of
CSR permits other than those issued in connection with building permits on
platted lots, but the applicant shall bear the cost of reviews and inspections
required by the terms of this section with respect to said permits, which shall
be the actual cost of the reviews and inspections by the city.
      4.   An applicant in possession of an NPDES general permit #2 issued by
the IDNR shall immediately submit to the city full copies of the materials
described below as a basis for the city to determine whether to issue a CSR
permit:
         a.   Applicant's NPDES general permit #2 notice of intent (NOI); and
         b.   Applicant's plans, specifications and materials in support of
applicant's application for the NPDES general permit #2; and
         c.   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in
accordance with this section.
      5.   Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for a
CSR permit shall:
         a.   Comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for SWPPPs
promulgated by the IDNR in connection with issuance of an NPDES general permit
#2; and
         b.   Comply with all mandatory minimum requirements pertaining to the
joint application form, "Protecting Iowa Waters", filed with the IDNR and U.S.
army corps of engineers; and
         c.   Comply with all other applicable local, state or federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application; and
         d.   Include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by the
person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of
this section.
      6.   Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application for a
CSR permit shall contain the provisions of the general permit #2, plus the
following additional provisions:
         a.   All SWPPPs shall comply with Iowa statewide urban design and
specifications (SUDAS) standard design criteria as amended; and
         b.   Address that stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to
erosion by wind or water are covered, vegetated, or otherwise effectively
protected from erosion and sedimentation in accordance with the amount of time
the material will be on site and the manner of its proposed use; no stockpiling
is allowed in the street; and
         c.   Assure that all temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be
maintained until the city has determined that the site has been permanently
stabilized; and
         d.   Limit potential for damage to sensitive environmental areas such
as water bodies, plant communities, rare, threatened and/or endangered species
habitat, wildlife corridors, greenways, etc.; and
         e.   Provide for design and construction methods to stabilize steep or
long continuous slopes; and
         f.   Include measures to control sediment, and the quantity and
quality of storm water, leaving a site during and after construction; and
         g.   Provide for stabilization of waterways and outlets directly
impacted by permitted construction; and
         h.   Protect storm sewer inlets and infrastructure from sediment
loading/plugging; and
         i.   Specify precautions to be taken to contain sediment when working
in or crossing water bodies; and
         j.   Account for stabilization of disturbed areas, including utility
construction areas, as soon as possible; and
         k.   Protect adjacent and outlying roads from sediment and mud from
construction site activities, including tracking; and
         l.   Provide for disposal of collected sediment and floating debris.
      7.   Issuance by the city of a CSR permit shall be a condition precedent
for the issuance of a city building permit or site plan approval.
      8.   For so long as a construction site is subject to an NPDES general
permit #2 or a CSR permit, the applicant shall provide the city with current
information as follows:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the person on site
designated by the owner who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the NPDES general permit
#2 and the CSR permit;
         b.   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
contractor(s) and/or subcontractor(s) that will implement each erosion and
sediment control measure identified in the SWPPP.
         c.   An on site location for storage and retrieval of the current
SWPPP.
         d.   Applicant's failure to provide current information shall
constitute a violation of this section.
      9.   If the applicant for the NPDES general permit #2 and the CSR permit
is not the same individual as the owner/builder on the site, then the applicant
has the option to include the owner/builder as a copermittee. Copermittees have
the same obligations and responsibilities as the original applicant. Absent
written confirmation of transfer of responsibility signed by both the parties
and provided to the city at the office of the enforcement official, the
original applicant remains obligated and responsible for permit compliance on
any parcel of the site, whether the parcel has been sold or not.
      10.   Upon receipt of an application for a CSR permit, the city shall
either find that the application complies with this section and issue a CSR
permit in accordance with this section, or that the application fails to comply
with this section, in which case the city shall provide a written report
identifying noncompliant elements of the application.
   C.   Inspection:
      1.   All inspections required under this section shall be conducted by a
designated person from the city, hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement
officer".
      2.   The applicant shall notify the city when all measures required by
applicant's SWPPP have been accomplished on site, whereupon the city shall
conduct an inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with this
section, and shall within a reasonable time thereafter report to the applicant
either that compliance appears to have been achieved, or that compliance has
not been achieved, in which case the city shall provide a written report
identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately
commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within a
time frame deemed reasonable by the city. Failure to take corrective action in
a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this section.
      3.   Unless otherwise approved by the city, construction shall not occur
on the site at any time when the city has identified conditions of
noncompliance.
      4.   Unless approved by the city, construction activities undertaken by
an applicant prior to resolution of all discrepancies specified in the written
report shall constitute a violation of this section.
      5.   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the applicant or to third parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by inspection.
   D.   Monitoring:
      1.   Upon issuance of a CSR permit, the applicant has an absolute duty to
monitor site conditions and to report to the enforcement officer any change of
circumstances or site conditions which the applicant knows or should know pose
a risk of storm water discharge in a manner inconsistent with applicant's
SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR permit.
      2.   Such report shall be made by the applicant to the enforcement
officer immediately upon knowledge of site condition changes, but in any event
within twenty four (24) hours of the change of circumstances or site
conditions.
      3.   Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of this
section.
      4.   Any third party may also report to the city site conditions which
the third party reasonably believes pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a
manner inconsistent with applicant's SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR
permit.
      5.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections of this
section, the enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as
soon as reasonably possible and thereafter may issue a written stop work order
to the applicant, directing the applicant to take no further action with
respect to the SWPPP, NPDES general permit #2 and/or CSR permit, other than
corrective action provided for hereinafter. The enforcement officer shall
provide the applicant with a written report identifying the conditions of
noncompliance. The applicant shall immediately commence corrective action and
shall complete such corrective action within a time frame deemed reasonable by
the city. Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute
a violation of this section, whereupon the enforcement officer shall
immediately commence enforcement actions specified in subsection E of this
section.
      6.   The enforcement officer shall conduct at least one unannounced
inspection during the course of construction to monitor compliance with the
NPDES general permit #2 and the CSR permit. If the inspection discloses any
noncompliance, the enforcement officer shall provide the applicant with a
written report identifying the conditions of noncompliance. The applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete such corrective
action within a time frame deemed reasonable by the city. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
section, whereupon the enforcement officer shall immediately commence
enforcement actions specified in subsection E of this section.
      7.   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to the applicant or to third parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by inspection.
   E.   Enforcement:
      1.   Violation of any provision of this section may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 06-4202, 4-4-2006)
      2.   Violation of any provision of this section may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction or environmental infraction within the meaning of section
364.22, pursuant to the city's municipal infraction ordinance. A municipal
infraction shall be punishable by a penalty as provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 10-4419, 12-7-2010)
   F.   Appeals:
      1.   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of
the enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the board of
appeals pursuant to the procedure set forth in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord.
06-4202, 4-4-2006)
17-8-16: ENFORCEMENT:
In all cases, the ultimate responsibility for compliance with this chapter
shall rest with the owner of the property, notwithstanding the participation of
any other responsible party. Any violation of this chapter or rules promulgated
thereto shall constitute a nuisance and/or an environmental infraction under
both state and local laws. In such event, the city may, at its option, elect to
carry out any one or all of the following remedies: prosecute environmental
infractions under title 1, chapter 4 of this code, deny or revoke any permit
under this chapter, abate the nuisance in accordance with title 6, chapter 1 of
this code and/or pursue civil remedies in courts of law or equity. (1978 Code
§8-17; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 9
BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE 1
(Rep. by Ord. 07-4290, 10-16-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title.
CHAPTER 10
CONDOMINIUM AND MULTIPLE HOUSING COOPERATIVE CONVERSION CODE
SECTION:
17-10-1: Condominium Conversion Code
17-10-2: Multiple Housing Cooperative Conversion Code
17-10-1: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION CODE:
   A.   All declarations to convert an existing structure, which is used for
human habitation or intended for use for human habitation, to a horizontal
property regime shall be filed with the city clerk.
   B.   Upon filing, the city clerk will provide a copy of the declaration to
the building official.
   C.   Before any inspection is conducted, the declarant must:
      1.   Submit "as built" plans for review by the building official that
indicate compliance with the city building code requirements in effect on the
date of the conversion; and
      2.   Pay condominium conversion fee, which will be set by resolution.
   D.   After "as builts" are submitted and the fee paid, the building official
shall conduct site and building inspections to determine whether the structure
complies with the city building code requirements in effect on the date of the
conversion.
   E.   Within sixty (60) days of the declaration being filed with the city
clerk, the building official shall issue a certificate of compliance if the
structure meets the city building code requirements in effect on the date of
the conversion or provide written notification to the declarant stating why the
structure does not meet the city building code requirements in effect on the
date of the conversion. (Ord. 01-3960, 3-5-2001)
17-10-2: MULTIPLE HOUSING COOPERATIVE CONVERSION CODE:
   A.   No conveyance of any residential building or portion thereof to a
multiple housing cooperative shall take place without the building first
conforming to the city building code then in effect.
   B.   Unless a certificate of occupancy confirming compliance with the
current building codes has been issued by the building official, no person
shall file or record an instrument in the office of the county recorder
conveying an interest in real estate located in the city to a multiple housing
cooperative.
   C.   At least sixty (60) days before an instrument of conveyance is filed or
recorded in the office of the county recorder, the applicant shall
electronically file a copy of such instrument, together with the following
documents, with the building official, and shall also pay a conversion fee in
the amount set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city council by
resolution:
      1.   An as built plan for the entire structure.
      2.   A building code analysis prepared by an architect or professional
engineer, licensed in the state of Iowa, demonstrating that the structure
conforms with then current building codes, or can be brought into conformance
with then current building codes by planned improvements to be made to the
structure.
      3.   If the structure is not in conformance with then current building
codes, the as built plan and building code analysis must be accompanied by
construction plans detailing planned improvements to bring the structure into
conformance with then current building codes.
   D.   Upon receipt of the code analysis, as built plans, construction plans
when necessary, and conversion fee, the building official shall review the
documents and conduct such inspections of the structure as s/he may deem
appropriate to determine whether or not the structure conforms with the
requirements of this section, or can be made compliant with proposed
construction plans. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the documents and the
conversion fee, as provided above, the building official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy or provide written notification to the applicant
regarding existing structural deficiencies and/or the failure of construction
plans to meet applicable codes. (Ord. 14-4601, 12-2-2014)
CHAPTER 11
LICENSING
SECTION:
17-11-1: License Required
17-11-2: Application For License
17-11-3: Fees
17-11-4: Licensing Standards
17-11-5: License Renewals
17-11-6: Revocation Of License
17-11-7: Inactive License
17-11-8: Penalties For Violation
17-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Master Electrician: No person shall perform unsupervised electrical
work, within Iowa City, with or without compensation unless the person holds a
master electrician's class A license issued by the state of Iowa.
   B.   Journeyman Electrician: No person shall work as a journeyman
electrician within the city unless the person holds a journeyman electrician's
class A license issued by the state of Iowa.
   C.   Fire Alarm: No person shall work as a fire alarm installer or perform
maintenance on fire alarm systems unless the person holds a fire alarm license
issued by the state of Iowa.
   D.   Fire Sprinkler Installer: No person shall work as a fire sprinkler
installer or perform maintenance on fire sprinkler systems unless the person
holds a fire sprinkler installer's license issued by the state of Iowa.
   E.   Fire Sprinkler Maintenance: No person shall perform maintenance on a
fire sprinkler system unless the person holds a fire sprinkler maintenance
license or fire sprinkler installer's license issued by the state of Iowa.
   F.   Master HVAC: No person shall undertake the planning, layout,
supervision, or perform heating, ventilation, and air conditioning within the
city, with or without compensation, unless the person holds an HVAC master
license issued by the state of Iowa.
   G.   Journeyman HVAC: No person shall work as a journeyman HVAC installer
within the city unless the person holds an HVAC journeyman license issued by
the state of Iowa.
   H.   Ducted Air Heating And Cooling Installer: No person shall install heat
and cooling ducts as regulated by chapter 1 of this title with or without
compensation unless the person holds an HVAC master, HVAC journeyman or a
ducted air heating and cooling installer's license issued by the state of Iowa.
   I.   Master Hydronics: No person shall plan for, lay out, supervise or
perform hydronics work within the city, with or without compensation, unless
the person holds a master hydronics license or a master HVAC license issued by
the state of Iowa.
   J.   Journeyman Hydronics: No person shall work as a journeyman hydronics
installer unless the person holds a journeyman hydronics or a journeyman HVAC
license issued by the state of Iowa.
   K.   Master Plumber: No person shall plan for, lay out, supervise or perform
plumbing work within the city, with or without compensation, unless the person
holds a master plumber's license issued by the state of Iowa.
   L.   Journeyman Plumber: No person shall work as a journeyman plumber within
the city unless the person holds a journeyman plumber's license issued by the
state of Iowa.
   M.   Sanitary Sewer And Water Service Installer: No person shall work as a
sanitary sewer and water service installer within the city unless the person
holds a sanitary sewer and water service installer's license issued by the city
or holds a master or journeyman plumber's license issued by the state of Iowa.
   N.   Licensed Persons To Be On Site: There shall be a properly licensed
person present at all locations and at all times where work requiring a license
is being performed. At least one licensed person shall be present for every
three (3) laborers. Such licensed person must be an employee of the permit
holder.
   O.   Unlicensed Persons: No person shall knowingly employ or permit an
unlicensed person to perform work within Iowa City if the work is required by
this code or the state of Iowa to be performed by a licensed person. (Ord. 15-
4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person required by this chapter to possess a license shall make application
to the state of Iowa or for a sewer and water installer license make
application to the city. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-3: FEES:
The examination fee and license fee for persons applying for a sewer and water
service installer license shall be established by resolution of city council
and shall not be refunded. The renewal fee, reinstatement fee, and fee for an
inactive license shall be set by resolution of city council. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-
15-2015)
17-11-4: LICENSING STANDARDS:
   A.   A sanitary sewer and water service installer license shall be issued by
the city to every person who successfully passes the examination approved by
the city.
   B.   Any person who fails the sanitary sewer and water service installer
examination or the electrical homeowner's exam must wait a minimum of thirty
(30) calendar days before retesting. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-5: LICENSE RENEWALS:
   A.   License Expiration: Every sewer and water service installer license
which has not previously been revoked shall expire on December 31 of each year.
Any license that has expired may be reinstated within sixty (60) calendar days
after the expiration date upon payment of an additional reinstatement fee.
After the expiration of the sixty (60) calendar day period, no license obtained
by municipal testing, shall be renewed except upon reexamination. Licenses
obtained by an approved third party testing agency, shall be renewed for a
period of five (5) years with the submittal of all required documentation and
payment of all back renewal fees from the time of the license expiration. After
the five (5) years, no license shall be renewed except upon reexamination.
   B.   Employer Identification: At the time of renewal, each licensee shall
identify the company the licensee is currently employed by. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-
15-2015)
17-11-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The city, with consent of the board of appeals, may revoke any license
issued by the city if the license holder shows incompetency or lack of
knowledge, if the license was obtained by fraud or for continual violation of
any sections of this code.
   B.   Licenses are not transferable. The lending, selling, giving, or
assigning of any license or the obtaining of permits thereunder for any other
person shall be deemed cause for revocation.
   C.   Revocation shall occur only after the city has given the licensee
written notice and an opportunity for an administrative hearing before the
board of appeals.
   D.   If a license is revoked for any reason, another license shall not be
issued for at least twelve (12) months after revocation. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-
2015)
17-11-7: INACTIVE LICENSE:
Any current sewer and water service installer license may be classified as
inactive upon written request of the licensee. Once so classified, the license
holder is permitted to maintain the license as current but will not be
permitted to obtain a plumbing permit. The license may be reactivated by
payment of the full license fee for that year. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
17-11-8: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
The violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal infraction as
provided for in subsection
1-4-2D of this code. (Ord. 15-4633, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 12
APPEALS
SECTION:
17-12-1: Board Of Appeals
17-12-2: Appeals Procedure
17-12-1: BOARD OF APPEALS:
A board of appeals is established. Members shall be appointed by the city
council. The number of board members, the terms, and eligibility requirements
shall be set forth in bylaws, which are approved by city council. (Ord. 11-
4455, 10-18-2011)
17-12-2: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Jurisdiction: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building
official or the fire chief with regard to the building code or fire code may
file an appeal to the board of appeals within thirty (30) days of said
decision. "Decision" means any decision, determination, direction, notice,
finding, or order of the building official or the fire chief.
   B.   Application: In order to file an appeal, the person must complete a
form provided by the city department of housing and inspection services and pay
a filing fee. In said application, the person filing the appeal shall state all
code provisions applicable to the appeal, attach relevant supporting
documentation, and explain the basis for the appeal.
   C.   Authority: The board of appeals may by majority vote reverse a decision
by the building official or the fire chief based on the building code or fire
code only if it finds that:
      1.   There are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code. "Practical difficulties" means that: a) the strict
letter of this code is impractical; b) the modification is in conformance with
the intent and purpose of this code; and c) such modification does not lessen
any fire protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity; or
      2.   Any material, alternate design or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this code is appropriate. Any material, alternate
design or method of construction is appropriate if: a) the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the provision of this code; and b) the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability, safety and sanitation; or
      3.   If the building official has incorrectly interpreted a provision of
the code; or
      4.   If the provisions of the code do not fully apply.
   D.   Hearing: The person shall be advised in writing of the time and place
at least three (3) calendar days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the
board shall review all applicable evidence presented regarding the subject
appeal.
   E.   Fees: Fees for filing an appeal shall be set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 02-4038, 8-20-2002; Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015; Ord. 23-4903, 6-20-
2023)
CHAPTER 13
FUEL GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-4631, 7-15-2015)
CHAPTER 14
PENALTIES
SECTION:
17-14-1: Penalties For Violation Of This Title
17-14-1: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 15
MORATORIUM
SECTION:
17-15-1: Moratorium And Area Of Applicability
17-15-2: Definitions
17-15-3: Termination
17-15-1: MORATORIUM AND AREA OF APPLICABILITY:
For properties zoned RS-5, RS-8 and RNS-12 within the Northside, College Green,
Bowery, Longfellow, Mark Twain, Riverfront Crossings East, Riverfront Crossings
West, Miller/Orchard, and Brookland/Roosevelt rental permit districts of the
"Rental Impact Area" in subsection
 17-5-16E,
figure 17-1 of this title, the City shall not issue a rental permit for any
single-family or duplex dwelling unit unless:
   A.   It has a current rental permit; or
   B.   It has a rental permit that expired in the past twelve (12) months and
has been granted a written extension. (Ord. 19-4793, 5-21-2019)
17-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions as defined in title
14, chapter 9 of this Code apply:
   DWELLING: A building wholly or partially used or intended to be used for
residential occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms
located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities used or
intended to be used by one household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
meals. Multiple dwelling units exist if there is more than one meter for any
utility, more than one address to the property, more than one kitchen, and/or
if there is a lockable, physical separation between rooms within the dwelling
unit such that a room or rooms on each side of the separation could be used as
a dwelling unit. (Ord. 19-4793, 5-21-2019)
17-15-3: TERMINATION:
This chapter shall be automatically repealed on March 7, 2020. (Ord. 19-4793,
5-21-2019)
TITLE 18
SITE PLAN REVIEW
ICHAPTER 1
INTENT AND APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
18-1-1: Purpose
18-1-2: Applicability
18-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to establish a procedure which will enable the
City to review certain proposed improvements of property within the City in
order to ensure the orderly and harmonious development of property in a manner
that will:
   A.   Promote the most beneficial relation between present and proposed uses
of land.
   B.   Allow development of property commensurate with the present and
foreseeable availability and capacity of City facilities and services. The
following factors shall be considered in arriving at a conclusion concerning
proposed development of property:
      1.   The projected population of the proposed development or the proposed
intensity of use and the effect the proposal will have on the capacity of
existing water and sanitary sewer lines to avoid overloading existing systems;
      2.   Zoning regulations at the time of the proposal; (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005)
      3.   The City's plans for future construction and provision for public
facilities and services; and
      4.   The existing and planned City facilities and services for the area
which will be affected by the proposed site use. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005;
amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
   C.   Ensure compliance with this Code, as amended, including applicable
zoning regulations, approved subdivision plats, public works standards, and
public safety standards.
   D.   Encourage adequate provision of surface and subsurface stormwater
drainage in order to assure that future development and other properties in the
City will not be adversely affected.
   E.   Provide screening of parking, truck loading, solid waste disposal and
outdoor storage areas from adjacent properties.
   F.   Provide for orderly, safe, and efficient circulation of traffic in the
development and throughout the City.
   G.   Minimize adverse environmental impacts on the developing property.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
   H.   Mitigate the impact of redevelopment on occupants of proposed projects
involving the remodeling or reconstruction of existing multi-family residential
dwellings by fostering communication between the property owner and the
occupants. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Site Plan Review Required:
      1.   The standards in this title are in addition to those required by the
Building Code, as amended, and apply to commercial, industrial, and multi-unit
residential development.
      2.   Site plans must be submitted, reviewed, and approved by the City
according to the provisions of this title prior to the issuance of a building
permit for any development on any "lot", "tract" or "parcel of land" as those
terms are defined in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code, except as exempted
in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Exemptions: Site plan review is not required for the development of one
single-family dwelling or one (1) two-family dwelling or related accessory
structures in any zoning district. However, such uses and structures are not
exempt from other applicable provisions of this Code, including requirements of
the Building Code, as amended.
   C.   Major Site Plans: Major site plans are required for all of the
following types of development:
      1.   Construction of over twelve (12) units residential development and
any additions or alterations to existing development containing over twelve
(12) units residential; or
      2.   Over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of nonresidential floor area.
   D.   Minor Site Plans: Minor site plans are required for all development
that does not require a major site plan, except as exempted in subsection B,
"Exemptions", of this section.
   E.   Sensitive Areas Development Plan: A sensitive areas development plan
may be required for properties containing environmentally sensitive features as
set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of
this Code. The requirements and exemptions for regulated sensitive features are
set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands And Features", of
this Code. Level I sensitive areas review shall be in accordance with the all
procedures and approval processes set forth in chapter 2 of this title, except
for section
18-2-1, "Submittal Requirements", of this title. Submittal requirements for
Level I sensitive areas review are set forth in title 14, chapter 5, article I
of this Code, based on the type of regulated feature(s) that exist on the
subject property. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURES AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
18-2-1: Submittal Requirements
18-2-2: Approval/Denial Process
18-2-3: Effective Period Of Plan Approval
18-2-4: Amendments To Approved Site Plans
18-2-1: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: An application for site plan approval shall be submitted to
the City with the required review fee, as established by resolution of the City
Council. The application shall be deemed complete upon filing the payment and
all information required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
   B.   Minor Site Plans: Minor site plans submitted for approval must include
the following information:
      1.   Date of preparation and north arrow.
      2.   A scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100').
      3.   Legal description or street address of the property.
      4.   Name and address of the owner of record of the property, the
applicant and the person(s) preparing the site plan, and the name and address
of the applicant's attorney, if any.
      5.   Property lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth of a foot
(1/10') and total square footage or acreage of the site.
      6.   Total number and types of dwelling units proposed, proposed uses for
all building, total floor area of each building and any other information which
may be necessary to determine the number of off street parking and loading
spaces required by title 14, "Zoning Code", of this Code.
      7.   Location and exterior dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures or additions, including setback distance from property boundary
lines and distance between structures.
      8.   Location, grade and dimension of all existing and proposed paved
surfaces, including parking and loading areas, entrance and exit drives,
pedestrian walkways, bicycle storage areas, dividers, curbs, islands and other
similar permanent improvements.
      9.   Location of all existing and proposed outdoor recycling, trash,
solid waste, and dumpster areas and methods of screening such areas.
      10.   Location and type of all existing and proposed signs. Proposed
signs may require a separate sign permit. (See title 14, chapter 5, article B,
"Sign Regulations", of this Code.)
      11.   Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil
erosion for the development.
      12.   A landscaping plot plan is required indicating all existing trees
eight inches (8") or larger in diameter measured at a point six inches (6")
above the ground level. In addition, the plot plan must distinguish the
existing or proposed trees or landscaping intended to satisfy tree requirements
or screening requirements of this Code. (See subsection
14-5A-5I, "Landscaping And Tree Requirements Within Parking Areas", and title
14, chapter 5, article E, "Landscaping And Tree Standards", of this Code, and
any other applicable screening required according to title 14, "Zoning Code",
of this Code.)
      13.   Location of the following features of the site:
         a.   Streams and other water bodies, including wetlands.
         b.   Areas subject to flooding from a 100-year event.
      14.   Location, amount and type of proposed lighting, fences, walls or
other screening.
      15.   A detailed lighting plan and photometrics layout which shows the
location, type, height, and intensity of all existing and proposed exterior
lighting on the property. The photometrics layout must show the foot-candles
generated by all lights on the property and provide the total outdoor light
output as measured in initial lumens from all bulbs used in outdoor light
fixtures. The lighting plan and photometrics layout must comply with the
standards specified in title 14, chapter 5, article G, "Outdoor Lighting
Standards", of this Code.
      16.   Location and specifications for any existing or proposed
aboveground or belowground storage facilities for any chemical, salts,
flammable materials or hazardous materials.
      17.   Other data and information as may be reasonably required by the
building official. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
   C.   Major Site Plans: Submittal information for major site plans must
include all the information contained in subsections A and B of this section,
plus the following additional information: (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
      1.   Existing and proposed contours at intervals not to exceed five feet
(5'), provided at least two (2) contours are shown. Contours of neighboring
properties must be provided when deemed necessary by the City.
      2.   When deemed necessary by the City, a complete stormwater runoff
plan, including grades and/or elevations of storm sewer systems, direction of
surface flow, detention areas, outlet control structures and devices and
stormwater calculations. (See title 16, chapter 3, article G, "Stormwater
Collection, Discharge And Runoff", of this Code.)
      3.   Location and size of existing and proposed utilities, including
water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, electrical telephone, cable TV, plus
all existing or proposed fire hydrants.
      4.   A typical cross section of all proposed streets, alleys and parking
areas showing roadway location, type of curb and gutter, paving and sidewalks
to be installed.
      5.   A complete traffic circulation and parking plan. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-
15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
      6.   Within twenty four (24) hours of submitting an application for major
site plan approval, the applicant shall post notice on the subject property of
intent to develop on the site. The notice to be posted will be provided by the
City and shall be posted as directed by the City. For major site plans
involving any additions or alterations to existing development containing over
twelve (12) residential units, the applicant, within twenty four (24) hours of
submitting an application for major site plan approval, shall mail written
notice to all current occupants of the development property informing them of
the application and intention to develop on the site, the anticipated
construction timeline, and phasing of the project. The applicant shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the City that such notice requirements have been
satisfied before the application will be considered complete.
      7.   For major site plans involving any additions or alterations to
existing development containing over twelve (12) residential units, the
applicant shall submit an occupant transition plan if there are any occupants
of the development on the date the application is submitted. Such a plan must
include the number of current occupants; a general description of current
contractual obligations between the owner and the occupant(s); when any
leasehold interest expires; and a construction timeline and phasing plan. (Ord.
17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-2-2: APPROVAL/DENIAL PROCESS:
   A.   Minor site plans shall be reviewed administratively. Major site plans
shall be reviewed administratively unless a request for Planning and Zoning
Commission review is made in accordance with subsection B of this section.
      1.   Except for major site plans involving any additions or alterations
to existing development containing over twelve (12) residential units, the
building official shall review and comment, approve, approve with conditions,
or deny such site plans submitted within twenty one (21) working days after
application.
      2.   Where an occupant transition plan is required pursuant to subsection
18-2-1C7 of this chapter, in no event shall the site plan be approved until the
City Council has considered and approved said occupant transition plan. In
approving the occupant transition plan, Council may impose conditions to
address the impact of the redevelopment on occupants of the property, but may
not prevent either the landlord or the tenant from exercising its rights under
any lease and/or Iowa law, including but not limited to those of eviction, a
decision not to renew existing leases or a challenge by a tenant thereto, and
may not alter the terms of the lease/right of possession by imposing
requirements that relocation benefits or other assistance be provided.
   B.   For major site plans, the Director of Neighborhood Development Services
or those owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property located within
two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed development
site, may request review of the site plan by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The request must be in writing and must be filed with the building
official within twenty (20) days of submission of the original application or
within twenty (20) days of the posting requirements set forth in section
18-2-1 of this chapter, whichever is later. When such a request is received,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may review and approve, review and approve
with conditions, or review and deny said plan within twenty (20) working days
of receipt of the written request for Planning and Zoning Commission review.
The commission's scope of review shall be the same as that of the building
official.
   C.   Upon site plan approval by the building official or the Planning and
Zoning Commission, a building permit may be issued. (Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017)
18-2-3: EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PLAN APPROVAL:
The approval of any site plan shall remain valid for three years after the date
of approval. The approved site plan shall be null and void if a building permit
has not been issued within three years of the site plan approval and if actual
construction has not commenced within forty two (42) months of the site plan
approval. "Actual construction" shall mean that the permanent placement of
construction materials has started and is proceeding without undue delay.
(Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728, 10-3-2017; Ord. 23-4908, 9-5-
2023)
18-2-4: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS:
Any approved site plan may be amended in accordance with the standards and
procedures established herein. However, the building official may waive such
procedures and fees in the event the building official determines that the
proposed amendment involves only a minor change in the approved site plan and
is in compliance with the site plan review standards. For the purposes of this
section, minor changes may include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   A change to move building walls within the confines of the smallest
rectangle that would have enclosed each originally approved building, to
relocate building entrances or exits or to shorten building canopies.
   B.   A change to a more restrictive use, provided there is no change in the
amount of off street parking as originally approved.
   C.   A change in angle of parking or a parking aisle width, provided there
is no reduction in the amount of off street parking as originally approved.
   D.   A change in location of the ingress and egress drives of not more than
one hundred feet (100'), provided such change is approved by the City and is in
compliance with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access
Management Standards", of this Code.
   E.   A substitution of plant species, provided the substituted species is
similar in nature and in screening effects and is otherwise in compliance with
requirements of this Code.
   F.   A change in type and design of lighting fixture, provided there will be
no change in the intensity of light at the property boundary and the proposed
fixture is in compliance with the applicable provisions of title 14, chapter 5,
article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this Code.
   G.   A change to increase peripheral yards.
   H.   The replacement of paved areas with landscaping, provided adequate
parking facilities are retained. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 17-4728,
10-3-2017)
CHAPTER 3
SITE PLAN DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
18-3-1: Compliance Required
18-3-2: Design Standards
18-3-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All site plans submitted for city approval must comply with the following
design standards. These standards are the minimum standards necessary to
safeguard the public health, safety, aesthetics and general welfare of the city
and are necessary to fulfill the intent of the zoning ordinance, the
comprehensive plan, as amended, and other specific community plans. (Ord. 05-
4186, 12-15-2005)
18-3-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Drainage: The design of the proposed development shall make adequate
provision for surface and subsurface drainage to limit the rate of increased
runoff of surface water to adjacent and downstream property so that the
proposed development will not substantially and materially increase the natural
flow onto adjacent downstream property.
   B.   Utility Connections: The design of the proposed development shall make
adequate provision for connection to water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
electrical and other public utility lines within the capacity limits of those
utility lines.
   C.   Fire Safety: The design of the proposed development shall make adequate
provision for fire protection and for building placement, acceptable location
of flammable materials and other measures to ensure fire safety.
   D.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control: The design of the proposed
development shall comply with the standards for erosion and sedimentation
control established in the city design standards in order to protect adjoining
or surrounding property. The development plan shall consider the topography and
soils of the site to achieve the lowest potential for erosion.
   E.   Landscape Preservation: So far as practical, the landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state by minimizing tree and soil removal and by
topographic modifications which result in maximum harmony with adjacent areas.
Structures and other site improvements shall be located in such a manner that
the maximum number of trees are preserved on the site. The development plan
shall identify existing trees to be preserved and trees to be removed and shall
specify measures to be utilized to protect trees during construction. To the
extent reasonably feasible, all wetlands shall be retained in their natural
state or consistent with their functions and values or be replaced with a
wetland of equal or greater value.
   F.   Vehicle And Pedestrian Circulation: The design of vehicle and
pedestrian circulation shall be provided for safe and convenient flow of
vehicles and movement of pedestrians and shall, to the greatest extent
reasonably possible, prevent hazards to adjacent streets or property. The city
may limit entrances and exits upon adjacent streets in order to prevent
congestion on adjacent or surrounding streets and in order to provide for safe
and orderly vehicle movement. The city may limit street access according to the
provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article C, "Access Management Standards", of
this code. The City may require construction of sidewalks in the abutting
public right of way where not present, according to the standards at section
15-3-3.
   G.   Outdoor Dumpster Areas: Outdoor recycling, trash, solid waste, and
dumpster areas shall be in compliance with the city's solid waste regulations
and in compliance with screening requirements contained in title 14, "Zoning
Code", of this code. (See subsection
14-4C-2Q, "Outdoor Dumpster Areas", of this code.)
   H.   Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall relate to the scale and
location of the development in order to maintain adequate security while
preventing a nuisance or hardship to adjacent properties or streets. All
exterior lighting must comply with the provisions of title 14, chapter 5,
article G, "Outdoor Lighting Standards", of this code.
   I.   Screening Of Equipment: All ground level mechanical and utility
equipment shall be screened from public view according to the provisions of
title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. (See subsection
14-4C-2N, "Mechanical Structures", of this code.)
   J.   Screening Of Storage And Loading Areas: If allowed, all outdoor storage
areas must be located and screened according to the applicable base zone
provisions of title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code. All outdoor storage areas
and loading/unloading service areas with delivery facilities, including bay
doors or docks, which face or are visible from residential district and the
Iowa River shall be screened to a height of no less than six feet (6') and must
meet all screening standards specified in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this
code, for outdoor storage and loading areas.
   K.   Parking Areas: Any parking areas or vehicle storage area designed or
intended for use by more than four (4) vehicles located adjacent to any street
shall be separated and screened from such street by a curbed, planted area as
specified in title 14, "Zoning Code", of this code.
   L.   Sensitive Areas: All sensitive areas development plans must comply with
the applicable provisions of title 14, chapter 5, article I, "Sensitive Lands
And Features", of this code.
   M.   Compliance With City, State, And Federal Regulations: Site plans shall
comply with all applicable city, state, and federal regulations. (Ord. 05-4186,
12-15-2005; amd. Ord. 22-4882, 6-21-2022)
CHAPTER 4
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
18-4-1: Development Activity
18-4-2: Performance Guarantee
18-4-3: Penalties
18-4-1: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:
No person shall undertake or carry out any activity or use, including any
building demolition, grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating or tree
removal, for which site plan approval is first required by this title, nor
shall such activity proceed prior to obtaining the necessary permits, including
local, county, state and federal permits. Any violation of this section is
subject to fines and penalties described in section
18-4-3 of this chapter for each day of the violation, from the day of discovery
of the incident until an approved restoration plan or an approved site plan is
granted. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
18-4-2: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
   A.   The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure completion of
improvements connected with a proposed use as required by this title,
including, but not limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks,
drainage, fences, screens, walls and landscaping.
   B.   "Performance guarantee" shall mean a cash deposit, certified check, or
irrevocable standby letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of the
improvements, to be determined by the applicant and verified by the city.
   C.   Upon issuance of a building permit, the city may require a performance
guarantee.
   D.   When a performance guarantee is required, there shall also be provided
a prescribed period of time within which improvements must be completed.
   E.   Where a performance guarantee is not required upon issuance of a
building permit and the improvements cannot be completed prior to occupancy or
commencement of a use, the building official may issue a temporary certificate
of occupancy and require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as
set forth in this section.
   F.   Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee is required, as determined by the city, the city shall
return the performance guarantee to the applicant.
   G.   In the event that the applicant defaults in making the improvements for
which a performance guarantee is required or fails to complete the improvements
within the time prescribed by the city, the city shall have the right, but not
the obligation, to use the performance guarantee deposited, together with any
interest earned thereon, to complete the improvements through contract or
otherwise. This includes the specific right to enter upon the subject property
to make the improvements. If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to
allow the city to complete the improvements for which the guarantee was posted,
the applicant shall be required to pay the city the amount by which the cost of
completing the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee
deposited. Should the city use the performance guarantee or a portion thereof
to complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after completion
shall be applied first to the city's administrative costs in completing the
improvements, with any balance remaining being refunded to the applicant. At
the time the performance guarantee is deposited, the applicant shall enter into
a written agreement with the city, which incorporates the performance guarantee
requirements set forth in this section. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
18-4-3: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this title shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction or environmental infraction as provided for in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 05-4186, 12-15-2005)
 
