CITY CODE
of
KNOXVILLE, IA
Code current through:
Ord. 25-11, passed 6-16-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Knoxville, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-11, passed June 16, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 25-12
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING CODE OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KNOXVILLE, IOWA, 2009
 
   BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa:
 
   SECTION 1. The Official Zoning Map referred to in Title 9, Chapter 2,
Section 2 of the City Zoning Code is amended by changing from M-1 Service
Commercial/Limited Industrial to C-2 General Commercial, the real estate
described as follows:
 
1600 South Lincoln Street, Knoxville, IA 50138 – Property Legal Description: NE
NW LOT 1 W275.2' OF E441.4'OF N230' LOT 1 EXC W378.8', City of Knoxville, Iowa.
The property is referred to as Parcel ID: 1070800500 by the Marion County, Iowa
Assessor’s Office. See Exhibit A Location Map.
 
   SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
      SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional.
 
      SECTION 4. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and
after its final passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED by the City Council this 18th day of August, 2025, and APPROVED this
18th day of August,
2025.                                                                                                                                            
_____________________________
ATTEST:                     Brian J. Hatch, MAYOR
 
 
_________________________________________
Jodie Wyman, CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
LOCATION MAP
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb550e2311696eef4b3f0e6e93f890449faa3be2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3444_9304x6323.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25-13
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING CODE OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KNOXVILLE, IOWA, 2009
 
   BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa:
 
   SECTION 1. The Official Zoning Map referred to in Title 9, Chapter 2,
Section 2 of the City Zoning Code is amended by changing from R-2 Low to Medium
Density Residential to C-2 General Commercial, the real estate described as
follows:
 
102 North Lincoln Street, Knoxville, IA 50138 – Property Legal Description: OLD
KHS SUBD LOT 2, City of Knoxville, Iowa. The property is referred to as Parcel
ID: 1004306000 by the Marion County, Iowa Assessor’s Office. See Exhibit A
Location Map.
 
   SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
      SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional.
 
      SECTION 4. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and
after its final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED by the City Council this 15th day of September, 2025, and APPROVED this
15th day of September,
2025.                                                                                                                                            
_____________________________
ATTEST:                     Brian J. Hatch, MAYOR
 
 
_________________________________________
Jodie Wyman, CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
LOCATION MAP
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb550e2311696eef4b3f0e6e93f890449faa3be2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3447_8760x8805.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25-14
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING CODE OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KNOXVILLE, IOWA, 2009
 
   BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa:
 
   SECTION 1. The Official Zoning Map referred to in Title 9, Chapter 2,
Section 2 of the City Zoning Code is amended by changing from R-2 Low to Medium
Density Residential to R-2 PUD Low to Medium Density Residential Planned Unit
Development, the real estate described as follows:
 
Veterans District, Knoxville, IA 50138 – Property Legal Description: THE
VETERANS DISTRICT PLAT 4, LOTS 1-8, City of Knoxville, Iowa. The property is
referred to as Parcel ID: 0897600500 by the Marion County, Iowa Assessor’s
Office. See Exhibit A Location Map.
 
   SECTION 2. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. The above-described property shall be
developed in accordance with the approved Master Plan, attached as Exhibit B,
that provides the specific guidelines and standards for: land uses;
transportation facilities; and building densities, arrangements, and types.
 
   SECTION 3. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
      SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional.
 
      SECTION 5. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and
after its final passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED by the City Council this 6th day of October, 2025, and APPROVED this 6th
day of October,
2025.                                                                                                                                            
_____________________________
ATTEST:                     Brian J. Hatch, MAYOR
 
 
_________________________________________
Jodie Wyman, CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb550e2311696eef4b3f0e6e93f890449faa3be2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3450_7354x6749.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
THE VETERANS DISTRICT PLAT 4, LOTS 1-8
R-2 PUD
 
INTENT
 
This district is intended to provide for low to medium-density residential
development characterized by detached and duplex dwellings on smaller lots.
 
PERMITTED USES
 
The permitted uses of the district are as follows:
 
Accessory Dwellings
Detached Dwellings
Duplex Dwellings
Home Occupations
 
ACCESSORY USES
 
The permitted accessory uses are as follows:
 
Accessory Buildings
Private Garages
Private Swimming Pools
Temporary Uses (Construction and Real Estate Sales)
 
BULK REGULATIONS
 
The bulk regulations of the R-2 District (9-6A-5) shall be the minimum
requirements of this district, except as follows:
 
 
Interior Side Yard    5 feet
Corner Lot Side Yard  15 feet adjacent to the street
Rear Yard             25 feet
 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
 
In addition to the R-2 bulk regulations that apply, the following R-
2 additional requirements apply:
 
9-6A-6: Additional Requirements to the Bulk Regulations
9-6A-7: Lot Division Proceeds for Duplex and Attached Dwellings
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 09-25
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KNOXVILLE, IOWA,
2009, AKA "CITY CODE."
WHEREAS, section 380.8 of the code of Iowa, 2009, requires that at least once
every five years a city shall adopt a code of ordinances; and,
WHEREAS, on April 5, 2002 ordinance no. 02-05 was published and thereby
effective adopting the city code of Knoxville, Iowa; and,
WHEREAS, the city of Knoxville adds new ordinances and amendments upon passage
by supplementation to the city code itself; and,
WHEREAS, if a proposed code of ordinances contains only existing ordinances
which have been edited and compiled without substantive changes, the council
may adopt such code without notice of public hearing; and,
WHEREAS, it is now appropriate to adopt a code of compiled and existing
ordinances under the statute, without any substantive changes proposed.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KNOXVILLE,
IOWA:
SECTION I. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code
of the city of Knoxville, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the
changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code
and law of the city as enacted by the city council, and shall hereafter be
referred to as "the city code".
SECTION II. It is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, a copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
SECTION III. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the city code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the
city code in any manner to cause the law of the city to be misrepresented.
SECTION IV. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION V. A code of ordinances, containing only the current and existing
ordinances edited and compiled without change in substance, shall be and hereby
is adopted as the city code, 2009.
Passed and approved this 21st day of December, 2009.
   /s/   Harvey E. Sprafka, Mayor   
ATTEST:
/s/   Jody J. Meyer, City Clerk   
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Official City Code
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: OFFICIAL CITY CODE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Knoxville.
This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CITY CODE or CODE
and is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided
in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1996 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1996 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revisions by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1996 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City Clerk. Any
person having a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said
Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. The person receiving
replacement pages shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered or made available through the office of the City
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed to do so by order of the
City Council. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations and not requiring the vote
of the people; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of
a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to election;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1996 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties service or rate of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, except as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1996 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance, after it becomes effective does not revive
an ordinance previously repealed, and no new ordinance shall be construed or
held to repeal a former ordinance unless expressly so stated. However, any
offense committed against or under any such former ordinance shall not be
affected, and any conviction, penalty, abatement, punishment, judgment, decree
or other court order shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically so ordered by a court of law or equity.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1996 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the
approved usage of the language; technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed
according to such meaning.
   C.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1996 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Knoxville, County of Marion, State of Iowa.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Knoxville, Iowa.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of Knoxville.
COUNTY: The County of Marion, State of Iowa.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Knoxville".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Knoxville".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The State of Iowa.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1996 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Definitions
1-4-2: Violations, Penalties, And Alternative Relief
1-4-3: Civil Citations
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Standard Penalty
1-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CODE: The code of ordinances of the city of Knoxville as may be amended from
time to time.
MUNICIPAL INFRACTION: A violation of this code punishable by civil penalty and
such alternative relief sought by the city and as provided by state law.
REPEAT OFFENSE: A recurring violation of the same section of the code of
ordinances. (Ord. 88-10, 12-5-1988; amd. 1996 Code)
1-4-2: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
   A.   Designations As Municipal Infractions: Any violation of this code, with
the exception of any violation which is a felony or misdemeanor under state law
or which is in violation of the following chapters, articles and/or sections,
is a municipal infraction:
Code Location  Subject
Code Location                  Subject
Title 5, chapter 1             General traffic provisions
Title 5, chapter 2             Parking regulations
Title 5, chapter 5             Noise control, motor vehicles
Title 6, chapter 3             General offenses
Title 6, chapter 4, article A  Dogs
Title 6, chapter 4, article B  Cats
Title 6, chapter 4, article D  Livestock and fowl
Title 6, chapter 5             Curfew
Section                        Sidewalk cleaning
7-2-1
 
(Ord. 89-4, 4-3-1989; amd. Ord. 97-4, 3-17-1997; Ord. 04-05, 5-21-2001; Ord.
13-09, 9-16-2013; Ord. 13-10, 10-7-2013)
   B.   Civil Penalties: Unless another civil penalty is provided elsewhere in
this code for a specific violation, a municipal infraction is a civil offense
punishable as provided in the following schedule of civil penalties: (Ord. 88-
10, 12-5-1988)
 
Schedule Of Civil Penalties
First offense                    $100.00
Second offense                   250.00
Third and subsequent offenses    500.00
 
(Ord. 06-05, 7-10-2006)
   C.   Each Day Separate Offense: Each day that a municipal infraction occurs
and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
   D.   Alternative Relief: Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
chapter does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the
court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not
limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief. (Ord. 88-10, 12-5-
1988)
1-4-3: CIVIL CITATIONS 1 :
Any officer authorized by the city to enforce this code may issue a civil
citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The citation may be
served by personal service as provided in Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.305,
by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant's last known mailing
address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided
in Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Iowa
rule of civil procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the
issuing officer, one copy shall be sent to the clerk of the district court, and
one copy shall be sent to the county treasurer. The citation shall serve as
notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The name and address of the defendant.
   B.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   C.   The location and time of the infraction including description of the
property where the violation concerns a condition of real property.
   D.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   E.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   F.   The time and place of court appearance.
   G.   The penalty for failure to appear in court. (Ord. 10-03, 12-20-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 364.22 (4).
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provisions of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the governing body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord.
88-10, 12-5-1988)
1-4-5: STANDARD PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular
provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or to
obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of this code, or any
rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-03, 3-19-2001)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Form Of Government
1-5-2: Powers And Duties
1-5-3: Compensation Of Council
1-5-4: Term; Compensation Of Mayor
1-5-5: Meetings
1-5-1: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council with appointed Manager
form of government. (Ord. 89-11, 9-18-1989)
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City. (1983 Code §
1-4-2)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL:
Council members shall receive a salary of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting,
as of the first Council Meeting of the year 2022, payable annually at the end
of the year. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; amd. Ord. 21-13, 10-20-2021)
1-5-4: TERM; COMPENSATION OF MAYOR:
The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years. The position of Mayor shall
be part-time employment. The Mayor shall receive a salary of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) per year; said salary shall be payable bi-weekly. (Ord. 89-
11, 9-18-1989; amd. Ord. 21-09, 10-19-2021)
1-5-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the
first and third Mondays of every month at the Council Chambers in the City
Hall, 305 South Third Street, Knoxville, Iowa; however, when a meeting date
falls on a day designated as a City holiday, the meeting shall be held on the
following Tuesday.
   B.   Quorum; Order Of Business:
      1.   Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of all Councilmembers.
      2.   Order Of Business: The following shall be the order of business of
the Council:
         a.   Roll call.
         b.   Consent agenda.
         c.   Citizen comments.
         d.   Ordinances, resolutions, miscellaneous items.
         e.   City Manager report.
   C.   Open Meetings: City Council meetings must be open to the public.
   D.   Substitution For Presiding Officer: In the absence of the Mayor and the
Mayor Pro Tempore, the Council may appoint the next most senior Councilmember
to act in this capacity. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6-1: Purpose
1-6-2: Appointment; Term
1-6-3: Oath
1-6-4: Bond
1-6-5: Compensation
1-6-6: Duties
1-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a manager for the city. (Ord., 6-
16-1975)
1-6-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The manager is to be appointed by a majority vote (3 voting members) of the
council. The appointment must be made on the basis of that individual's
qualifications and not on the basis of political affiliation. The manager shall
hold office at the pleasure of the council and shall be subject to removal by
majority vote of the council. (Ord., 6-16-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
1-6-3: OATH:
Before undertaking the duties of the office, the city manager shall take the
following oath:
I,                 do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will
faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all the duties
of the office of City Manager in Knoxville, Iowa, as now or hereafter required
by law.
(1996 Code)
1-6-4: BOND:
The manager shall be bonded for the faithful performance of his/her duties, and
in favor of the city, in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The
city shall pay the cost of this bond. (Ord., 6-16-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
1-6-5: COMPENSATION:
The manager shall receive such annual salary as the council shall from time to
time determine by resolution, and payment shall be made biweekly from the
treasury of the city, in the manner provided for paying other officers and
employees. (Ord., 6-16-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
1-6-6: DUTIES:
The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city. The duties of
the city manager shall be as follows:
   A.   Plans, directs, coordinates, controls and evaluates all activities of
all city departments and municipal functions, within broad guidelines and
policies established by the elected body; informs the council of the status of
activities, programs, progress, problems, plans, and departmental operations.
   B.   Develops and administers a personnel management system for the
recruitment, selection, hiring, placement and training of city employees;
approves and acts upon promotions, transfers, position classifications and
reclassifications, job content evaluations, demotions, removal, and related
personnel actions; and oversees (with legal counsel) the disposition of
employee discipline, grievances, disputes, and matters involving staff and/or
labor relations, with the exceptions of the city attorney, city clerk, and
librarian and his/her designees; investigates the affairs and conduct of any
department, agency, officer or employee under the city manager's supervision.
   C.   Prepares the annual operating budget for the city, laying out a
proposed spending plan for the council's consideration, and implementing and
administering the approved budget. Prepares the annual capital improvement
program and the city's long range infrastructure and economic development plans
as part of the administrative oversight function. Responsible for regular
financial reporting to the elected body.
   D.   Promotes internal operating efficiencies; motivates subordinate
department heads through periodic staff meetings; reviews the collective
performance of each operating department and the individual performance of
department heads and key professionals; and encourages employee self-
development programs. Reviews various regular and special operating reports
against budgetary constraints, program goals and objectives, and city policies,
rules, and regulations; and prepares special reports for the council's
consideration, information and/or action.
   E.   Attends all city council and related public meetings; directs the
preparation of the council's agenda; and advises the council (collectively and
individually) concerning the status of public inquiries, projects of current
interest, and proposed legislative action. Appears before citizen groups and
other organizational meetings; makes presentations and attends ceremonial
functions; and serves as a spokesperson for the city in situations of mutual
interest and concern with neighboring municipalities, as well as with federal
and state agencies; and represents the community to the local press and media.
Also promotes the city to outside entities, to economic development and
investor interests, and provides assistance for same.
   F.   Coordinates the overall police powers, activities and functions in the
enforcement of laws and ordinances, the prevention of crime, and the protection
of persons, life and property and the general preservation of the public safety
of city citizens; assesses current and long term city needs in various program
or service delivery areas; makes appropriate recommendations to the council;
develops program goals and objectives; and implements new activities.
   G.   Assures all city ordinances are effectively enforced; prepares
correspondence needed to direct or document city business decisions; assists
citizens, outside agencies, developers, local community groups, utility
companies, etc., and city staff in resolving governmental or operating problems
by bringing important matters to the council's attention; assures that self and
staff maintain an awareness of worker safety guidelines and standards and apply
these in performing daily activities and programs; and performs related work as
directed by the mayor and council. (Ord. 04-13, 12-6-2004)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Position Title
1-7-2: Appointment
1-7-3: Immediate Supervisor
1-7-4: Duties And Responsibilities
1-7-5: Qualifications
1-7-1: POSITION TITLE:
The position title for this City official shall be the City Clerk. (1996 Code)
1-7-2: APPOINTMENT:
The City Clerk is appointed by the City Council at the first meeting of January
following a regular City election. The term of this office shall be for a
period of two (2) years and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, or
until a successor is appointed and qualified. (1996 Code)
1-7-3: IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR:
The immediate supervisor of the City Clerk shall be the City Manager. (1996
Code)
1-7-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   General Statement Of Duties: The City Clerk oversees the administrative
activities of the City Clerk's office, maintains the City data processing
program, functions as the City personnel officer and does related work as
required.
   B.   Position Summary: The City Clerk is responsible for the general
administration, development and direction of the office of the City Clerk. The
work is performed with a wide latitude for technical and administrative
discretion within the framework of broad policies established by the City
Manager. Supervision is exercised over the work of full-time and part-time
officer personnel.
   C.   Essential Duties And Responsibilities: The City Clerk shall perform the
following duties and responsibilities (illustrative only):
      1.   Supervises the activities of the City Clerk's office.
      2.   Assists the Mayor, City Council and the City Manager in the
discharge of their duties and attends all Council meetings.
      3.   Notifies and/or sends copies of City Council action to all person
affected by its action.
      4.   Keeps records, ordinances, resolutions, deeds, bonds, proceedings,
special assessments and public measures of the City Council properly indexed.
      5.   Prepares and publishes public notices in the official newspaper 1
of the City.
      6.   Issues licenses and permits pursuant to the Code of Iowa and
ordinance of the City and keeps records of same.
      7.   Serves as secretary to Civil Service Commission and other boards
assigned.
      8.   Assist public as necessary.
      9.   Operates the City computer system, keeps current in upgrading of
system and assists others in the operation of the system.
      10.   Inputs accounts payable.
      11.   Processes all payroll records, workers' compensation forms.
      12.   Serves as City Personnel Officer and assists the City Manager with
the administration of the City personnel requirements; supervises and maintains
personnel records for City employees.
      13.   Assists, under the direction of the City Manager, in the collective
bargaining, day-to-day grievance procedures, mediation and arbitration
proceedings.
      14.   Assists with the interpretation of contract language and sees that
department heads and supervisory personnel are well informed to administer the
provisions adequately and effectively.
      15.   Checks existing and new employee relations policies and programs to
ensure clarity of interpretation and compliance with laws and regulations
governing employment, utilizing legal counsel if necessary.
      16.   Assists with staffing activities, including recruitment, placement,
orientation, transfer, promotion, layoff, recall and termination of represented
personnel.
      17.   Conducts annual performance evaluations of supervisory personnel.
      18.   Coordinates and assists in the administration of the employee
benefit program, to include health insurance and pension programs.
      19.   Other duties that may be assigned. (1996 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 362.3.
1-7-5: QUALIFICATIONS:
Qualifications of the City Clerk shall be as follows:
   A.   Required Knowledge, Skills And Abilities: Thorough knowledge of general
laws and administrative policies governing Municipal financial practices and
procedures; thorough knowledge of the functions and organization of Municipal
government; good knowledge of modern office methods and practices; ability to
prepare reports of official proceedings; ability to read, interpret and apply
provisions of laws, rules and regulations; ability to perform difficult and
responsible clerical work and to keep clear and concise records and
correspondence; ability to formulate and install standard accounting methods,
procedures, forms and records; ability to evaluate work performed by
subordinates; ability to establish and maintain harmonious working
relationships with other department heads and governmental officials; good
professional judgment; good physical condition; thoroughly familiar with
computers and their operation; knowledge of personnel practices, laws and
regulations as they relate to cities; basic understanding of collective
bargaining process, contract administration and employee relations.
   B.   Education, Experience And Training: Four (4) years of college, business
or technical school, or graduate from high school with a minimum of four (4)
years of appropriate experience in a city clerk's office; strong leadership and
people oriented management skills; ability to operate all the phases of the
City computer with associated word processing; Iowa Notary Public or obtain
within six (6) months of date of hire; valid Iowa drivers license.
   C.   Equipment Operation Required: Computer, calculator, copy machine,
telephone, word processor and other office equipment. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FINANCE OFFICER
SECTION:
1-8-1: Position Title
1-8-2: Immediate Supervisor
1-8-3: Duties And Responsibilities
1-8-4: Qualifications
1-8-1: POSITION TITLE:
The position title for the official shall be the Administrative Assistant/
Finance Officer. (1996 Code)
1-8-2: IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR:
The immediate supervisor of the Finance Officer shall be the City Manager.
(1996 Code)
1-8-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Finance Officer shall perform the following duties and responsibilities:
   A.   Serves as chief accounting officer for the City.
   B.   Oversees the balancing of accounts for the City each month and at year
end.
   C.   Prepares financial agenda items and attends City Council meetings as
directed.
   D.   Assists the City Manager in budget preparation and prepares State
budget reports.
   E.   Directs the maintenance of a central expenditure accounting system for
the City government in a manner consistent with established and accepted
Municipal accounting principles and practices, and in sufficient detail to
produce adequate costs, financial and statistical data for management purposes
and to meet statutory requirements.
   F.   Provides the basic documents to implement the disbursement of all City
funds in accordance with officially established procedures.
   G.   Maintains a system of control to ensure that expenditures do not exceed
appropriations.
   H.   Prepares financial statements, cost reports and statements of receipts
and expenditures at regular intervals for use by the City Manager.
   I.   Directs the approval, audit and certification of all claims against the
City for payrolls, goods and services.
   J.   Compiles statements of current operating and capital outlay
expenditures for use by the City in preparing budget estimates.
   K.   Prepares financial documents for preaudit.
   L.   Responsible for monitoring all bank accounts and depositing funds in
the banks designated by the City Council in amounts not to exceed the
depository limits set by law.
   M.   Monitors and manages debt service and investments, risk management,
accounting and bookkeeping functions, debt analysis, revenue and expenditures
forecasting and cost/benefit analysis.
   N.   Works with staff to accomplish projects identified herein and others
not listed.
   O.   Other duties as may be assigned. (1996 Code)
1-8-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Qualifications of the Finance Officer shall be as follows:
   A.   Required Knowledge, Skills And Abilities: Knowledge of general laws and
administrative policies governing Municipal financial practices and procedures,
knowledge of the functions and organization of Municipal government, thorough
knowledge of the principals and practices of accounting and budgeting, ability
to install standard accounting methods, procedures, forms and records; ability
to perform fiscal planning and to advise to the formalization of fiscal policy;
ability to work well with others and the public.
   B.   Education, Experience And Training: Four years of college with a degree
in finance, public or business administration with emphasis in finance or
budgeting; at least two (2) to four (4) years of experience in public or
business finance, accounting, bookkeeping and computer operations; and
demonstrated written and verbal communication skills.
   C.   Equipment Operation Required: Computer, calculator, copy machine,
telephone, word processor and office equipment. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointment
1-9-2: Compensation
1-9-3: Duties
1-9-4: Responsibility
1-9-5: Annual Report
1-9-6: Confirmation Of Fees And Rules
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT:
The City Manager shall, subject to the approval of the Council, appoint a
person to serve as Public Works Director. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
1-9-2: COMPENSATION:
The Public Works Director shall serve under the direction of the City Manager
and shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be fixed by the
Council. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
1-9-3: DUTIES:
The Public Works Director shall have general charge and supervision of the work
of the Public Works Department. This includes responsibility for street
maintenance, parks maintenance, cemetery operations, wastewater treatment,
building and grounds maintenance, and planning and zoning. (Ord. 458, 3-1-1956;
amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
1-9-4: RESPONSIBILITY:
The Public Works Director shall be responsible for all property of his/her
Department. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
1-9-5: ANNUAL REPORT:
The Public Works Director shall, at all times, keep complete records of all
properties of the Department and in January of each year, file in the office of
the Clerk an inventory report of all the Department supplies and materials,
tools, fixtures and furnishings, equipment and all other properties. (Ord. 83-
4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
1-9-6: CONFIRMATION OF FEES AND RULES:
All fees and charges for the use of any of the facilities of this Department
and for the sale of any cemetery lots in existence on the date of the adoption
of this Chapter are hereby confirmed. All rules for the use of any of the
facilities of this Department in existence on the date of the adoption of this
Chapter are hereby confirmed. The City Council may revise any of the fees and
charges for the use of the facilities of the Department and for the sale of any
cemetery lots and may further revise any rules for the use of the facilities of
this Department after the adoption of this Chapter. (Ord. 84-7, 11-6-1984, eff.
1-1-1985)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Elections
1-10-2: Precincts
1-10-1: ELECTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to designate the methods by
which candidates for elective Municipal offices in the City shall be nominated.
   B.   Nominating Method To Be Used: For all Municipal elections of the City
after the adoption of this Chapter, all candidates for elective Municipal
office shall be nominated by the procedures provided by chapter 44 or 45 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended. Pursuant to chapter 376.8 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended, candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot shall be elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions
open. (Ord. 82-3, 1-18-1982; 1996 Code)
1-10-2: PRECINCTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to divide the City of
Knoxville, Iowa into geographical areas, herein called "precincts";
   B.   Division Into Precincts: The City of Knoxville, Iowa, is hereby divided
into four (4) precincts.
      1.   First Precinct: The first precinct shall include that part of the
City of Knoxville, Iowa, laying north and east of the Centerlines of the
following description:
Beginning at the north City Limits at the Centerline of Lincoln Street thence,
in a southerly direction following said Centerline to the Centerline of Long
Lane Drive, thence along said Centerline in an easterly direction to the
Centerline of Grant Street, thence in a southerly direction along said
Centerline to the Centerline of West Pleasant Street, thence in an easterly
direction along said Centerline to the Centerline of North Roche Street, thence
in a southerly direction along said Centerline to the Centerline of Main
Street, thence in an easterly direction along said Centerline to the east
corporate limits of the City of Knoxville, Iowa.
      2.   Second Precinct: The second precinct shall include all that part of
the City of Knoxville, Iowa, laying east of the Centerline of Roche Street and
south of the Centerline of Main Street in said City.
      3.   Third Precinct: The third precinct shall include all that part of
the City of Knoxville, Iowa, laying south of the Centerline of Pleasant Street
and west of the Centerline of Roche Street in said City.
      4.   Fourth Precinct: The fourth precinct shall include all that part of
the City of Knoxville, Iowa lying west and north of the Centerlines of the
following descriptions:
Beginning at the north City Limits at the Centerline of Lincoln Street, thence
in a southerly direction following said Centerline to the Centerline of Long
Lane Drive, thence in an easterly direction along said Centerline to the
Centerline of Grant Street, thence in a southerly direction along said
Centerline to the Centerline of Pleasant Street, thence in a westerly direction
along said Centerline to the west corporate limits of the City of Knoxville,
Iowa. (Ord. 91-4, 8-5-1991, eff. 8-10-1991; amd. Ord. 21-19, 12-20-2021)
CHAPTER 11
GIVING AND REPORTING OF GIFTS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Definition Of Gift
1-11-2: Recipient Reporting Of Gifts
1-11-3: Donor Reporting Of Gifts
1-11-4: Reporting For Group Events
1-11-1: DEFINITION OF GIFT:
For purposes of this Chapter, "gift" is defined as follows:
GIFT: A. A rendering of money, property, services, granting a discount, loan
forgiveness, payment of indebtedness, or anything else of value in return for
which legal consideration of equal or greater value is not given and received,
if the donor is in any of the following categories:
      1.   Is doing or seeking to do business of any kind with the City. For
purposes of this Chapter, "doing business with the City" means being a party to
any one or any combination of sales, purchases, leases, or contracts to, from,
or with the City.
      2.   Is engaged in activities which are regulated or controlled by the
City.
      3.   Has interests which may be substantially and materially affected by
the performance or nonperformance of the recipient's official duty.
      4.   Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the recipient's
jurisdiction.
   B.   However, "gift" does not mean any of the following:
      1.   Campaign contributions.
      2.   Informational material relevant to a public servant's official
functions, such as books, pamphlets, reports, documents, or periodicals, and
registration fees or tuition not including travel or lodging, for not more than
three (3) days, at seminars or other public meetings conducted in this State,
at which the public servant received information relevant to the public
servant's official functions. Information or participation received under the
exclusion of this paragraph may be applied to satisfy a continuing education
requirement of the recipient's regulated occupation or profession if the
recipient pays any registration costs exceeding thirty five dollars ($35.00).
      3.   Anything received from a person related within the fourth degree by
kinship or marriage, unless the donor is acting as an agent or intermediary for
another person not so related.
      4.   Any inheritance.
      5.   Anything available to or distributed to the public generally without
regard to official status of the recipient.
      6.   Food, beverages, registration, and scheduled entertainment at group
events to which all members of either house or both houses of the General
Assembly are invited. "Member of the General Assembly" means an individual duly
elected to the Senate or House of Representatives of the State of Iowa.
      7.   Actual expenses for food, beverages, travel, lodging, registration,
and scheduled entertainment of the recipient for a meeting, which is given in
return for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting.
      8.   Plaques or items of negligible resale value given as recognition for
public services.
   C.   The value of the gift is determined as follows:
      1.   An individual making a gift on behalf of more than one person shall
not divide the value of the gift by the number of persons on whose behalf the
gift was made.
      2.   The value of a gift to the recipient is the value actually received.
      3.   For the purposes of the reporting requirements of this Chapter, a
donor of a gift made by more than one individual to one or more recipients
shall report the gift if the total value of the gift to the recipient exceeds
fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 88-8, 11-7-1988; 1996 Code)
1-11-2: RECIPIENT REPORTING OF GIFTS:
   A.   Disclosure Of Gift Received: An elected or appointed official or
employee of this City, or the spouse, or minor child of an elected or appointed
official or employee of this City, or a firm of which the elected or appointed
official or the employee of this City holds ten percent (10%) or more of the
stock either directly or indirectly, shall disclose in writing on a report form
developed by the Secretary of State, the nature, date, and the name of the
donor, and the name of such person as recipient to which a gift or gifts were
made where the gift or gifts exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) in cumulative
value in any one calendar day. However, the recipient need not report food and
beverage provided for immediate consumption in the presence of the donor.
   B.   Report Filed: By the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which the gift has been received, a copy of the report disclosing the gift or
gifts shall be filed in the office of the Marion County Auditor. (Ord. 88-8,
11-7-1988; 1996 Code)
1-11-3: DONOR REPORTING OF GIFTS:
   A.   Disclosure Of Gift Given: A donor of a gift to an elected or appointed
official or to an employee of the City, or to the spouse, or to a minor child
of an elected or appointed official or employee of this City, or to a firm of
which the elected or appointed official or the employee of the City is a
partner, or to a corporation of which the elected or appointed official or the
employee of the City holds ten percent (10%) or more of the stock either
directly or indirectly, shall disclose in writing on the form developed by the
Secretary of State, the nature, amount, date, and name of the donor and the
name of the recipient of a gift or gifts made by the donor which gift or gifts
exceeds fifteen dollars ($15.00) in cumulative value in any one calendar day.
However, the donor need not report food and beverage provided for immediate
consumption in the presence of the donor.
   B.   Report Filed: By the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which the gift was given, a copy of the report disclosing the gift or gifts
shall be filed by the donor with the Marion County Auditor. (Ord. 88-8, 11-7-
1988; 1996 Code)
1-11-4: REPORTING FOR GROUP EVENTS:
Expenses for food, beverages, registration and scheduled entertainment at group
events to which all members of either house or both houses of the General
Assembly have been invited, and where an elected or appointed official or
employee of this City has been invited, shall be reported by the donor for each
such event. The donor shall report the date, location and total expense
incurred by the donor or donors. By the fifteenth day of the month following
the month in which the group event occurred, a copy of the report shall be
filed by the donor with the Marion County Auditor. (Ord. 88-8, 11-7-1988)
CHAPTER 12
COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-12-1: Purpose
1-12-2: Position Of Community And Economic Development Director
1-12-3: Appointment And Term
1-12-4: Compensation
1-12-5: Duties And Responsibilities
1-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create the position of Community and Economic
Development Director and to set forth the duties and powers relative thereto.
(Ord. 21-08, 10-4-2021)
1-12-2: POSITION OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
The position of Community and Economic Development Director is hereby created.
The office of Community and Economic Development Director and City Manager may
be filled by the same person unless otherwise precluded by state laws or
ordinances. (Ord. 21-08, 10-4-2021)
1-12-3: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Council shall appoint, by a majority vote, a Community and Economic
Development Director to serve at the pleasure of the Council. However, the
Community and Economic Development director may be removed by an affirmative
four-fifths (4/5) vote of the Council. (Ord. 21-08, 10-4-2021)
1-12-4: COMPENSATION:
The Community and Economic Development Director shall receive such annual
salary as the Council shall from time to time determine by resolution, and
payment shall be made from the treasury of the City, in the manner provided for
paying other officers and employees. (Ord. 21-08, 10-4-2021)
1-12-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Direct economic development initiatives to achieve the goals and
objectives outlined by the City's Comprehensive Master Plan, 2015 Marion County
Housing Study, and the adopted land-use concept for the former VA Campus
Redevelopment.
   B.   Work with internal and external City partners, including: Knoxville
Chamber of Commerce, Knoxville Economic Development Corporation (KEDC), Marion
County Development Commission, Greater Des Moines Partnership, and City
Administration on negotiating development agreements and developing strategies
designed to market and recruit the City of Knoxville as a destination for
development.
   C.   Actively recruit to the Knoxville area: individuals, businesses and
industries looking to expand or relocate their respective entities through
necessary outreach and marketing.
   D.   Serve as central point of contact for businesses, developers and
contractors who use city economic development services including financial
assistance, site selection assistance, urban renewal, and other municipal
actions and services related to a specific project.
   E.   Responsible for the coordination and/or preparation of various
community and economic development projects and long-range plans as may be
directed by the City Manager.
   F.   Develop and keep current an economic development plan that addresses,
at a minimum, marketing, infrastructure, recruitment, retention and
entrepreneurial development.
   G.   Maintain a good working knowledge of local utilities, tax structure,
zoning regulations, financial incentives and resources (internal and external
to the City) and transportation and community services in order to effectively
respond to requests for information for economic development purposes.
   H.   Build and maintain a strong working relationship with the various
local, State and Federal agencies engaged in economic development activities.
   I.   Monitor an economic development database including information on
available buildings, sites, utilities, infrastructure and labor availability.
   J.   Conduct tax and public benefit analysis for economic development
projects.
   K.   Assist in planning, organizing, and administering complex programs and
financial incentives that promote economic development in the City and result
in new capital investment, job creation, expanded tax base, tourism venues, and
other economic development opportunities.
   L.   Market and promote business and housing funding assistance programs
including but not limited to: tax increment financing (TIF), tax abatement,
local revolving loan fund, state and/or federal tax credit programs, Community
Development Block Grant Programs, neighborhood development projects.
   M.   Monitor legislation and regulations related to economic development and
report findings to the appropriate boards and individuals.
   N.   Build and maintain a strong working relationship with Knoxville's
citizenry, businesses, schools and media outlets.
   O.   Attend professional development workshops and conferences to further
develop knowledge, skills and abilities in order to develop new or to maintain
and enhance areas of expertise in the field of economic development.
   P.   Schedule and make visits on a regular basis to Knoxville businesses,
commercial property owners, and other stakeholders.
   Q.   Prepare detailed written reports and recommendation for presentation to
Mayor and Council, City Manager, developers, businesses, advisory boards, and
community groups.
   R.   Make oral presentations to public and private groups.
   S.   Follow up and respond to all inquiries and contacts of prospective new
industry, service and retail businesses.
   T.   Assures that all work performed meets or exceeds the City's standards
for customer service, accuracy, quality and efficiency.
   U.   Represents the City at various regional boards and commissions as
directed by the City Manager.
   V.   Perform other duties and manage special projects as assigned by the
City Manager. (Ord. 21-08, 10-4-2021)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Appointment
2-1-2: Term; Qualification
2-1-3: Compensation
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-5: Comprehensive Plan
2-1-6: Appropriation
2-1-7: Annual Report
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a city planning and zoning commission composed of seven
(7) members, five (5) of whom shall reside within the city and two (2) members
shall reside within the city or within two (2) miles of the city limits, who
shall be qualified by knowledge and experience to act in matters pertaining to
the development of city planning and zoning, none of whom shall hold an
elective position in the city. Such members shall be appointed by the city
council. (Ord. 08-02, 4-21-2008)
2-1-2: TERM; QUALIFICATION:
   A.   Term: The term of office of said members shall be five (5) years. Any
vacancy occurring on the commission shall be filled by the council for the
unexpired term. (Ord. 502, 5-2-1960)
   B.   Qualification: Members of this commission shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years. (1996 Code)
   C.   Resignation: If a commission member has been absent from three (3) or
more consecutive regular meetings, the city clerk shall include this as an item
on the agenda for the next regular council meeting. At that meeting, the
council shall set a date for a hearing and direct the city clerk to give the
member notice of the hearing by personal service or first class mail to the
member's last known address. At the hearing, the commission member shall have
the right to present information on why one or more of the absences should be
excused. If the council does not excuse one or more of the member's absences by
a majority vote at the conclusion of the hearing, there shall be a vacancy on
the commission. (Ord. 11-11, 11-21-2011)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses which shall be subject to the approval of the council. (Ord.
502, 5-2-1960)
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The planning and zoning commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as chairman and another as vice
chairman, who shall perform all the duties of the chairman during the
chairman's absence or disability.
   B.   The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its
organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
   C.   It shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made such
surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any portion of such
municipality or of any land outside thereof, which in the opinion of the
commission bears relation to a comprehensive plan and shall bring the attention
of the council and may publish its studies and recommendations.
   D.   No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public
building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances
shall be located or erected or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be
issued by any department of the municipal government for the erection or
location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location of any such
improvement shall have been submitted to the city planning and zoning
commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements
and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such
improvement when such commission after thirty (30) days' written notice
requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
   E.   All plans, plats or replats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land
embraced in said municipality or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats
with the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated
to the public in such municipality, shall first be submitted to the planning
and zoning commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by
council.
   F.   No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, trafficway,
riverfront or other public improvement affecting the city planning and zoning
shall be finally approved by the municipality or the character or location
thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the
planning and zoning commission and the latter shall have had thirty (30) days
within which to file its recommendations thereon.
   G.   The commission shall have full, complete and exclusive authority to
expend for and on behalf of the city all sums of money appropriated as
hereinafter provided, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments
whatsoever which are received by the city for city planning and zoning
purposes.
   H.   The commission shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount
of its income for the present year. (Ord. 502, 5-2-1960)
   I.   The regular meeting of the commission shall be on the second Tuesday of
every month in city hall at 305 South 3rd Street, Knoxville, Iowa. Additional
meetings may be scheduled by a majority of the commission, the city manager, or
the planning and zoning administrator. Each meeting must have a quorum of the
commission present for action to be taken. A quorum shall consist of a majority
of the commissioners. The commission shall submit monthly minutes to the city
manager for presentation to the council. (Ord. 11-11, 11-21-2011)
2-1-5: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   A.   For the purpose of making a comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the municipality, the planning and zoning commission shall make
careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of
the municipality and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory.
The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its
environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best
promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
   B.   Before adopting a comprehensive plan as referred to in the preceding
subsection, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the
commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time
of which shall be given by one publication in the official newspaper of the
city not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of
hearing. The adoption of the plan or part or amendment thereof shall be by
resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the commission. After adoption of said plan
by the commission, an attested copy thereof shall be certified to the council
and the council may approve the same, and when said plan or any modification or
amendment thereof shall receive the approval of the council, the said plan,
until subsequently modified or amended as hereinbefore authorized, shall
constitute the official city plan.
   C.   When such comprehensive plan as hereinbefore provided has been adopted,
no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without such
proposed change first being referred to the planning and zoning commission for
its recommendations. If this commission disapproves the proposed change, it may
be adopted by the council only by the affirmative vote of at least three-
fourths (3/4) of the said council. (Ord. 502, 5-2-1960)
2-1-6: APPROPRIATION:
The council may annually appropriate a sum of money from the general fund for
the payment of the expenses of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 502,
5-2-1960)
2-1-7: ANNUAL REPORT:
The commission shall file with the city council, in the month of January, an
annual report of its activities. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Created
2-2-2: Organization
2-2-3: Powers And Duties
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A parks and recreation commission is hereby created to advise the council in
regard to park and recreation facilities and programs. (Ord. 15-24, 12-21-2015)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Appointment; Term: The commission shall consist of five (5) members,
three (3) of whom shall reside within the city and two (2) of whom shall reside
either within the city or within the Knoxville Community School District. The
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council
for overlapping three (3) year terms. The commission shall designate a
chairperson, a vice chairperson and a secretary. The Commission shall designate
a Chair Person, a Vice Chair Person and a Secretary. The Commission shall
annually, at its regular monthly meeting for the month of May, elect its Chair
Person, Vice Chair Person and Secretary. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments.
   B.   Qualification: Members of this commission shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
   C.   Compensation: Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive
their actual expenses.
   D.   Meetings: The commission shall meet on the second Wednesday of every
month. The commission shall provide monthly minutes to the city manager for
presentation to the council.
   E.   Resignation: If a commission member has been absent from three (3) or
more consecutive regular meetings, the city clerk shall include this as an item
on the agenda for the next regular council meeting. At that meeting, the
council shall set a date for a hearing and direct the city clerk to give the
member notice of the hearing by personal service or first class mail to the
member's last known address. At the hearing, the commission member shall have
the right to present information on why one or more of the absences should be
excused. If the council does not excuse one or more of the member's absences by
a majority vote at the conclusion of the hearing, there shall be a vacancy on
the commission. (Ord. 84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985; amd. 1996 Code; Ord. 08-
03, 4-21-2008; Ord. 11-12, 11-21-2011; Ord. 20-17, 11-2-2020)
2-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The commission shall work with the recreation director and
the city manager and advise the recreation director as to plans for recreation
programs and facilities. The commission shall review updates and revisions of
these plans as required.
   B.   Reports: The commission shall make written reports to the city manager
of its activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon request by
the city manager.
   C.   Rules: Rules and regulations for the use of the recreational facilities
or for the conduct of recreation programs shall be reviewed for recommendation
by the commission prior to city council approval. Such rules shall either be
posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate
notice to the using public. (Ord. 84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Public Library Established
2-3-3: Organization
2-3-4: Powers And Duties
2-3-5: Power To Contract With Others For Use Of Library
2-3-6: Nonresident Use Of Library
2-3-7: Library Account
2-3-8: Annual Report
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation and appointment of a
city library board of trustees and to specify the board's powers and duties.
(Ord., 1-20-1975)
2-3-2: PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a free public library for the city, to be known as
the Knoxville public library. (Ord., 1-20-1975)
2-3-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Appointment: The board of trustees of the Knoxville public library,
hereinafter referred to as the board, consists of seven (7) members. All board
members are to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council.
(Ord., 1-20-1975)
   B.   Term: All appointments to the board shall be for six (6) years, except
to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments shall be
made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) of the total number as near as
possible, to stagger the terms. (Ord., 1-20-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
   C.   Qualifications: Six (6) members of the board shall be bona fide
citizens and residents of the city of Knoxville and the seventh member shall be
a resident of Marion County, Iowa. All members shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 02-04, 3-4-2002)
   D.   Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if the trustee
moves permanently from the city; or if he/she is absent from six (6)
consecutive regular meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or
temporary absence from the city. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by
appointment of the mayor, with approval of the council and the new trustee
shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
   E.   Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services. (Ord., 1-20-1975)
   F.   Meetings: The library board shall meet once a month at a regular day
and time established by the library board. (1996 Code)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: (Ord., 1-20-
1975)
   A.   To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary and such
other officers as it deems necessary. The finance officer shall serve as board
treasurer, but shall not be a member of the board. (Ord., 1-20-1975; amd. 1996
Code)
   B.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
   C.   To direct and control all of the affairs of the library.
   D.   To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the board voting
in favor thereof.
   E.   To remove by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board the librarian and
provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of
chapter 70, code of Iowa.
   F.   To select, or authorize the librarian to select and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furnitures, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within
budgetary limits set by the board.
   G.   To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to
fix charges therefor.
   H.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations.
   I.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
library purposes by the council, and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies
belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected, within the
rules of the board.
   J.   To accept gifts or real property, personal property, or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the
conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library.
   K.   To keep a record of its proceedings.
   L.   To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises
and bequests accepted by the city by action against the city council.
   M.   To have authority to make agreements with the local county historical
association, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care
for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The
trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials
for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment
of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds
allocated for library purposes. (Ord., 1-20-1975)
2-3-5: POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF LIBRARY:
   A.   Contracting: The board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, any other city, school, corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or county,
or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library
by their respective residents.
   B.   Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
(5%) in a number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the
governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. (Ord., 1-
20-1975)
2-3-6: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one or
more of the following ways:
   A.   By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents
on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city or upon payment of
a special nonresident library fee.
   B.   By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to nonresidents. (Ord., 1-20-1975)
2-3-7: LIBRARY ACCOUNT:
All monies appropriated by the council for the operation and maintenance of the
library shall be set aside in an account for the library. (Ord. 81-16, 6-15-
1981)
2-3-8: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close
of the municipal fiscal year ending June 30. This report shall contain
statements of the condition of the library, the number of books added thereto,
the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money
expended in the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such
further information required by the council. (Ord., 1-20-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 16-04, 5-16-2016)
CHAPTER 5
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 15-22, 12-21-2015)
CHAPTER 6
STREETSCAPE COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-21, 12-21-2015)
CHAPTER 7
CEMETERY ADVISORY COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 15-23, 12-21-2015)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 16-01, 1-4-2016)
CHAPTER 9
YOUTH COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-9-1: Purpose And Intent
2-9-2: Composition
2-9-3: Organization
2-9-4: Duties
2-9-5: Additional Responsibilities
2-9-6: Requirements; Term Of Members
2-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
There is established a mayor's youth council, hereinafter known as the "youth
council" of the city to provide an opportunity for the youth of Knoxville to
acquire a greater knowledge of and appreciation for their city government and
their community leadership through active participation and involvement.
Further, the youth council is established to help the mayor and city council
accomplish the goals of the community by working directly with the
representatives of the youth. The youth council shall also serve the youth of
Knoxville by:
   A.   Informing the city council of the needs and wishes of the youth.
   B.   Planning and implementing social, educational, cultural and
recreational activities for the youth.
   C.   Working with the mayor, city council, city administrators, Knoxville
schools, and the chamber of commerce to provide service and leadership
opportunities for the youth of Knoxville.
   D.   Instilling a feeling of positive self-worth and esteem.
   E.   Promoting a sense of civic involvement and community pride.
   F.   Learning various aspects of community leadership. (Ord. 10-02, 11-15-
2010)
2-9-2: COMPOSITION:
The youth council consists of twelve (12) representatives appointed by the
mayor, with the assistance of an advisory committee. The advisory committee
shall include one council member, the city manager, and two (2) school
representatives. Appointments shall be presented to the city council for final
approval. The city council shall authorize any finances needed for the
effective operation of the youth council, as requested by the youth council and
recommended by the city manager. (Ord. 10-02, 11-15-2010)
2-9-3: ORGANIZATION:
The youth council shall organize as a board, with the election of a
chairperson, vice chairperson, and recorder. The responsibilities of the youth
council's officers shall be as follows:
   A.   Responsibility and authority of the youth council chairperson:
      1.   To plan and conduct all youth council meetings;
      2.   To carry out the decisions of the youth council;
      3.   To meet periodically with the city manager to provide for proper
planning and coordination between the city council and the youth council;
      4.   To propose to the youth council plans and projects designated to
assist in the fulfillment of the purposes of the youth council;
      5.   To assign each youth council member areas of responsibility.
   B.   Responsibility and authority of the youth council vice chairperson:
      1.   To perform the duties of the youth council's chairperson during his/
her absence.
   C.   Responsibility and authority of the youth council recorder:
      1.   To attend all youth council meetings and take and maintain minutes
of the meetings;
      2.   To carry out assignments of the mayor's youth council;
      3.   To have all youth council's records submitted to the city clerk
monthly;
      4.   To submit a year end report to the mayor and city council.
   D.   In addition, the mayor's youth council shall have at least one advisor.
The advisor shall attend meetings and become involved, in an advisory role, in
all youth council activities. The advisor shall be appointed by the mayor and
city manager, with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 10-02, 11-15-2010)
2-9-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the mayor's youth council to:
   A.   Meet at least once monthly to conduct business.
   B.   Review and modify youth council charter, as needed, by a majority vote.
   C.   Present to the mayor and council this charter and all amendments for
their approval.
   D.   Nominate one of its members as a chairperson, with final approval by
the mayor.
   E.   Nominate one of its members as a vice chairperson, with final approval
by the mayor.
   F.   Nominate one of its members to act as recorder, with final approval by
the mayor.
   G.   Pass motions and resolutions as necessary by a majority vote. A
majority vote is one vote more than half the quorum of voting members who are
present.
   H.   Carry out the purpose of the mayor's youth council as outlined in this
charter.
   I.   Develop and plan activities for the youth of the community,
coordinating all such activities with the mayor and the youth council advisor.
   J.   Report to the city council. (Ord. 10-02, 11-15-2010)
2-9-5: ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
The mayor's youth council must:
   A.   Have a quorum in order to conduct business. A majority of the total
number of members will constitute a quorum. Without a quorum, no business will
be transacted and no official action on any matter will take place.
   B.   Post agendas of all youth council meetings publicly at least two (2)
days in advance of each meeting.
   C.   Coordinate all activities with the youth council advisor and the mayor.
(Ord. 10-02, 11-15-2010)
2-9-6: REQUIREMENTS; TERM OF MEMBERS:
In order to serve on the mayor's youth council, a youth must be a resident
within the city for at least one year and be in at least the ninth grade. In
order to remain on the youth council, a youth must attend school in Knoxville,
must remain a resident within the city, attend at least seventy five percent
(75%) of all youth council meetings, maintain at least a 2.0 grade point
average if in school, fulfill the responsibilities of the office held, and set
a proper example for the youth of the community. Youth council members shall
serve a term of one year, with unlimited subsequent terms with yearly review by
advisory committee. A member of the youth council can be removed from office
upon violation of one or more of the above criteria and by a majority vote of
the mayor's youth council, with the final approval of the mayor and city
council. Any vacancy on the youth council, either by removal or resignation,
shall be filled by the appointment of the mayor, with final approval by the
city council. The requirements of the members of the mayor's youth council are
as follows:
   A.   To attend mayor's youth council meetings;
   B.   To carry out assignments of the mayor's youth council;
   C.   To meet by appointment with the staff of the city in an effort to
accomplish the purpose of the youth council;
   D.   To develop and plan, with the help of a committee, if necessary, plans
to accomplish effectively the youth council's purposes outlined above. (Ord.
10-02, 11-15-2010)
TITLE 3
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: License Required
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: Fees
3-1-6: Power To Inspect And Investigate
3-1-7: Issuance Of License
3-1-8: Revocation Of License
3-1-9: Appeal
3-1-10: Effect Of Revocation
3-1-11: Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-1-12: Display Of License
3-1-13: Exemptions
3-1-14: Special Requirements
3-1-14-1: Shooting Gallery
3-1-14-2: Over-Sized Load Carriers
3-1-14-3: Bill Posters
3-1-14-4: Junk Dealers
3-1-14-5: Pawnbrokers And Secondhand Goods Dealers
3-1-14-6: Sales By Auctioneers
3-1-15: Penalty
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that in the conduct of the activities,
vocations, public amusements and professions licensed and regulated by this
Chapter, the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and
maintained. (1983 Code §
6-3-1)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
BILL: Any notice, poster, placard, announcement or advertisement except notices
required by law.
JUNK DEALER: Any person engaged in collecting, storing, buying or selling junk.
"Junk" means articles or materials that, because of age, deterioration or use,
have lost their original utility or desirability but that by alteration,
restoration or salvage may furnish an item or items of value.
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: A place in which a public amusement is conducted for,
engaged in, or performed by the general public and to which the general public
is admitted or is in attendance. It does not include places that the general
public is not free to enter and to which admission is restricted to members of
a club, fraternal organization or religious or educational group.
OVER-SIZE LOAD CARRIER: Any person who undertakes to move a load more than
thirteen and one-half feet (131/2') high, twelve feet (12') wide or heavier
than allowed in chapter 321 of the Iowa Code on the public streets, alleys and
property excluding State highways.
PAWNBROKER: Any person whose business consists primarily of buying personal
property subject to the right of repurchase or redemption, or of receiving
actual possession of personal property as security for loans with or without a
mortgage or bill of sale. This definition shall not include banks, trust
companies, building and loan associations and similar businesses.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation or association of any kind.
PUBLIC AMUSEMENT: Any public dance hall, skating rink, fortune teller's place
of business, billiard hall, bowling alley, shooting gallery, amusement center,
circus or theater that is open to the public.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: Any place of public amusement in which dancing is engaged in
or performed, even though food is served and the operator holds a state
restaurant license.
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER: Any person, firm or corporation other than a
pawnbroker or a junk dealer, who purchases, collects, trades, sells or deals in
any secondhand goods, or used articles whatsoever, except for a person who
sells or deals in antiques only.
SPECIAL EVENT: A single event or a series of events, to which the public is
invited to watch, participate or listen, including, but not limited to, the
following: motorized vehicle races or contests; carnivals, circuses, mechanical
amusement ride, nondomesticated animal act or exhibition, and similar
activities; any public amusement or event that will take place on a public
right of way within the boundaries of the city of Knoxville or on other
property owned or occupied by the city of Knoxville; outdoor shows, concerts
and exhibitions; races, craft fairs, parades, soap box derbies, rallies, or
other similar events; any public event requiring street closure which occurs on
a city street, sidewalk, alley or other street right of way, and which is
likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
THEATER: Any place of public amusement in which plays, moving pictures or other
exhibitions are presented, except that it shall not include places in which
lectures on scientific, historical or literary subjects are given. (1983 Code §
6-3-2; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; Ord. 11-04, 6-6-2011)
3-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity, vocation,
profession or public amusement regulated by this chapter without a valid
license from the city. (1983 Code §
6-3-3)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for any license under this chapter shall be made in writing on
forms furnished by the city clerk. One application shall be filed with the city
clerk and shall include:
   A.   The applicant's full name and address, the address of his local
business establishment and the nature of his business.
   B.   If the applicant is not the owner of the place in which the business is
to be conducted, the name and address of the owner.
   C.   If the applicant is a corporation or other association, it shall also
list the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   D.   The number of the receipt through which all fees have been paid. (1983
Code §
6-3-4)
   E.   There shall be a separate application for special events. (Ord. 11-04,
6-6-2011)
3-1-5: FEES:
   A.   An applicant may apply for an annual license. The annual license shall
be valid for one year after the date on which it is issued and fees for the
license shall be nonrefundable. (1983 Code §
6-3-6)
   B.   The fees for licenses shall be:
 
Auctioneers                      $10.00 per year
Pawnbrokers and secondhand goods $35.00 per year
dealers
                                 $100.00 plus $100.00 cleanup/damage
Special events                   deposit for events with food and/or
                                 beverage sales and $50.00 cleanup/damage
                                 deposit for all other events
All other                        $25.00 per year
 
(Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; amd. Ord. 11-04, 6-6-2011)
3-1-6: POWER TO INSPECT AND INVESTIGATE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the city clerk shall forward it
immediately to the chief of police who shall submit a recommendation concerning
whether or not a license should be issued. The clerk shall notify the general
inspector and the fire chief who shall inspect the premises to determine
whether they meet the standards of the applicable state and local regulations.
(1983 Code §
6-3-7; amd. 1996 Code)
3-1-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the city clerk finds that all of the prescribed conditions for the issuance
of a license have been satisfied, that no grounds for revocation exist, and
that the special requirements of section
3-1-14 of this chapter have been complied with, the clerk shall issue a license
to the applicant. The clerk must issue a license within ten (10) days from the
date a completed application is submitted. If the clerk refuses to act within
this ten (10) day period, the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before
the council at its next regular meeting on whether the license should be
issued. (1983 Code §
6-3-5)
3-1-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Reasons For Revocation: After giving a licensee two (2) days' notice
and after a hearing, the clerk may revoke any license issued under this chapter
for the following reasons:
      1.   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application
for the license or in the conduct of such business.
      2.   The licensee has violated this Chapter or has otherwise conducted
his/her business in an unlawful manner.
      3.   The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, health, safety, order or morals.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: The notice shall be in writing and shall be served
personally or as required for personal service by the Iowa Rules of Civil
Procedure. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
reasons for the intended revocation. (1983 Code §
6-3-8)
3-1-9: APPEAL:
If the City Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the City Clerk shall
endorse his/her reasons upon the application. The applicant shall have a right
to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may
reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the City Clerk by a majority vote of
the Council members present, if a quorum and the Clerk shall carry out the
Council's decision. (1983 Code §
6-3-9)
3-1-10: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
Revocation of a license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this Chapter for a period of one year from the date of
revocation. (1983 Code §
6-3-10)
3-1-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
In no case shall a license issued under this Chapter be transferred to another
person or be used for a purpose other than that for which it was issued. (1983
Code §
6-3-11)
3-1-12: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall
display the license in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the
business is being conducted. (1983 Code §
6-3-12)
3-1-13: EXEMPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not be construed to require a license of each employee or
agent of one engaged in a licensed occupation. Only the owner, manager or agent
of such an occupation need possess a license. (1983 Code §
6-3-13)
3-1-14: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Every person who is granted a license under the terms of this Chapter shall
comply with the following regulations of Sections
3-1-14-1 through
3-1-14-6 that apply in his/her case. (1983 Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-14-1: SHOOTING GALLERY:
A shooting gallery shall display a written certificate from the Chief of Police
that it is equipped with a safe and adequate backstop and shooting equipment.
(1983 Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-14-2: OVER-SIZED LOAD CARRIERS:
   A.   Application: An application for over-sized load carrier's license shall
describe the present location and the future site of the building or structure
to be moved.
   B.   Bond: The applicant shall post with the City Clerk a corporate surety
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond shall guarantee
the licensee's payment for any damage done to the City or to the public
property in the course of moving the building or structure.
   C.   Insurance: The applicant shall show evidence that he/she is insured for
not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for personal
injuries and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage. A
corporate surety bond for the same sum of money may be posted with the City
Clerk in lieu of the insurance policy. The sureties on the bond shall be
approved by the City Clerk and the bond shall guarantee the licensee's payment
for personal injury or property damage caused by the licensee or the licensee's
agents or employees in the course of the moving operations. (1983 Code §
6-3-14)
   D.   File Route Plan: The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a route
plan approved by the Chief of Police. (1983 Code §
6-3-14; 1996 Code)
   E.   Flagmen Required: At all times when the load is in motion or at rest on
any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the licensee shall maintain
flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the load. (1983 Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-14-3: BILL POSTERS:
   A.   An application for a bill poster's license shall contain a description
of the boundaries of the areas of the City in which the distribution of bills
is to be made. The license shall limit distribution of bills in the City to
these areas.
   B.   Bill posters shall not attach bills to any tree, pole, sidewalk,
building or other structure.
   C.   Bills shall not be distributed in such a manner that they may be blown
about or scattered.
   D.   Bills larger than nine inches by eleven inches (9" x 11") in size shall
not be handed to persons on the sidewalks or streets or public property or
attached to automobiles parked on any street, alleys or public property. (1983
Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-14-4: JUNK DEALERS:
   A.   Every junk dealer shall maintain a permanent record, for as long as the
property is held, of transactions that shows a description of each item
received, the name and address of the person from whom it was received, the
quantity or weight of each item, the amount paid and the time and date of the
transaction.
   B.   Every junk dealer shall segregate each day's collection for a period of
forty eight (48) hours. During this period no item shall be disposed of or
altered in any manner.
   C.   A junk dealer shall not purchase or receive junk from a minor unless
the junk dealer first received the written consent of the minor's parent or
guardian. Such consent shall be attached to the record of transactions as a
part of the permanent record. (1983 Code §
6-3-14; 1996 Code)
   D.   Public health and peace officers shall be permitted at all times to
inspect the premises for the existence of materials or conditions dangerous to
the public health.
   E.   All junk yards shall be enclosed within a solid fence at least eight
feet (8') in height, which hides the contents of the yard from public view.
Materials within the yard shall not be stacked higher than the surrounding
fence. Any gates in said fence shall be of solid material and equal height.
(1983 Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-14-5: PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in or carry on the business of
a pawnbroker or a secondhand goods dealer, without first paying the fee and
obtaining the license provided for in this Chapter, nor shall any person carry
on such business in any manner contrary to its provisions. Every clerk, agent
or employee of any such business shall be subject to and bound by all of the
provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Exemption: This Section
3-1-14-5 shall not apply to:
      1.   Any person selling new, unused articles and receiving or taking in
used articles or trade from the purchasers of the new articles against the
purchase price of said new articles, where such new articles are sold for their
market value.
      2.   Any person collecting antique items for personal use only.
      3.   Casual and occasional sales of unused household goods by the owner
thereof to the public, on a nonreceiving basis, if the seller, at time of sale,
is not engaged for profit in the business of selling goods of that or a similar
nature; this category includes those sales commonly referred to as "garage
sales".
      4.   Articles received by a secondhand goods dealer for which no
consideration is given or promised.
   C.   Records:
      1.   Records Kept: Every pawnbroker and secondhand goods dealer shall
keep records on forms furnished by the Police Department, on which the
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall accurately, intelligibly and
legibly, enter in ink, at the time of purchasing or receiving any personal
property:
         a.   The value of the article.
         b.   The amount paid for the article.
         c.   The description of the article.
         d.   The article's serial number and model number, if any.
         e.   The name of the person from whom the article is purchased or
received, his or her residence address, social security number, height, age,
and race.
         f.   The date of disposition of the article or any part or portion
thereof, and to whom it was disposed or redeemed, including said person's
address.
      2.   Records Open To Inspection: The records required by this subsection
shall at all times be open to examination by any police officer, sheriff or
deputy sheriff.
      3.   Misdemeanor: Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who shall:
         a.   Fail to keep such record.
         b.   Fail to make required entries.
         c.   Intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible
entry, or any entry which he has reason to believe is untrue.
         d.   Fail to make the inquiries necessary to enable him to make such
entries or any of them.
         e.   Fail to produce his license or book when requested by an officer
having authority to examine it.
         f.   Destroy or negligently permit such book to be destroyed or lost.
      4.   Daily Reports To Chief Of Police: Every pawnbroker and secondhand
goods dealer who shall purchase or receive from any person any article of
jewelry or precious stones, silverplated articles or any guns, pistols, tools,
instruments or implements or parts thereof or any used bicycle, motorcycle or
automobile or parts thereof, except from the manufacturer thereof, shall within
twenty four (24) hours after purchasing or receiving such articles report the
same in writing to the Chief of Police, stating fully and correctly:
         a.   The name and residence of the person from whom received or
purchased.
         b.   A full and accurate inventory and description of each article.
         c.   The value or amount paid for each article.
         d.   The weight or other quantity of each article. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-
1983)
      5.   Destroying, Disposing Or Dismantling Articles: No pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer purchasing or receiving any article described in this
subsection shall melt, destroy or dispose of the same without making the report
required in the preceding subsection C4, or within fifteen (15) days after the
report is made, except upon written permission from the Chief of Police. No
article of jewelry shall be changed in its form or altered or mutilated in any
way within the time fixed for sale or redemption. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996
Code)
      6.   Purchase From Minors: No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall
purchase or receive any item from a minor unless the pawnbroker or secondhand
goods dealer first receives the written consent of a parent or guardian of the
minor. Such consent shall be attached to the records required by this
subsection. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
      7.   Concealing Articles To Prevent Identification: No pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer shall conceal or destroy for the purpose of concealing
any article purchased or received by him for the purpose of identification
thereof by any officer or any person claiming the same. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983;
1996 Code)
      8.   Sales During Redemption: No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer
shall sell or otherwise dispose of any article during the time any person has
the right to buy back or redeem the same.
      9.   Search For Stolen Property: Whenever any police officer shall have
reason to believe that any pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer has in his/her
possession or on his/her premises any stolen property, the police officer shall
have the right to duty to enter and search the premises of such person for the
purpose of discovering stolen property.
      10.   Examination Of Premises By Officer: No pawnbroker or any other
person shall refuse, resist or attempt to prevent any police officer, sheriff
or deputy sheriff, with or without warrant, from examining the premises
occupied by the pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer for the purpose of
discovering stolen property. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
3-1-14-6: SALES BY AUCTIONEERS:
An auctioneer shall not use any street, highway, avenue, alley, sidewalk or
other public place as a location for conducting a sale. (1983 Code §
6-3-14)
3-1-15: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-2 of this Code. (1983 Code, §
6-3-15; 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BEER AND LIQUOR LICENSES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Iowa Code Provisions Adopted
3-2-3: Investigation Of Applicant
3-2-4: Application; Fee
3-2-5: Transfers
3-2-6: Hearing On Suspension Or Revocation
3-2-7: Obstructing Of View Prohibited
3-2-8: Additional Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation
3-2-9: Liquor Licensee And Beer Permittee Requirements
3-2-10: Disturbances
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide administration of licenses and
permits and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale
and consumption of beer and liquor, for the protection of the safety, morals
and general welfare of this community. (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981)
3-2-2: IOWA CODE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the 1975 Code of Iowa as amended are hereby adopted:
Iowa
Code    Subject
Section
123.3   Definition
123.30  Liquor Control Licenses
123.31  Application Contents
123.32  Action by Authorities on Applications for Liquor Control Licenses and
        Wine and Beer Permits
123.35  Simplified Renewal Procedure
123.39  Suspension or Revocation of License or Permit
123.40  Effect of Revocation
123.46  Consumption in Public Places–Intoxication–Right to Chemical Test on
        Arrest
123.47  Persons Under Legal Age
123.49  Miscellaneous Provisions
123.50  Penalties
123.92  Civil Liability for Sale and Service of Beer, Wine, or Intoxicating
        Liquor (Dramshop Act)
123.123 Effect on Liquor Control Licensees
123.132 Authority under Class "C" Permit
123.134 Beer Fees–Sunday Sales
123.138 Books of Account Required
123.140 Separate Locations–Class "B" or"C".
 
(Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981; 1996 Code)
3-2-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of original application or any renewal of an application for a
liquor license or beer permit by the City Council, it shall be forwarded to the
Chief of Police, who shall conduct an investigation and shall submit a written
report on the applicant as to the truth of the facts averred in the application
and a recommendation to the City Council as to the approval of the license or
permit. It shall be the duty of the General Inspector and the Fire Chief to
inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the
City, and no license or permit shall be approved until or unless an approving
report has been filed with the City Council by such officers. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-
1983; 1996 Code)
3-2-4: APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Consider Application: The applicant may attend, but shall not be
required to attend the Council meeting when the original application renewal is
being considered or for any renewal applications, unless specifically requested
by the City Council or the City Manager. (Ord. 93-1, 1-18-1993)
   B.   Fees:
      1.   Beer Licenses: The City shall receive from each applicant a beer
license application fee in such amount as set from time to time by the State
Department of Commerce, Beverage Division.
      2.   Liquor Licenses: A liquor license application fee shall be required
by the State Department of Commerce, Beverage Division. (1996 Code)
3-2-5: TRANSFERS:
The Council will, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee to
transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the City;
provided, that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have been
eligible for a license or permit in the first instance and such transfer will
not result in the violation of any law or ordinance. An applicant for such
transfer shall file with the application for transfer the fee for transfer.
(1983 Code § 6-4-5; 1996 Code)
3-2-6: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The Council shall conduct its hearing on suspension or revocation in the
following manner: (1983 Code § 6-4-6)
   A.   Notice Of Complaint: The permit holder shall be served with written
notice containing a copy of the complaint against him/her, the ordinance
provision or State statute allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for
a hearing on the matter. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
   B.   Conduct Of Hearing: The Council shall conduct a hearing at which both
the permit holder and the complainant shall be present, the purpose of which is
to determine the truth of the fact alleged in the complaint. Should the permit
holder or his/her authorized representative fail to appear without good cause,
the Council may proceed to determination on the complaint.
   C.   Permit Holder Representation: The permit holder shall have the right to
be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his/her own
behalf and to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
   D.   Evidence: The Council shall admit only reliable and substantial
evidence into the revocation or suspension proceeding and shall give all
admitted evidence its natural probative value. (1983 Code § 6-4-6)
   E.   Criminal Charges: In the event that criminal charges have been brought
against the permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis
for the revocation or suspension complaint, the Council shall await a judgment
in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary suspension
hearing required by this Section. (1983 Code § 6-4-6; 1996 Code)
   F.   Findings Of Fact: The Council shall make and record findings of fact
and conclusions of law, and shall revoke or suspend a permit under this Section
only when, upon review of the entire record, it finds clear and convincing
evidence of a substantial violation of this Chapter or State law. (1983 Code §
6-4-6)
3-2-7: OBSTRUCTING OF VIEW PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to cover, or allow to be covered the windows of the place
of business of any permit holder with paint, signs, shades or material of any
kind so as to obstruct the view from the street of the entire interior of the
room or building occupied by such business. (1983 Code § 6-4-7)
3-2-8: ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
In addition to the causes for suspension or revocation of a liquor license or
beer permit provided in section 123.39 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, any
liquor control license or beer permit, issued by the Council of the City, may,
after notice and hearing as provided by law, be suspended for a period not to
exceed one year or revoked for operating an establishment in such a manner as
to create a nuisance. Nuisance includes:
   A.   Noise: Loud music and other noise emanating from the premises in
question that can be heard inside other buildings whose doors and windows are
closed.
   B.   Unruly Groups: The gathering of loud or unruly groups in any area
outside the premises under the control of such permittee when such gathering
blocks or hinders access to one's automobile or otherwise interferes with the
reasonable use of sidewalks, streets and adjacent property.
   C.   Litter: Accumulations of litter upon the premises of such permittee or
upon sidewalks, streets and adjacent property when such litter can reasonably
be deemed to be from the establishment of the permit holder.
   D.   Open Containers: Allowing patrons to leave the premises with an open
container of beer or alcohol.
   E.   Intoxicated Persons: Allowing intoxicated persons to remain on the
premises.
   F.   Cooperation With Law Enforcement: Failing to cooperate with law
enforcement officers in the performance of their duties to enforce the
provisions of the Iowa Beer and Liquor Control Act.
   G.   Employing Underage Persons: Employing persons under eighteen (18) years
of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor or beer for consumption on
the premises where sold or employing people under sixteen (16) years of age in
the sale of beer in Class "C" beer establishments. The holder of a Class "C"
beer permit shall require that an adult be present when beer is sold by a
person under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981)
3-2-9: LIQUOR LICENSEE AND BEER PERMITTEE REQUIREMENTS:
A holder of a liquor license and a beer permit, in addition to the other
requirements of this Chapter and of the Iowa Beer and Liquor Control Act,
shall: (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981)
   A.   Lighting: Have a one hundred (100) watt light bulb in each exterior
doorway overhead. (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981; 1996 Code)
   B.   Hours: Prohibit anyone on the premises between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except for employees. (Ord. 83-4, 12-
5-1983)
   C.   Posting Signs:
      1.   Open Containers: Post a sign within the premises, stating that no
open container of beer or alcohol shall be taken from the premises. (Ord. 81-2,
2-2-1981)
      2.   Underage Persons: Post a sign in the window or door of the premises,
stating no one under age twenty one (21) will be served and proper
identification will be required. (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981; 1996 Code)
3-2-10: DISTURBANCES:
The Chief of Police may order any tavern closed when there has been a
disturbance which required calling in additional police officers besides those
on duty and when in his opinion the closing of said tavern will end the
disturbance. Any such tavern closed by order of the Chief of Police shall
remain closed until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the day following the
disturbance. (Ord. 81-2, 2-2-1981)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required
3-3-3: Exemptions
3-3-4: Application For License
3-3-5: Fees
3-3-6: Bond Required
3-3-7: Issuance Of License
3-3-8: Display Of License
3-3-9: License Not Transferable
3-3-10: Revocation Of License
3-3-11: Exceptions
3-3-12: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL MARKET: An enclosed building where a number of merchants sell/market
antiques, used or new household goods, crafts, curios, art or artifacts, and
other such items, under the sponsorship of a "commercial market promoter" as
defined in this section.
COMMERCIAL MARKET MERCHANT: Any individual, partnership or corporation that
engages in the sale of items at a "commercial market" as defined in this
section.
COMMERCIAL MARKET PROMOTER: An individual, partnership or corporation that
either organizes, sponsors, promotes or makes space available, within an
enclosed building, for profit for a commercial market or is otherwise
considered an organizer of said commercial market.
PEDDLER: Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale
for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise; however, not to include
wholesalers of retail products.
SOLICITOR: Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit an order of goods,
subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date; however, not to
include wholesalers of retail products.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant
merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or
occupies any building or structure whatsoever. Temporary association with a
local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient
business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer shall not exempt any person from being
considered a transient merchant, except for any person which is defined as a
"commercial market merchant" in this section. (Ord. 91-5, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord.
09-13, 5-18-2009)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, in the business of a transient
merchant or a commercial market promoter in the city without first obtaining a
license as herein provided shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 91-5,
8-19-1991)
3-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Nonprofit Organizations; Vendors: The following shall be exempt from
the fee provision of this chapter: nonprofit organizations (showing proof of
their nonprofit status) based in Marion County, Iowa, and those vendors
directly participating in the event being put on by the nonprofit organization
and block parties. Persons selling produce raised in Marion County are also
exempt if they are set up as a single individual separate from a special event
group. These nonprofit organizations and block parties are required to file the
appropriate event agreement and permit application and are required to provide
commercial general liability insurance as required, however, they would be
exempt from the fee requirement. (Ord. 11-05, 6-6-2011)
   B.   Religious And Charitable Organizations:
      1.   Authorized representatives of religious and charitable organizations
desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature shall be exempt from the
operation of sections
3-3-4 through
3-3-7 of this chapter. All such organizations shall be required to submit in
writing to the city clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which
activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organizations, the period during which such activities are to be carried on,
and whether any commission, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor
for his efforts and the amount thereof.
      2.   If the city clerk shall find that the organization is a bona fide
charity or religious organization, he shall issue, free of charge, a license
containing the above information to the applicant. (Ord. 91-5, 8-19-1991)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application in writing shall be filed with the city clerk for a license
under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant's name,
permanent and local address, business address, if any, and physical
description. The application also shall set forth the applicant's employer, if
any, and the employer's address, the nature of the applicant's business, the
last three (3) places of such business, and the length of time sought to be
covered by the license. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
3-3-5: FEES:
   A.   Annual Fee: Every licensee, except commercial market promoters and
merchants, shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred five dollars
($105.00) which shall be nonrefundable. (Ord. 97-12, 6-16-1997)
   B.   Operation Near Fairgrounds; Racing Events:
      1.   Collection Of Fees: For peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants
who operate in the central business district or on streets closed by the city,
or on city property for activities during special racing events at the Marion
County Fairgrounds, including, but not limited to, the World Of Outlaws shows,
California Racing Association races and the National Sprint Car Finals Week,
the Knoxville chamber of commerce will have complete authority to collect fees
related to participation in chamber events, locate vendors and coordinate
activities associated with or sponsored by the Knoxville chamber of commerce.
(Ord. 09-12, 5-18-2009)
   C.   National Sprint Car Finals Week: Regardless of the date when this
license is obtained, no license shall be effective for use during more than one
National Sprint Car Finals Week. (Ord. 95-5, 10-16-1995)
   D.   Commercial Market Promoters: Every commercial market promoter shall pay
an annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) per promotion, which may last up to five (5) days, and said fee shall
be nonrefundable.
   E.   Commercial Market Merchants: Commercial market merchants shall not be
required to obtain a license or pay any fee. (Ord. 91-5, 8-19-1991)
3-3-6: BOND REQUIRED:
Before a license for any business with future delivery under this chapter shall
be issued, each applicant shall post a bond of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) with the city clerk. Such bond shall be conditioned to indemnify
and pay the city for any penalties or costs occasioned by the enforcement of
this chapter, and shall not be retired until after a lapse of ninety (90) days
from the expiration of each license. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
3-3-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the city clerk finds the application is made out in conformance with section
3-3-4 of this chapter and the facts stated therein are correct, the clerk shall
issue, upon posting of bond as required by section
3-3-6 of this chapter, a license, and charge a fee as established in this
chapter. (1983 Code §
6-2-5)
3-3-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Each solicitor, peddler, transient merchant or commercial market promotor shall
at all times while doing business in this city keep in his possession the
license provided for in this chapter, and shall exhibit the license as evidence
that he has complied with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient
merchant shall display publicly his license in his place of business. (Ord. 91-
5, 8-19-1991)
3-3-9: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are applicable only to the person filing the application.
(1983 Code §
6-2-9)
3-3-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city manager, after notice and hearing, may revoke any license issued under
this chapter where the licensee in the application for the license or in the
course of conducting such business has made fraudulent or incorrect statements
or has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted such business in an
unlawful manner. (1983 Code §
6-2-10)
3-3-11: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The city council, upon application and approval, may grant authority to
an organization to hold events in the downtown business square area. If said
authority is granted, the organization authorized by the council shall have
control of the number and type of vendors allowed at said event, with the
exception of alcoholic beverage sellers, which must be approved by the council.
Possession of a city license pursuant to this chapter does not guarantee a
holder of said license the right to participate in the event.
   B.   Said organization may charge a fee for participation by a participant
separate and distinct from the city's license requirements. However, if the
participant will only be participating in these events, no city license shall
be required. (Ord. 09-04, 4-20-2009)
3-3-12: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-2 of this code. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; amd. 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-4-1: License Required
3-4-2: License Application
3-4-3: License Fee
3-4-4: Liability Insurance
3-4-5: Licenses Issued
3-4-6: Number Of Licenses
3-4-7: Licenses Not Transferable
3-4-8: Revocation Of License
3-4-9: License Renewal Date
3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or business shall operate a taxicab for hire without first obtaining
a license. (Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for such license must be signed by the applicant. The application
shall list the number of vehicles to be operated, with the make, model and
license plate number of each vehicle. The application shall also list the
names, addresses and driver's license number of each person driving the
vehicles for the applicant. Each driver must show proof of a valid chauffeur's
license, class D endorsement 3 from the state of Iowa. (Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011,
eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each person or business shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) annually, which fee shall be submitted with the application. If the
application is denied, the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Licenses
shall be issued by the city clerk or mayor after the application has been
approved by the city council. (Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-4: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   A license shall not be issued or continued in effect unless and until
the owner of the taxicab business furnishes to the city clerk an insurance
policy or policies, or certificate of insurance. The policy(ies) shall include
commercial general liability insurance coverage and automobile liability
insurance coverage, or the equivalent thereof, for the taxicab business and
independent contractors of the taxicab business. The commercial general
liability insurance shall include coverage for bodily injury, death and
property damage with limits of liability not less than seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($750,000.00) per occurrence and aggregate combined single
limit. The automobile liability insurance shall include coverage for bodily
injury, death and property damage with limits of liability of not less than
seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) per occurrence combined
single limit.
   B.   The certificate of insurance referred to in this section shall provide
that the insurance policy or policies have been endorsed to provide thirty (30)
days' advance written notice of cancellation, forty five (45) days' advance
written notice of nonrenewal, and ten (10) days' advance written notice of
cancellation due to nonpayment of premium, and that these written notices shall
be provided by registered mail to the city clerk.
   C.   The cancellation or other termination of any required insurance policy
shall automatically revoke and terminate the certificate and all licenses
issued for the taxicab business, independent contractors and the vehicles
covered by such insurance policy(ies), unless another policy(ies), complying
with this section, shall be provided and in effect at the time of such
cancellation or termination. The city clerk shall immediately issue a written
notification of the revocation of said certificate and all licenses for the
taxicab business, independent contractors and the vehicles covered by such
insurance which is canceled or terminated and shall file a copy of such notice
with the city council. (Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-5: LICENSES ISSUED:
Licenses issued shall be effective on the day following approval by the city
council and shall be in effect for one year unless sooner surrendered by the
holder, canceled by the city or the annual March 31 renewal date arrives first.
If a license is surrendered or canceled by the city, refunds will not be
issued. (Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-6: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
There will be no restriction on the number of licenses issued, nor will there
be restrictions on the number of vehicles used under each license. (Ord. 11-06,
6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-7: LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Licenses are not transferable from one licensee to another. However, a license
holder may add or substitute one vehicle(s) for another under an existing
license by advising the city in writing of the substitution with the make,
model and license plate number of the new or substituted vehicle(s) with proof
of insurance. The same applies to any new drivers for the licensee. (Ord. 11-
06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses may be canceled or revoked by the city council if the vehicles
operated thereunder are not kept in good and safe operating condition; if the
drivers of the vehicles repeatedly violate traffic laws; if any illegal or
immoral practice is conducted in connection with the operation of the taxicabs,
or for any other cause which the city council may deem sufficient. (Ord. 11-06,
6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
3-4-9: LICENSE RENEWAL DATE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewed annually on March
31 of each year and are not prorated based on the date of issuance. (Ord. 11-
06, 6-20-2011, eff. 4-1-2012)
CHAPTER 5
ALARMS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: False Alarms
3-5-4: False Alarm Fee Schedule
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to "alarm systems" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 18-01, 1-15-
2018)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall be
construed to have the meaning set forth unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended:
ALARM SYSTEM: Either a fire or burglar alarm system.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within
the City.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice
message or coded signal, indicating the existence of the emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM: A method of detecting and signaling the presence, entry
or attempted entry of an intruder into a protected premises.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system caused by mechanical or
electrical failure, improper installation, equipment malfunction or the
negligence of the user or operator, except the following shall not be
considered false alarm:
   A.   Alarms caused by the malfunction or failure of the monitoring equipment
located at a tax supported dispatch facility.
   B.   Alarms caused by damage to, or by the testing or repair of, telephone
equipment or lines by the telephone company.
   C.   Alarms caused by an extraneous accident, or act of God, such as
earthquake, flood, or violent wind storm.
   D.   Alarms intentionally caused by the resident, owner or employee acting
under the sincere belief that a need exists to call for emergency service.
   E.   Alarms followed by an immediate call or signal to the dispatching
center canceling the alarm; such call having been made prior to the arrival of
the emergency service.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A method of detecting and signaling the presence of fire,
the products of combustion or heat in a protected premises. (Ord. 18-01, 1-15-
2018)
3-5-3: FALSE ALARMS:
Alarm users will be charged for careless use of the alarms or malfunctions of
the alarm equipment. Further, if the alarm user refuses to respond to the place
of business or residence to reset the alarm after officers have responded to
that location, the alarm will be handled as a careless use alarm and the
appropriate fee charged. (Ord. 18-01, 1-15-2018)
3-5-4: FALSE ALARM FEE SCHEDULE:
An alarm user will be charged for each false alarm a fee pursuant to the
following schedule:
One to eight (8) false alarms per calendar year, no charge.
After the seventh false alarm, a written warning shall be sent to the alarm
user.
For the ninth false alarm and every subsequent false alarm that calendar year,
the alarm user will be charged twenty five dollars ($25.00) per incident. (Ord.
18-01, 1-15-2018)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT TAX EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Tax Exemption
3-6-4: Exemption Prohibited
3-6-5: Application For Exemption
3-6-6: Exemption May Be Repealed
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of
the actual value added to industrial real estate by new construction of
industrial real estate, research service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers and acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed
as real estate pursuant to Iowa Code section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e,
as amended. (Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A. A building or structure used primarily for the storage
of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
   B.   Does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be
used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum
products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A. A new building and structures, and includes new buildings
and structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures.
   B.   Does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure
which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or
structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence, and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products, and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those
products; which determination shall receive prior approval from the city
council upon the recommendation of the Iowa department of economic development.
The exemption shall also apply to new machinery and equipment assessed as real
estate pursuant to Iowa Code section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, as
amended, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or
operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status.
RESEARCH SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted primarily
to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the
design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental
use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of
providing on site services to the public.
WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage
of goods pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 554, article 7, except that it does not
mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products,
or from which goods are sold at retail. (Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
3-6-3: TAX EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible and to which this exemption
from taxation applies shall be as follows:
   A.   For the first year, seventy five percent (75%).
   B.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%).
   C.   For the third year, forty five percent (45%).
   D.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%).
   E.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%). (Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
3-6-4: EXEMPTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Dual Exemptions: A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not
be granted if the property for which an exemption is being claimed has
received, or is receiving any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
   B.   Assessed Value Not Reduced Below Starting Value: The granting of an
exemption under this chapter for new construction constituting complete
replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in an
assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed
value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction
added. (Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
3-6-5: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed. The application for exemption shall be filed
by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the
assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the director of
revenue of the state of Iowa and shall contain information pertaining to the
nature of the improvement, its cost and other information deemed necessary by
the said director.
A person may submit a proposal to the city council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. The city council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans for the city.
The prior approval shall also be subject to the hearing requirements of this
section. Prior approval does not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation
until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the
person may submit an amended proposal to the city council to approve or reject.
(Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
3-6-6: EXEMPTION MAY BE REPEALED:
When in the opinion of the city council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter, and pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 427B, ceases to be a benefit
to the city, the council may repeal this chapter, but existing exemptions shall
continue until their expiration. (Ord. 04-14, 12-6-2004)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTRICIANS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Electrical License
3-7-1: ELECTRICAL LICENSE:
No person shall do any electrical work or other work connected with the
introduction or supply of electricity from the utility or with the laying of
electric lines and making electrical connections performed for pay, unless they
obtain a permit from the city. Every person, before obtaining such permit,
shall furnish a valid copy of their electrical and contractor license issued by
the state of Iowa. Within twenty four (24) hours after the completion of each
job, the permittee shall report the same in detail to the city. (Ord. 09-07, 4-
20-2009)
CHAPTER 8
PLUMBERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Plumber's License
3-8-2: License Fees
3-8-1: PLUMBER'S LICENSE:
No person shall do any plumbing work or other work connected with the
introduction or supply of water from the waterworks or with the laying of
sewers and making sewer connections, unless they obtain a permit from the city.
Every person, before obtaining such permit, shall furnish satisfactory evidence
of their ability to perform the work properly, and must enter into a covenant
and give corporate surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
conditioned that they will conform to the rules and regulations of the city,
and save the city harmless from all accidents, damages or losses occasioned by
their acts. Within twenty four (24) hours after the completion of each job the
permittee shall report the same in detail to the city. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985,
eff. 1-1-1986; amd. 1996 Code)
3-8-2: LICENSE FEES:
All applications for license as prescribed by this chapter shall be accompanied
by credentials and sureties provided in section
3-8-1 of this chapter and a license fee in an amount to be established from
time to time by city council resolution. In addition to the license fee, each
original and renewal applicant shall pay the city clerk amounts that the city
is required by law to pay the state. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986)
CHAPTER 9
CIGARETTE SALES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Permit Required
3-9-3: Application
3-9-4: Fees
3-9-5: Issuance And Expiration
3-9-6: Refunds
3-9-7: Persons Under Legal Age
3-9-8: Self-Service Sales Prohibited
3-9-9: Permit Revocation
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined 1 :
CARTON: A box or container of any kind in which ten (10) or more packages or
packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise
distributed to consumers.
CIGARETTE: Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any
substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of
tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with
any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or
any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include
cigars.
PACKAGE OR PACK: A container of any kind in which cigarettes or tobacco
products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or kept for the
purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
RETAILER: Every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY: Any manner of product display, placement or storage from
which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior
to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer,
in removing the product from a restricted access location.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: The following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies;
periques; granulated, plug cut; crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes. (Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 453A.1.
3-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell
cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale
of any cigarettes within the city without a valid permit for each place of
business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so
that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
3-9-3: APPLICATION:
A completed application on forms provided by the state department of revenue
and finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the clerk.
Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last
regular meeting of the council in June. If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special council meeting is called to act on the application, the
costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 01-06, 4-
16-2001)
3-9-4: FEES:
The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows:
 
For Permits Granted During    Fee 
July, August or September     $75.00
October, November or December 56.25
January, February or March    37.50
April, May or June            18.75
 
(Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
3-9-5: ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION:
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit,
and any permit issued, to the Iowa department of public health within thirty
(30) days of issuance. (Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
3-9-6: REFUNDS:
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
city, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 01-06, 4-16-
2001)
3-9-7: PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE:
No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or
cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The provisions of
this section include prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco
products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer
violates the provisions of this section, the council shall, after written
notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such
violation, assess the following:
   A.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil
penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension
of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
   B.   For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer's
permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
   C.   For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the
retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
   D.   For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the
retailer's permit shall be revoked.
The clerk shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the retailer by mailing a
copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application
for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and
the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard. (Ord. 01-06,
4-16-2001)
3-9-8: SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED:
Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a
cigarette vending machine as provided in section 453A.35(6) of the Code of
Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco
products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-
service display. (Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
3-9-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of division I of chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the council. The clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Iowa department of public health within thirty (30) days of the
revocation or suspension. (Ord. 01-06, 4-16-2001)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Establishment And Purpose
4-1-2: Organization
4-1-3: Compensation
4-1-4: Residency
4-1-5: Training
4-1-6: Fire Chief; Duties
4-1-7: Accidental Injury Insurance
4-1-8: Liability Insurance
4-1-9: Calls Outside The City
4-1-10: Mutual Aid
4-1-11: Authority To Cite Violations
4-1-12: Emergency Ambulance Service
4-1-13: Obedience To Fire Chief
4-1-14: Chapter Updates/Revisions
4-1-15: Ambulance/EMS Fees
4-1-16: Fire/Hazardous Material Fees
4-1-17: Inspection Fees
4-1-18: Offset Program
4-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Fire Department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to
protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire
safety, to provide for emergency ambulance service, to respond to hazardous
conditions, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
The department shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council. The department shall be headed
by a Fire Chief who is appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the
Council. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 15-10,
7-20-2015)
4-1-4: RESIDENCY:
All new members of the Fire Department appointed after February 15, 2000, shall
be residents of the City or reside within two (2) miles of the existing City
limits unless waived by the Council. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-5: TRAINING:
All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief. (Ord. 15-10,
7-20-2015)
4-1-6: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Enforce Laws: Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention,
Fire Code enforcement and the investigation of the cause, origin and
circumstances of fires.
   B.   Appointment And Removal: The Fire Chief shall be appointed and may be
discharged by the City Manager subject to final approval of the City Council.
Appointments to officer vacancies will be at the discretion of the Fire Chief,
subject to final approval by the City Manager. In case of the absence of the
Chief, the officer next in rank, or the Fire Chief's designee, shall be in
charge and have and exercise all powers of the Chief. In the case of the
removal or departure of the Fire Chief, an interim Fire Chief will be appointed
by the City Manager.
   C.   Technical Assistance: Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   D.   Personnel: Recruit, select, and train personnel to provide the
necessary proficiency level for emergency service responses.
   E.   Training: Designating personnel, with the City Manager's approval, to
attend schools and courses concerned with fire and rescue service and all
reasonably related subjects.
   F.   Authority At Fires: When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department's duties.
   G.   Rules: Have the power, in the exercise of duties, to prescribe,
promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations for the governance of the members
and employees of the fire department, which shall, however, not be inconsistent
with this code or the laws of the state; and provide every member of the
department with a copy of these rules and regulations. Any change or amendment
to the same, before being effective, must be approved by the city manager.
   H.   Command: Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the fire chief.
   I.   Property: Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the
fire department.
   J.   Notification: Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) has occurred as a
result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the state fire marshal's
division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency responses by the fire department, file a
report with the fire marshal's division within ten (10) days following the end
of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state
the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire,
the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of
the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
   K.   Right Of Entry: Have the right, during reasonable hours and upon
consent of the occupant, to enter any building or premises within the fire
chief's jurisdiction for the purpose of making such investigation or inspection
which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   L.   Recommendation: Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   M.   Assist State Fire Marshal: At the request of the state fire marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   N.   Records: Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
firefighting equipment, and depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the
number or responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of
losses by value, type and location of buildings.
   O.   Reports: Compile and submit to the city manager an annual report of the
status and activities of the department, plus monthly minutes of the regular
meetings, as well as such other reports as may be requested by the mayor,
council or city manager.
   P.   Control Of Scenes: Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire
department.
   Q.   Authority To Barricade: Place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or
other obstructions across a street, alley, right of way, or private property
near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire department, to control
the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence
related to the fire or other emergency.
   R.   Other Duties: Any other duties as directed by the city manager or city
council. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-7: ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE:
The council shall contract to insure the city against liability for workers'
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for members injured in the performance of their
duties as members whether within or outside the corporate limits of the city.
All members of the fire department shall be covered by the contract. (Ord. 15-
10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-8: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The council shall contract to insure against liability of the city or members
of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-9: CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The department may answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the City
limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that such
action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits. (Ord. 15-
10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-10: MUTUAL AID:
Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into
mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted Fire Departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-11: AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS:
Fire officials acting under the authority of chapter 100 of the Iowa Code may
issue citations in accordance to chapter 805 of the Iowa Code, for violations
of State and/or local fire safety regulations. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-12: EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE:
The department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue services
and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein shall
include such operation. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-13: OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-14: CHAPTER UPDATES/REVISIONS:
The City of Knoxville will update this chapter to assure compliance to the Code
of Iowa. Therefore, should the Code of Iowa, pertaining to the sections
included in this chapter, be updated and revised, then this chapter will also
be updated and revised. (Ord. 15-10, 7-20-2015)
4-1-15: AMBULANCE/EMS FEES:
The following fees are hereby adopted as Ambulance/EMS fees for the Fire
Department:
Procedure                        Base Fee Schedule (Medicare/ Approved Charge
                                 BCBS)
A0426 - ALS Non-Emergency        $1200.00                     CDW
A0427 - ALS Emergency            $1200.00                     CDW
A0428 - BLS Non-Emergency        $1000.00                     CDW
A0429 - BLS Emergency            $1000.00                     CDW
A0433 - ALS-2 Emergency          $1300.00                     CDW
A0434 - Specialty Care Transport $1600.00                     CDW
                                                             
                                Supplies Fee Schedule         
                                 Commercial/Medicaid Payers
A0382/A0398 - BLS/ALS Disposable $100.00/$200.00              CDW
Supplies
A0394 - ALS IV Via IO            $150.00                      CDW
A0396 - Intubation               $100.00                      CWD
A0422 - Oxygen                   $100.00                      CWD
A0998 - Treatment No Transport   $250.00                      CWD
A0999 - ALS Intercept/Agency     $250.00                      CWD
Assist
A0425 - Loaded Mileage - per     $18.00                       CDW
mile
Flight Crew Transport (if        $400.00                      CDW
applicable)
Event Standby - per hour         $150.00                      CDW
 
(Ord. 19-01, 2-4-2019, eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-15-2020; Ord. 21-02,
4-19-2021; Ord. 24-13, 6-17-2024)
4-1-16: FIRE/HAZARDOUS MATERIAL FEES:
The following fees are hereby adopted as fire/hazardous material fees for the
Fire Department:
Motor vehicle incidents       $400.00 level 1
                              500.00 level 2
Extrication                   275.00
Vehicle fire                  300.00
Creating a landing zone       250.00
Haz-mat response              300.00 level 1
                              500.00 level 2
Absorbent - per bag           Replacement cost
Foam - per 5 gallons          250.00
Structure fire                $750.00
Fire alarm 1st alarm          Warning
Fire alarm 2nd, 3rd/year      $100.00
Fire alarm 4th/year           250.00
Copy of paperwork             25.00
Insufficient funds for check  25.00
Event standby per hour (Fire) 250.00
 
(Ord. 19-01, 2-4-2019, eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-15-2020; Ord. 21-02,
4-19-2021)
4-1-17: INSPECTION FEES:
The following fees are hereby adopted as inspection fees for the Fire
Department:
Annual Liquor License Inspection Fee based on square footage
Annual Liquor License Inspection              Fee based on square footage
Inspection Fee Schedule Fire Safety Operation (valid for two years)
Permit
   1,500 sq ft or less                     $50.00
   1,501 - 3,000 sq ft                     $100.00
   3,001 - 6,000 sq ft                     $200.00
   6,001 - 9,000 sq ft                     $300.00
   9,001 - 12,000 sq ft                    $400.00
   12,001 - 15,000 sq ft                   $500.00
   15,001 sq ft or more                    $600.00
The 2nd Reinspection fee is $75.00 if the entity does not pass the
inspection; however, if they pass the inspection, the 2nd inspection fee
is waived.
Additional Reinspection's                     $100.00
 
(Ord. 21-16, 11-1-2021; amd. Ord. 23-11, 11-6-2023)
4-1-18: OFFSET PROGRAM:
All unpaid debts resulting from ambulance bills for service, fire bills for
service, and hazmat bills for service shall be submitted to the State (Offset)
Setoff Program administered by the Iowa Department of Revenue. (Ord. 23-12, 10-
16-2023)
CHAPTER 2
SANITARY USER CHARGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Use Of Revenues
4-2-4: User Charges
4-2-5: Billing; Failure To Pay; Application For New Service
4-2-6: Review Of Charges And Notification To Users
4-2-7: Connection Fee For Single-Family Unit
4-2-8: Multiple-Unit Connection Fee
4-2-9: Utility Development Fee
4-2-10: Newbold Drive Service Area Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the city's treatment works.
The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of
operating, maintaining and retiring the debt for such public wastewater
treatment works. (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986, eff. 12-1-1986)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/
l).
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
   A.   Has a flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average
workday; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or
   C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works; or
   E.   Contributors who contribute wastewater, the strength of which is
greater than normal domestic wastewater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: All expenditures during the useful life of the
treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the capacity
and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds (200 mg/l) of
BOD, 0.20 pounds (240 mg/l) of suspended solids, and 0.03 pounds (40 mg/l) of
ammonia- nitrogen (NH3N) and 1.25 pounds (1500 mg/l) of sulfate.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR: Any contributor to the city's treatment works whose
lot, parcel of real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes
only.
SS (Denoting Suspended Solids): Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
TREATMENT WORKS: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or liquid industrial
wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection
systems, individual systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply each as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including
site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment
process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such
treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such
compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment
systems before land application); and any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water
and sanitary sewer systems.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
USER CHARGE: That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is
levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
WATER METER: A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and/or
installed by the city by and through the board of trustees of the Knoxville
water department, or furnished and/or installed by a user and approved by the
city. (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986, eff. 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005)
4-2-3: USE OF REVENUES:
   A.   Pay Annual Costs: The user charge system shall generate adequate annual
revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement
and costs associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with
financing the treatment works which the city may by ordinance designate to be
paid by the user charge system. That portion of the total user charge which is
designated for operation and maintenance including replacement of the treatment
works shall be established by this chapter.
   B.   Operation, Maintenance And Replacement Fund: That portion of the total
user charge collected which is designated for operation and maintenance
including replacement purposes as established in section
4-2-4 of this chapter, shall be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known
as the operation, maintenance and replacement fund and will be kept in two (2)
primary accounts as follows:
      1.   An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying
operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works
(operation and maintenance account). (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986, eff. 12-1-1986)
      2.   An account designated for the specific purpose of insuring
replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (replacement
account). Deposits in the replacement account should be made annually from the
operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in the amount of forty thousand
dollars ($40,000.00). (Ord. 92-4, 7-6-1992)
   C.   Year End Balances: Fiscal year end balances in the operation and
maintenance account and the replacement account shall be carried over to the
same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other
purposes than those designated for these accounts. Monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts
upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance
and replacement. (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986, eff. 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 05-09, 9-6-
2005)
4-2-4: USER CHARGES:
   A.   Use Of Treatment Works: Each user shall pay for the services provided
by the City based on the user's use of the treatment works as determined by
water meter(s) acceptable to the City. Said charges shall include a monthly
water usage charge, a surcharge and a minimum charge.
   B.   Monthly Water Usage Charge And Base Charge: Contributors will pay a
monthly user charge based on the monthly water usage by the contributor during
the current month. The user charge rate is for operation and maintenance of the
system including replacement and debt service. The rate, which is set out
below, is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. In addition to the
monthly water usage charge, each contributor shall also pay a base charge per
month, which is set out below:
 
                             User Charge         Base Charge
                             (Per 1,000 Gallons)
July 1, 2020 - June 30, 2023 $7.05               $22.89
July 1, 2023 - June 30, 2026 $7.19               $23.35
 
      1.   If a commercial, residential or industrial contributor has a
consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not
returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for the
contributor may be based on a wastewater meter(s) or separate water meter(s)
installed and maintained at the contributor's expense, and in a manner
acceptable to the City. (Ord. 99-11, 9-20-1999)
   C.   Major Contributing Industry Violations:
   FINE SCHEDULE
 
               Written warning (if no violations of the specified pollutant in
               the previous 12 months)
               or
               $1,000.00 x (actual/pollutant limit) (if there has been a
First offense  violation of the specified pollutant in the last 12 months)
               Upon receipt of the Notice of Violation the company shall file a
               written response with the Waste Water Superintendent explaining
               the actions that will be taken by the company to eliminate the
               discharge of pollutants.
Second offense $2,000.00 x (actual/pollutant limit)
Third offense  $3,000.00 x (actual/pollutant limit)
Fourth offense $4,000.00 x (actual/pollutant limit)
 
Example:
Actual BOD on day test is 680 pounds per day.
Form 31 or pretreatment agreement limit is 500 pounds per day.
This is the first fine in the last 90 days.
The fine would be:
$1,000.00 x (680/500) = $1,360.00
In addition, if pretreatment violations by a major contributing industry cause
permit violations by the City, the industry will be responsible for costs
incurred by the City.
   D.   Commercial Surcharge: A surcharge factor shall be levied for the
following customers whose wastewaters exceed normal domestic wastewater:
 
Customer Type                                                 Surcharge Factor
Laundry, including industrial laundries, commercial laundries 1.2
and laundromatic
Car washes                                                    1.3
Restaurants, including quick serve and sit down types         1.6
Schools                                                       1.6
Seasonal (racetracks, etc.)                                   1.6
Hospitals, nursing homes and rest homes                       1.8
 
For those customers categories not listed, the City shall establish the new
category.
   E.   Sampling Charge: Those industrial and commercial contributors who
contribute wastewater which is monitored by the City shall pay a sampling
charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month in addition to the above
described user charges. For tests completed by outside certified laboratories,
contributors will be charged the cost of the required testing by the City's
NPDES permit under a five (5) year contract executed by the Wastewater Division
plus the one hundred dollar ($100.00) charge.
   F.   Increased Costs: Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which
cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the
City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly
or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the
cost of the operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works,
shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as
determined by the City Manager and approved by the City Council.
   G.   Application Of Charges: The user charge rates established in this
chapter apply to all users, regardless of their location, of the City's
treatment works.
   H.   Grease Trap Inspection Charge: Those contributors who contribute
wastewater that require a grease trap that is monitored by the City shall pay
an inspection charge of eight dollars thirty five cents ($8.35) per month in
addition to the above described user charges, to pay for the inspections done
twice per year. The seasonal contributors that have inspections only once per
year shall pay the inspection charge of four dollars seventeen cents ($4.17)
per month to pay for the inspection done once per year. (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986,
eff. 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 99-11, 9-20-1999; Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005; Ord. 08-11,
12-1-2008; Ord. 15-05, 4-6-2015; Ord. 18-09, 6-4-2018; Ord. 19-06, 6-17-2019;
Ord. 20-01, 6-5-2020)
4-2-5: BILLING; FAILURE TO PAY; APPLICATION FOR NEW SERVICE:
   A.   Billing Periods; Time Of Payment: All users with less than one million
(1,000,000) gallons of water usage per month shall be billed bimonthly. All
users with more than one million (1,000,000) gallons of water usage per month
shall be billed monthly. Billings for any particular billing period shall be
made within thirty (30) days after the end of that billing period. Payments are
due when the billings are made. Any payment not received within thirty (30)
days after the billing is made shall be delinquent.
   B.   Late Payment Penalty: A late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) of
the user charge bill will be added to each delinquent bill for each thirty (30)
days of delinquency. When any bill is thirty (30) days in default, rendition of
water and/or sewer service to such premises shall be discontinued until such
bill is paid following due notice and opportunity for hearing.
   C.   Lien For Delinquent Charges:
      1.   The city shall have a lien upon the property receiving the sewer
service for all delinquent rates and charges.
      2.   The city clerk shall certify within ten (10) days of the following
dates, to the county treasurer for collection with and in the same manner as
property taxes and to establish the property liens, all rates and charges which
are delinquent over ninety (90) days on March 1, June 1, September 1 and
December 1. (Ord. 86-3, 11-17-1986)
   D.   Deposit Required:
      1.   Residential: Residential customers shall be required to pay a
deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Commercial: A deposit shall be required of all commercial customers.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
         a.   New Customers At Existing Accounts: The deposit shall be the same
as the account's highest bill for any billing period within the last two (2)
years. No deposit shall be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         b.   New Commercial Accounts: The deposit shall be an amount
determined by the public works director based on bills of existing similar type
businesses.
         c.   Commercial Deposits: Commercial deposits of two hundred dollars
($200.00) or less shall be paid in cash.
         d.   Payment Of Deposits: Commercial deposits of more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) may be paid by either cash or by posting a utility payment
bond approved by the city for the amount of the deposit, or by a letter of
credit from the consumer's financial institution. Such letter of credit must be
provided in a form dictated by the city.
         e.   Deposits By Bond: Deposits paid by securing a utility payment
bond must be renewed annually and the amount for which the bond must be held
will be reviewed and adjusted every two (2) years.
   E.   Deposit Refunded:
      1.   Any customer who has an excellent pay history (no more than 1 late
payment and no disconnects) for their initial one year on service, shall have
their deposit refunded.
      2.   If a customer does not meet the criteria listed above to have their
deposit refunded, the deposit shall stay on file indefinitely to guarantee
payment toward a final bill. Any customer who has a deposit on file at the time
of approval hereof, and meets the requirements set out under subsection E1 of
this section, shall have their deposit(s) refunded as expeditiously as
possible.
   F.   Deposit Waived:
      1.   Anyone who has had a deposit refunded under the provisions of
subsection E of this section and has not been off of service with the city of
Knoxville for more than one year shall have their deposit fee waived.
Commercial accounts shall not be eligible for deposit waivers.
      2.   Anyone starting service with the city of Knoxville for the first
time or after being off of service for more than one year and can provide a
letter of reference showing an excellent pay history with another utility
within the previous twelve (12) months shall have their deposit fee waived.
Commercial accounts shall not be eligible for deposit waivers.
      3.   Anyone returning to service with the city of Knoxville, who has
arrears of any type with the city of Knoxville, shall not be eligible to have
their deposit fee waived, regardless of meeting the criteria above. All arrears
and the deposit must be paid in full prior to service being started.
   G.   Application For New Sewer Service:
      1.   Any person or business requesting to start a new sewer service must
complete an application form. (Ord. 13-15, 12-16-2013)
4-2-6: REVIEW OF CHARGES AND NOTIFICATION TO USERS:
   A.   The staff will review the user charge system on an annual basis and
make recommendations to council concerning any proposed changes to the user
rates. (Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005)
   B.   The city will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance including
replacement of the treatment works. (Ord. 86-2, 9-15-1986, eff. 12-1-1986)
4-2-7: CONNECTION FEE FOR SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT:
The connection fee for each single-family unit connection will be two hundred
twenty five dollars ($225.00). (Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005)
4-2-8: MULTIPLE-UNIT CONNECTION FEE:
The connection fee shall be the number of units times the single- family unit
times two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00). (Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005)
4-2-9: UTILITY DEVELOPMENT FEE:
The connection fee shall be according to a formula developed by the city based
on a proportionate charge such as cost per acre, cost per lot of flow
requirement. (Ord. 05-09, 9-6-2005)
4-2-10: NEWBOLD DRIVE SERVICE AREA SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Newbold Drive service area sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in lot 1 and lot 2 of Knoxville
Industrial Park and lots 7 through 15 in Reimer Subdivision, both official
plats, now included in and forming a part of the city of Knoxville, Marion
County, Iowa, as graphically depicted on figure 1 attached to the ordinance
codified herein on file in the office of the city clerk and made a part hereof.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Newbold Drive service area sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance, at the time of application to connect their
properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
   A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof, a connection fee based
upon the following formula:
 
Total cost of Newbold Drive sanitary sewer extension
54.23 acres
 
The "total cost of Newbold Drive sanitary sewer extension" will include the bid
price of the Newbold Drive sanitary sewer extension project in the amount of
one hundred fourteen thousand eight hundred sixty eight dollars ($114,868.00)
plus twenty four thousand dollars ($24,000.00) of engineering costs. Therefore,
the "total cost of Newbold Drive sanitary sewer extension" is equal to one
hundred thirty eight thousand eight hundred sixty eight dollars ($138,868.00).
From the effective date hereof, a connection fee as calculated in the fee
schedule of two thousand five hundred sixty dollars ($2,560.00) per acre of
property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed.
   B.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not
apply to any properties within the Newbold Drive service area sanitary sewer
connection fee district which do not use any sewer facilities constructed for
the Newbold Drive service area sanitary sewer connection fee district.
   C.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the
sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid,
prior to the time of release of a final plat for recordation or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
   D.   Adjustment Of Fees: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Newbold Drive service area sanitary sewer connection fee district.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate
adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
(Ord. 10-01, 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Volume Based Charges
4-3-3: Recycling
4-3-4: Recyclables Defined
4-3-5: License Required
4-3-6: Recyclable Hauler License Fee
4-3-7: Types Of Licenses
4-3-8: Transfer Of License
4-3-9: Renewal Of License
4-3-10: Revocation Of License
4-3-11: Insurance Requirements
4-3-12: Public Education
4-3-13: Filing Of Volume Based Plan
4-3-14: Pay As You Throw Plan
4-3-15: Size And Rate For Collection
4-3-16: Disposal Of White Goods/Appliances
4-3-17: Submittals Of Necessary Materials
4-3-18: Compliance With Law
4-3-19: Misdemeanor
4-3-20: Ability To Collect Recyclables
4-3-21: Mandatory Garbage Collection
4-3-22: Accumulation Of Refuse Or Garbage
4-3-23: Commercial Garbage Pick Up
4-3-24: Yard Wastes
4-3-25: Vehicle Regulations
4-3-26: Roll-Off Dumpsters/Bins/Trash Receptacles
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth herein unless otherwise limited or expanded elsewhere in this chapter:
AREA: The legally defined boundaries of the City of Knoxville, Iowa.
CITY: The City of Knoxville, Iowa.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL UNITS/OCCUPANTS: All locations within the City which
are not considered residential units/occupants under this chapter. Mobile home
parks, where water services are metered by a single meter, are considered
commercial units.
CONTAINERS AND BINS: Those containers used for collection of garbage. These
containers must be a durable rigid wall container with a lid.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION: The collection of all garbage or recyclables placed
curbside or in front of the house as near to the street as possible if no curb
exists.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE: Every waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable
matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking,
dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. Dead animals
are not included in the term "garbage". "Refuse" shall mean all other
miscellaneous waste materials not specifically defined as garbage or
specifically defined as recyclable.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, proprietorship, or other
entity.
RECYCLABLE HAULER: Any person, partnership, corporation, proprietorship or
other entity desiring to pick up and transport for processing any recyclable in
the City. Anyone subcontracting to perform any such recycling pick up or
transportation task is also considered a recyclable hauler under this
definition.
RECYCLABLE(S): Those items defined as a "recyclable(s)" in section
4-3-4 of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT/OCCUPANT: Each single-family or multi-family dwelling located
within the corporate limits of the City and occupied by a person or group of
persons, except "mobile home parks" as defined in the definition of "commercial
and industrial units/occupants" of this section.
VOLUME BASED GARBAGE SYSTEM: A system with an ever increasing charge based upon
number of containers utilized or upon actual weight of garbage generated. (Ord.
01-15, 12-17-2001; amd. Ord. 02-08, 5-20-2002, eff. 7-1-2002; Ord. 17-06, 10-2-
2017)
4-3-2: VOLUME BASED CHARGES:
Any individual or entity holding a license to haul garbage and refuse in the
City shall charge based upon the volume of garbage and refuse generated. These
volume based charges may be made through the number of containers or bins
utilized or based upon actual weight collected. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-3: RECYCLING:
Each commercial, industrial, and residential unit/occupant in the City shall be
offered recycling of those items designated in section
4-3-4 of this chapter by their licensed garbage hauler. Those items designated
as recyclables shall not be disposed of except by delivery by the commercial,
industrial or residential unit/occupant, or by a licensed recyclable hauler, to
an individual or entity engaging in recycling of the item involved. No
recyclable (properly set out for the purpose of recycling) shall be disposed of
by depositing same with garbage or refuse. (Ord. 02-08, 5-20-2002, eff. 7-1-
2002)
4-3-4: RECYCLABLES DEFINED:
"Recyclables" under this chapter are defined as follows:
   A.   Tin, aluminum, and bimetal cans and metal.
   B.   Clear, brown and green glass bottles and jars.
   C.   No. 1 PETE plastics and no. 2 HDPE plastics.
   D.   Newsprint.
   E.   Office paper.
   F.   Anything else as approved by hauler and City.
   G.   Cardboard (corrugated and noncorrugated).
   H.   Waste oil (contained in leakproof containers).
   I.   Lead acid batteries (casing undamaged).
   J.   Wood pallets.
No licensed recyclable hauler is required to pick up items listed in
subsections H through J of this section as a part of their customer pick up.
However, any licensed recyclable hauler making any scheduled recyclable pick up
shall pick up items listed in subsections A through G of this section. (Ord.
01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler in the City shall be licensed for
this purpose by the City pursuant to this chapter. A license application must
be completed for a garbage or refuse/recyclable hauler to be eligible for a
license, which applications are available in the Office of the City Clerk. It
shall be unlawful to commercially collect and haul garbage, refuse, and trash
within the City, without first securing a license issued by the City Council.
The annual license and fees shall be as set by resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-6: RECYCLABLE HAULER LICENSE FEE:
Each recyclable hauler recycling license can be obtained, after application
approval, by the payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). A renewal fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged at the time of each renewal of a
license. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-7: TYPES OF LICENSES:
A residential or commercial license shall be required of all garbage haulers.
(Ord. 17-06, 10-2-2017)
Only those haulers with a valid residential garbage license may provide service
to residential zoned districts and only those haulers with a valid commercial
garbage license may provide service to commercial and industrial zoned
districts. Garbage haulers who secure a residential and commercial garbage
license may provide service in either district. (Ord. 09-06, 5-4-2009)
4-3-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to another person or
be used for a purpose other than that for which it was issued, without the
approval of the city council. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The annual license to haul recyclables, garbage and refuse shall be
automatically renewed, from year to year, upon payment of the annual fee
provided herein and upon filing of the required certificate of proper insurance
coverage. License may be revoked upon a showing of noncompliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Reasons For Revocation: After giving a licensee two (2) days' notice
and after a hearing before the city council, the city council may revoke any
license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
      1.   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the licensee's
application for the license or in the conduct of his/her business.
      2.   The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted
his/her business in an unlawful manner.
      3.   The licensee has conducted his/her business in such a manner as to
endanger the public welfare, health, safety, order or morals.
   B.   Manner Of Serving Notice: The notice shall be in writing and shall be
served personally by the police department or as required for personal service
by the Iowa rules of civil procedure. The notice shall state the time and place
of hearing and the reasons for the intended revocation. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-
2001)
   C.   Effect Of Revocation: Revocation of a license shall bar the licensee
from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a term determined by
the city council not to exceed one year from the date of revocation. Despite
the requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter, the licensed hauler shall be entitled to reinstatement
of his license after the revocation period if he meets all code requirements.
(Ord. 02-08, 5-20-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
4-3-11: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler shall not be permitted to commence
work under this chapter until recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler has
obtained all required insurance and filed proof of such with the city clerk.
Neither shall the recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler allow any subcontractor
to commence work until all similar insurance required of the subcontractor has
been so obtained and approved.
   A.   Compensation Insurance: The recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler shall
take out and maintain workers' compensation insurance for all employees of the
business. In any case, where work subject to the workers' compensation act is
subcontracted, the recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler shall require any
subcontractor to provide workers' compensation insurance for all the latter's
employees unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by the
recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler.
   B.   Public Liability And Property Damage Insurance: The recyclable, garbage
and refuse hauler shall obtain and maintain such public liability and property
damage insurance as shall protect him from claims for damages for personal
injury, including accidental death, as well as property damages which may arise
from operations under this chapter, whether such work is performed by the
recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler or by any subcontractor or by anyone
directly or indirectly employed by either of them and the amount of such
insurance shall be as follows:
Public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to any one person, and
subject to the same limit for each person, in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) on account of one accident, and property damage
insurance in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
The recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler shall require each and every
subcontractor to obtain and maintain similar policies with the same limits
stipulated above.
   C.   Comprehensive Vehicle Liability Insurance: The recyclable, garbage and
refuse hauler (and any subcontractor) shall obtain prior to commencement of
work under this chapter comprehensive vehicle mobile liability insurance in the
following amounts:
      1.   For injury to or death of persons, not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) to or for any one person and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for any one accident, and
      2.   For injury to or destruction of property not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident, where such loss arises by
reason of ownership, maintenance, operation, use, loading and/or unloading of
any vehicle. Such insurance shall be applicable to each and every truck or
other vehicle used in hauling garbage or recyclable materials or as otherwise
used in the performance of work under or in connection with this chapter.
   D.   Umbrella Liability Coverage: The recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler
(and subcontractor) shall further obtain and maintain umbrella liability
coverage with the same limits of liability as specified in subsection B of this
section providing excess insurance over and above the basic automobile policy
referred to in subsection C of this section.
   E.   Proof Of Carriage Of Insurance: Prior to commencement of work,
hereunder, the recyclable, garbage and refuse hauler shall furnish to the city
clerk the certificates of insurance relating to all required coverage.
   F.   Cancellation Of Insurance: Each policy shall provide that it is
noncancelable for a period of thirty (30) days following written notice of
intention to cancel given to the city by certified mail. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-
2001)
4-3-12: PUBLIC EDUCATION:
The recyclable and/or garbage/refuse hauler will develop a plan of education so
as to inform his clientele of this chapter's requirements imposed upon the
collection of garbage, refuse, and recyclable materials specific to their
company. As part of this educational effort, the recyclable hauler will
distribute, in printed form, a statement of his collection schedule as well as
a statement of items which are recyclable and an explanation concerning how the
garbage/refuse and recyclable system is to operate. Any cost associated with
the educational effort shall be the exclusive responsibility of the recyclable
hauler. The city will be responsible for a generic public education pamphlet
regarding unit based pricing and recycling. (Ord. 02-08, 5-20-2002, eff. 7-1-
2002)
4-3-13: FILING OF VOLUME BASED PLAN:
All garbage/refuse haulers and/or recyclable haulers shall file, in writing, a
description of their volume or weight based system concerning garbage and
refuse. Such a volume of weight based system shall create a financial incentive
to recycle and reduce the volume of garbage and refuse generated. Filing of
this required written statement is a condition, which must be satisfied prior
to the issuance of a recyclable hauler license. The volume based plan shall
include a description of the process in which refuse and garbage shall be
disposed. The plan shall include a description of where the collected
recyclable materials will be processed, handled and a description of their
final disposition. The plan will be required to include that all refuse and
garbage shall be deposited with the south central Iowa solid waste agency
landfill. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-14: PAY AS YOU THROW PLAN:
The city shall have, per Iowa Code section 455D.3 and administrative rule
section 101.5(8), a unit based pricing program in agreement with the licensee
for the collection of solid waste for the city of Knoxville. (Ord. 01-15, 12-
17-2001)
4-3-15: SIZE AND RATE FOR COLLECTION:
A monthly service charge for collection of residential solid waste from each
residence shall be billed according to the size of container with charges
increasing with each larger size of container. Service levels shall include:
   A.   One weekly pick up of not more than thirty five (35) gallons or forty
five (45) pounds.
   B.   One weekly pick up of not more than sixty four (64) gallons or ninety
(90) pounds.
   C.   One weekly pick up of not more than ninety six (96) gallons or one
hundred thirty five (135) pounds.
Any additional containers will be an additional cost. Solid waste shall be
stored in approved solid waste containers. The weight of any individual
container and contents shall not exceed amounts listed in subsections A through
C of this section.
The billing for each customer shall be the responsibility of each licensee.
(Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-16: DISPOSAL OF WHITE GOODS/APPLIANCES:
The licensee, refuse hauler, or recyclable collector from each licensed
business will be responsible for providing an operational plan for the disposal
of white goods/appliances for each licensed business customer. The plan will be
included with the filing of the volume based plan filed with the city as noted
in section
4-3-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-17: SUBMITTALS OF NECESSARY MATERIALS:
All required documentation and documents will be made available to the city
manager fourteen (14) days prior to the city council meeting in which approval
of a garbage or refuse/recyclable material license will be considered. (Ord.
01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-18: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
All recyclable, garbage and refuse haulers licensed pursuant to this chapter
shall comply with all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of all state,
federal, and local authorities associated with the pick up, transportation and
processing of items defined as recyclable herein. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-19: MISDEMEANOR:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
imprisonment for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 01-15, 12-
17-2001)
4-3-20: ABILITY TO COLLECT RECYCLABLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to collect any
recyclables within the city except from his/her/its own residence or business
property, without first obtaining a license from the city. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-
2001)
4-3-21: MANDATORY GARBAGE COLLECTION:
All residences, commercial businesses, industrial businesses and all other
entities shall be required to contract with or pay one of the licensed garbage/
refuse and/or recyclable haulers for service within the corporate limits of
Knoxville. All refuse and garbage shall be taken to the south central Iowa
solid waste agency landfill. Landlords of properties will be responsible for
the expense if the occupant or tenant does not pay the cost. (Ord. 01-15, 12-
17-2001)
4-3-22: ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE OR GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful for private residences, commercial businesses, industrial
businesses and all other entities to allow refuse or garbage to accumulate for
more than a two (2) week period of time. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-23: COMMERCIAL GARBAGE PICK UP:
Garbage or refuse may not be stored or put out for pick up on city street
rights of way. (Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-24: YARD WASTES:
The purpose of this section is to provide for regulations pertaining to the
disposal of yard wastes generated within the city limits.
   A.   Definitions Of Yard Waste:
   COMPOST: Organic material resulting from biological decomposition of waste
which can be used as a soil conditioner or soil amendment.
   YARD WASTES: Debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and
trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
   B.   Separation Of Yard Wastes Required: All yard wastes shall be separated
by the owner or occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on the
premises and placed in containers, or packages and set out for collection,
which is agreeable to the licensee.
   C.   Requirements Of Licensee: Garbage, refuse and/or recyclable hauler
licensed by the city shall be required to provide a means in which all clients
of the licensee shall have the ability to dispose of yard waste generated. The
licensee shall dispose of any yard waste collected by the licensee by any legal
means available. The licensee shall be required to dispose of any yard wastes
collected in full compliance with any local, state or federal regulations.
(Ord. 01-15, 12-17-2001)
4-3-25: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Packer Type Conveyance: It shall be unlawful for any person to haul
garbage upon or along any street or alley except in a packer type conveyance
which shall be packed in such a way that it will not scatter said materials
along the streets or alleys.
   B.   Unlawful To Litter: It shall be unlawful for any person to haul refuse
or trash along any street or alley except in a conveyance so constructed as to
prevent the scattering of said materials upon the streets or alleys. All
vehicles used therefor shall be either covered or packed in such a way that
they will not scatter said materials.
   C.   Operations Limited: Vehicles used in the collection and hauling of
garbage, refuse and trash shall not be parked closer than one hundred feet
(100') to any residence unless within a completely enclosed building. (Ord. 02-
11, 10-7-2002)
4-3-26: ROLL-OFF DUMPSTERS/BINS/TRASH RECEPTACLES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to place, park or leave standing on any public
street, alley or city owned or city controlled parking areas any roll-off
dumpster, bin or trash receptacle without the approval of the chief of police
or public works director and a permit issued.
   B.   All permit applications for roll-off dumpsters, bins and trash
receptacles must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Roll-off dumpsters, bins and trash receptacles must be clearly
marked with the owner's name, address and telephone number.
      2.   Roll-off dumpsters, bins and trash receptacles must have adequate
reflective warning markings on both sides and on the end of the roll-off
dumpster, bin or trash receptacle nearest to any oncoming traffic.
   C.   Applicants must apply to the chief of police or public works director
for a seven (7) day twenty five dollar ($25.00) permit prior to placing any
roll-off dumpster, bin or trash receptacle in the public street, alley or city
owned or city controlled parking areas. Time extensions beyond the seven (7)
day permit must be approved by the chief of police or public works director.
      1.   If odors persist prior to the end of the seven (7) day permit, the
roll-off dumpster, bin or trash receptacle will be required to be removed
immediately.
   D.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section constitutes a
one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine under this chapter. (Ord. 08-09, 9-19-2008)
   E.   (Rep. by Ord. 12-03, 4-16-2012)
   F.   Roll-off dumpsters, bins and trash receptacles will not be allowed to
remain on public streets, alleys or city owned or city controlled parking areas
during any declared snow or storm emergency period. (Ord. 08-09, 9-19-2008)
   G.   Only those haulers with a valid residential garbage license may provide
roll-off/dumpster service to residential zoned districts and only those haulers
with a valid commercial garbage license may provide roll-off/dumpster service
to commercial and industrial zoned districts. Haulers who secure a residential
and commercial license may provide roll-off/dumpster service in either
district. (Ord. 09-06, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 4
WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Purpose
4-4-2: Definitions
4-4-3: License Required
4-4-4: Issuance Of License
4-4-5: Denial, Suspension And Revocation Of License
4-4-6: Hours Of Work
4-4-7: Permit Requirements
4-4-8: Disposal
4-4-9: Identification Of Source
4-4-10: Mixing Wastes
4-4-11: Standards Of Disposal At The Wastewater Treatment Plant
4-4-12: Rejection Of Waste Loads
4-4-13: Enforcement Procedures
4-4-14: Fee Payment For Domestic And Industrial Wastes
4-4-15: Vehicle Regulations
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of waste haulers
and their use of the wastewater treatment facilities in Knoxville, Iowa. (Ord.
92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are used in this chapter and are defined as follows:
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the Knoxville wastewater treatment division
or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial users.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section
212 of the clean water act, owned by the city. This definition includes any
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of wastewater or industrial waste, or that convey wastewater to the wastewater
treatment plant, regardless of ownership.
VEHICLE: A device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
WASTE: Human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, and food waste grease
solids from public and private wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks;
impervious vaults, portable, or chemical toilets; and devices used to trap
grease resulting from food preparation.
WASTE HAULER: A person or firm engaged in the business of cleaning and
disposing of waste from public or private waste facilities, including a person
or firm that owns and rents or leases portable toilets.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the liquid and solid wastes carried from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground water, surface water, and stormwater as may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to
provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation of wastewater and
industrial waste). (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No waste hauler shall remove waste from within the corporate limits of the city
or shall dispose of waste, whether from a source inside or outside the
corporate limits of the city, into the Knoxville wastewater treatment plant
without first obtaining a waste hauler license from the city. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-
1992)
4-4-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The waste hauler’s license shall be issued by the city clerk upon written
application and completion of the following minimum requirements:
   A.   Inspection: All inspections related to the trucks, hoses, valves and
associated equipment of the applicant for a waste Hauler’s license shall be
completed by the County Sanitarian.
   B.   License Fee And Bond: An application shall require the payment of a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fee for each vehicle used by the applicant and the
posting of a bond with reasonable surety in the penal sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful compliance with the provisions of this
chapter including prompt payment of fees, fines and damages.
   C.   Renewal: Waste hauler licenses shall expire on March 31 next after its
issuance. Renewal application must be made in the same manner as initial
application and must be received at the city clerk’s office thirty (30) days
prior to expiration. Failure to apply thirty (30) days prior to expiration may
result in an interruption in license and the privileges of such license. (Ord.
92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord. 00-08, 10-16-2000; Ord. 24-10, 5-6-2024)
4-4-5: DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Reasons For Suspension Or Denial: The city may suspend, revoke or deny
a waste hauler license for any of the following reasons:
      1.   A material misstatement of facts in a license application or
submission of an incomplete application;
      2.   Failure to pay fees or costs allowed by this code;
      3.   Violation of the rules governing waste haulers as found in sections
4-4-3 and
4-4-7 of this chapter;
      4.   An inspection shows deficiencies in equipment;
      5.   The waste hauler’s license has been suspended by the city due to
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: No suspension or revocation shall be issued except
upon notice delivered to the licensee by mailing the notice through the regular
mail addressed to the licensee at the address listed on the license
application, a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing
before the city manager or his or her designee. Such notice shall inform the
licensee of the time, date and place of the hearing, the purpose of the
hearing, and shall set out the reasons therefor. Provided that in case of
violation of this chapter of such nature that the violation is deemed to be an
immediate hazard by the administrator of the wastewater treatment plant, the
administrator shall be authorized to temporarily suspend the license until
notice can be given and hearing held.
   C.   Discretion Of City Manager: If, after such a hearing, the city manager
or his or her designee makes a finding based on substantial evidence that a
violation of this chapter did in fact occur as alleged, the city manager or his
or her designee may continue suspension of, suspend or revoke the license; the
determination of whether to revoke such license shall be in the discretion of
the city manager or his or her designee and shall be dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the violation and its severity.
   D.   Appeal Manager’s Decision: The decision of continued suspension,
suspension or revocation made by the city manager or his or her designee may be
appealed to the city council. In order to appeal such decision, written notice
of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within three (3) days after receipt
of the decision. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute
a waiver of right to appeal the decision of continued suspension or revocation
of the city manager or his or her designee.
   E.   Scheduling Of Hearing: The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for
such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the city
clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled at the next regular
council meeting, if such notice is received by five o’clock (5:00) P.M. on the
Wednesday before the next regular council meeting. If notice is not received by
the above designated time the hearing will be scheduled for the next following
council meeting. The hearing may be continued for good cause. The hearing shall
be confined to the record made before the city manager or his or her designee
and the arguments of the parties or their representatives, but no additional
evidence shall be taken. After such hearing, the city council may affirm or
reverse the order of the city manager or his or her designee. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with
the City Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing, or any continued
session thereof.
   F.   Continuation Of Suspension Or Revocation: If the City Council affirms
the action of the City Manager or his or her designee, continuing the
suspension or revocation, the City Council shall so state and order in its
written decision.
   G.   Eligibility After Revocation: A licensee whose license has been revoked
shall not be eligible for another waste hauler license for a period of two (2)
years. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-6: HOURS OF WORK:
   A.   Normal Water Reclamation Facility Hours: Normal business hours are
shown on the City’s website, or a caller may call the plant to determine the
hours of operation.
      No after-hours dumping shall be allowed at the Wastewater Treatment Plant
after normal business hours.
   B.   Time For Waste Pickup: Every waste hauler shall have the right to pick
up waste at any time during the day or night pursuant to the above request, but
said hauler shall only be allowed to bring said waste to the wastewater
treatment plant during regular business hours, unless prior approval is
obtained pursuant to the above paragraph. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord. 24-
10, 5-6-2024)
4-4-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
All waste haulers doing business in the City shall be required to carry their
waste hauler license/permit in the truck at all times. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-8: DISPOSAL:
Waste Haulers shall dispose of hauled wastes permitted in this Chapter at a
location designated by the wastewater treatment plant administrator: and, only
licensed Waste Haulers are allowed to dump at the City’s Public Owned Treatment
Works. Hours of operation at the Knoxville wastewater treatment plant disposal
station shall be from eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to four o’clock (4:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday, except by special arrangement between the waste hauler
and the administrator to permit response to emergency conditions. Waste haulers
shall maintain the designated location in a clean and orderly condition to
avoid noxious odors and unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord.
24-10, 5-6-2024)
4-4-9: IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE:
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the
site and method of disposal for wastes that are delivered to the Knoxville
wastewater treatment plant. Such information shall be provided on a manifest
form provided by the administrator. The manifest shall also include: 1) the
name, address and phone number of the waste generator, 2) the type of waste
collected, 3) the approximate volume of the load, 4) any other information
consistent with identification and tracking of wastes. The administrator or his
or her designee shall have the right to verify all information required by this
Section including the right to measure, sample and analyze any waste regulated
by this Chapter. The waste hauler shall obtain approval from the administrator
or his or her designee prior to loading wastes originating from an industrial/
commercial source unless previous approval is on record at the wastewater
treatment plant. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-10: MIXING WASTES:
   A.   Residential And Commercial Wastes: Wastes from residential and
nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an industrial/commercial
source shall not be mixed with wastes of any type from another location.
Portable toilet and food grease trap wastes may be mixed with similar wastes
from different locations. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed
as long as each source is identified.
   B.   Hazardous Or Toxic Wastes: Any tanks or equipment used for hauling
waste to the wastewater treatment plant shall not be used for hauling hazardous
or toxic wastes, as defined in chapter 131 of Iowa Code and in 40 CFR part 261,
or other wastes detrimental to the wastewater treatment plant. (Ord. 92-2, 5-
18-1992)
4-4-11: STANDARDS OF DISPOSAL AT THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT:
Disposal of wastes to the wastewater treatment plant shall be carried out in
accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by federal,
state and city governments including categorical standards developed for the
waste generator's industrial category. The administrator may reject wastes from
waste haulers that do not comply with this section or with any other provision
of this chapter. Waste haulers shall not deliver wastes to the Knoxville
wastewater treatment plant that:
   A.   Exceed the limits found in Knoxville city ordinances, except for
suspended solids and BOD5 as approved by the city 1 ;
   B.   Are hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR part 261 or chapter 131 of the
Iowa Code; (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
   C.   Originate from sand traps, such as those located in car, truck, and
trailer washes, which primarily remove sand and dirt;
   D.   Originate from mineral oil and grease traps such as those located at
vehicle maintenance facilities;
   E.   Originate from an animal confinement facility; (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992;
amd. 1996 Code)
   F.   Are not completely identified or are from industrial/commercial sources
that are not approved by the administrator;
   G.   Are mixed in a manner prohibited in section
4-4-10 of this chapter;
   H.   Are wastes other than residential from outside city limits, except
through requests to the administrator in emergency situations.
   I.   Are wastes which originate outside the Marion County boundary lines.
(Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-5-5 of this title.
4-4-12: REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS:
The administrator or his or her designee may reject any hauled waste load that
violates or is suspected to violate the requirements of this code or that fails
to meet any other guidelines established by the administrator to protect
personnel, equipment, and processes at the wastewater treatment plant. Waste
haulers must:
   A.   Remove rejected waste from the wastewater treatment plant.
   B.   Immediately remove any additional wastes contaminated by the rejected
waste while contained at the wastewater treatment plant prior to introduction
into the sewer.
   C.   Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with state and
federal law.
   D.   Provide the administrator with a written statement, signed by the waste
hauler/license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected load
was disposed of. The statement is due within five (5) calendar days after the
waste is rejected.
Vehicles used to haul rejected wastes shall not be allowed to enter the
wastewater treatment plant with additional wastes until the statement required
by this section is delivered to the administrator. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992)
4-4-13: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Municipal Infraction; Repeat Offense: Any person, corporation or other
legal entity who violates or resists the enforcement of any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the initial offense and seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. Each violation constitutes a
separate offense. Any person, corporation or other legal entity who violates a
provision of this chapter after having previously been found guilty of
violating the same provision of this chapter at the same location or at a
different location shall be guilty of a repeat offense. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992;
amd. Ord. 05-10, 9-6-2005)
   B.   Alternative Relief: Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief, including
any order for abatement or injunctive relief, from the court in the same action
or as a separate action. The enforcement provisions in this section are in
addition to those set out in other Knoxville city ordinances.
   C.   Additional Penalties: Dumping of waste in any unapproved dump site or
an approved dump site outside of designated times and dates will be subject to
all of the following:
      1.   Above.
      2.   Illegal waste dumping infraction punishable by a civil penalty of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)/offense.
      3.   Revocation for waste haulers license (if applicable) for two (2)
years.
      4.   Above. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord. 24-10, 5-6-2024)
4-4-14: FEE PAYMENT FOR DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
   A.   Treatment Fee: A treatment fee shall be set per one thousand (1,000)
gallons (minimum) of hauled waste which shall be equal to the cost of disposal
and treatment of an equivalent mass or pollutants otherwise delivered into the
sewer system. The fees shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) up to and
including the first one thousand (1,000) gallons and any excess shall be
charged an additional rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each one
hundred (100) gallons over the first one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   B.   Monthly Billings: Fees shall be paid by the waste hauler on the basis
of monthly billings by the city clerk’s office. All fees shall be paid through
the city clerk’s office. Limits of credit shall be reasonable limits to be
determined by the city clerk’s office. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds
for liability on the waste hauler’s bond and for refusal of disposal services
to any waste hauler under this chapter.
   C.   Waiver Of Fees: Council may waive fees for sponsors of special events
sponsored by nonprofit groups located in the city. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd.
Ord. 05-10, 9-6-2005; Ord. 24-10, 5-6-2024)
4-4-15: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to haul waste upon or
along any street or alley except in a device equipped with a tank and used to
remove or transport waste in such a way that it will not scatter said waste
along the streets or alleys.
   B.   Unlawful To Litter: It shall be unlawful for any person to haul waste
along any street or alley except in a vehicle so constructed as to prevent the
scattering of said waste upon the streets or alleys. All vehicles used therefor
shall be either covered or packed in such a way that they will not scatter said
waste.
   C.   Operations Limited: Vehicles used in the collection and hauling of
waste shall not be parked closer than one hundred feet (100') to any residence
unless within a completely enclosed building. (Ord. 09-05, 4-20-2009)
CHAPTER 5
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Prohibited Discharges
4-5-4: Storm Water
4-5-5: Prohibited Wastes
4-5-6: Grease, Oil Or Sand Traps
4-5-7: Abandoned Underground Fuel Storage Tanks
4-5-8: Remedial Action
4-5-9: Right Of Entry
4-5-10: Collection Point For Sampling
4-5-11: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
4-5-12: Malicious Damage
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of the discharge
of water and wastes into the Knoxville sewerage system and providing for
remedial action to be taken in the event of violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean
and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: That person designated to so act by the city manager.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/
l).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid, liquid or gaseous substances which any person
discharges or allows to be discharged into the public sewer which substances
have a suspended solids content in excess of three hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (350 mg/l), or a BOD in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300
mg/l), or both, or which substances contain substances, material or wastes set
out in section
4-5-5 of this chapter.
PPM: Parts per million.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
SS: Suspended solids.
STORM WATER: Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or
emulsified grease or oil; substances that may impart taste and odor or color
characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension, colloidal state or solution; explosive, odorous or otherwise
obnoxious gases. All as defined by the Iowa department of natural resources
and/or the U.S. environmental protection agency. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975; amd.
1996 Code; Ord. 05-11, 9-6-2005)
4-5-3: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water runoff,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
4-5-4: STORM WATER:
Storm water shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director.
(Ord. 05-11, 9-6-2005)
4-5-5: PROHIBITED WASTES:
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials or wastes
into the public sewer:
   A.   Any solid, liquid or gas having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   B.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, petroleum products or
derivatives, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   C.   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C). (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
   D.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975;
amd. Ord. 05-11, 9-6-2005)
   E.   Any ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, blood, hair and fleshings,
entrails, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint, or ink residues,
cannery wastes, tannery wastes, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
   F.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five- tenths (5.5)
or greater than nine and five-tenths (9.5), or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to wastewater facilities,
equipment or personnel, or create any hazard in the receiving stream,
including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter
as cyanides or in excess of 1.0 milligrams per liter of hydrogen sulfide in the
wastewater discharged to the public sewers which is subject to change to come
into compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. (Ord. 05-11, 9-
6-2005)
   G.   Any water or wastes containing strong acid pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions.
   H.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater exceeds the limits established by the
administrative officer in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
   I.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations
as may exceed limits established by the administrative officer in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
   J.   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other waste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits established by the
administrative officer in compliance with regulations of state or federal
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving streams.
   K.   Any water, wastes, materials or substances which either singly or by
interaction with other water or wastes in the sewerage system, release
obnoxious or malodorous gases, form suspended solids in unusual concentration
or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes
or which is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to public health.
   L.   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions). (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
      3.   BOD greater than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and or
having SS greater than two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/l),
except that "industrial wastes", as defined herein, may be discharged into the
public sewer providing that the person so discharging notifies the
administrative officer in advance thereof, and thereupon fully qualifies and
complies with all the terms and provisions of this chapter relating to
industrial wastes; however, the person first must have received approval by
action of the city council to dump such wastes. Approval is revokable at any
time by the city council. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975; amd. 1996 Code; Ord. 05-11, 9-
6-2005)
      4.   Volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug. A
"slug" is defined as the intermittent release or discharge of industrial waste.
(Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975; amd. 1996 Code)
   M.   Wastes or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving stream. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
4-5-6: GREASE, OIL OR SAND TRAPS:
Grease, oil or sand traps shall be provided when they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, and/or other harmful ingredients. All traps or similar
devices shall be of a type and capacity to prevent discharge of grease, oil or
sand into the public sewer, and shall be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. All grease, oil or sand traps shall be provided and
maintained in continuously efficient operation at all times by the person at
his own expense. Owners shall maintain records of maintenance and cleaning of
grease, oil and sand interceptors. The sewer department shall inspect the
grease, oil or sand traps at six (6) month intervals and provide a report with
any needed maintenance issues. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975; amd. Ord. 05-11, 9-6-2005;
Ord. 15-05, 4-6-2015)
4-5-7: ABANDONED UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE TANKS:
All abandoned underground fuel storage tanks (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.) shall
be removed in accordance with all federal and state codes. (Ord. 05-11, 9-6-
2005)
4-5-8: REMEDIAL ACTION:
If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewer, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section
4-5-5 of this chapter, and which may have a deleterious effect unto wastewater
facilities or treatment process, or upon the receiving stream, or which
otherwise create a hazard to the public health or constitute a public nuisance,
the administrative officer may:
   A.   Refuse to accept the wastes into the public sewer; or
   B.   Require pretreatment by the person at his own expense, to an acceptable
condition for discharge to the public sewer; or
   C.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
   D.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
4-5-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Administrative Officer: The administrative officer shall have the
right, during reasonable hours and upon the consent of the occupant, to enter
any building or premises of any person who discharges or whom the
administrative officer has reasonable grounds to believe is discharging
industrial waste into the public sanitary sewer, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing and to such extent as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Consent Of Owner: Where the building or premises is occupied, the
consent of the owner shall be obtained. If the administrative officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the discharge of industrial waste on the
premises constitutes an extreme hazard to persons or property, he shall have
the right to immediately enter for such purposes of inspection, and may use any
reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection,
whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission
to inspect has been obtained. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
4-5-10: COLLECTION POINT FOR SAMPLING:
Any person or entity who discharges industrial, commercial, or any wastewater
identified as having a strength in excess of domestic wastewater into the
public sanitary sewer shall, upon request by the administrative officer,
provide a central collection point with adequate flow measurement devices to
record flow and to facilitate observation and sampling of the water or wastes.
Such collection points shall be located to provide easy access to the
administrative officer, without knowledge of the person. The collection points
and flow measurement devices shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the administrative officer, installed and maintained by the person
at his own expense. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975; amd. Ord. 05-11, 9-6-2005)
4-5-11: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes
shall be determined in accordance with the procedures set forth in the most
recent edition of "Standard Methods". Scheduled testing and analyzing that may
be required of the city on certain industrial customers shall be charged to the
customer at rates set by the council. (Ord. 85-6, 8-19-1985, eff. 9-1-1985)
4-5-12: MALICIOUS DAMAGE:
No person shall maliciously or wilfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structures, appurtenances or equipment which is part of the
public wastewater system. (Ord. 75-2, 9-2-1975)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose
4-6-2: Enforcement
4-6-3: Sewer Installations
4-6-4: License Required
4-6-5: Mandatory Connections
4-6-6: Private Disposal Systems
4-6-7: Permit
4-6-8: Revocation Of Permit
4-6-9: Fee For Permit
4-6-10: Special Connection Charge
4-6-11: Separate Connections
4-6-12: Grade
4-6-13: Excavations
4-6-14: Making The Connection
4-6-15: Unlawful Discharges
4-6-16: Inspection And Approval
4-6-17: Completion By The City
4-6-18: Infiltration And Inflow (I&I)
4-6-19:    Service Outside The City Limits
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure and regulations to be
followed in making private connections to the public sanitary sewers of this
city in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (1983 Code §
4-5-1)
4-6-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city manager shall designate an administrative officer who shall supervise
the installations of private sewers and their connections with public sewers in
this city and enforce all regulations pertaining thereto in accordance with
this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all replacement of existing sewers as
well as to new sewers. The administrative officer may make such regulations as
are necessary that do not conflict with this chapter. (1983 Code §
4-5-2; amd. 1996 Code)
4-6-3: SEWER INSTALLATIONS:
The installation of any private sewer and its connection with a public sewer
shall comply with all applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or
enforcement provisions of section
8-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1985)
4-6-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any installation of a private sewer and its connection to a public sewer shall
be made by a plumber licensed by this city. The administrative officer shall
have the power to suspend the license of any plumber for violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter; a suspension, unless revoked, shall continue
until the next regular meeting of the city council. The administrative officer
shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written notice of the
suspension, the reasons for the suspension and the time and place of the
council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a hearing. Prior to this
council meeting, the administrative officer shall submit a written report to
the council stating his reasons for the suspension, and the council, after fair
hearing, shall revoke the suspension or take any further action that is
necessary and proper. (1983 Code §
4-5-4; amd. 1996 Code)
4-6-5: MANDATORY CONNECTIONS:
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located a
sanitary sewer line or within the drainage area and within two hundred feet
(200') of a public sanitary sewer, must connect their sewage facilities to the
public sewers in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the
council deems it necessary that any outside water closet, privy or privy vault
be abandoned and removed, where said private sewer is within the limits as
described above, the council may order that the outside water closet, privy or
privy vault be abandoned and such facilities to be connected directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
order of the council may be in substantially the following form:
Be It Resolved by the Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa:
That it is necessary that the outside closet and privy vault located on the
following described real estate, to-wit:
                                                                                   
be abandoned and removed and that suitable toilet facilities be installed and
connected with the proper public sewer abutting such property.
That said abandonment and removal of all other toilet facilities and the
connection to the public sewer shall be made within one hundred eighty (180)
days after date of official notice to do so.
(1983 Code §
4-5-5)
4-6-6: PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available within the limits as set out in
Section
4-6-5 hereof, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of the Code of Iowa and the
Marion County Health Department and being licensed by the City. (1983 Code §
4-5-6)
4-6-7: PERMIT:
Before any person shall open, uncover, or in any manner make a connection or
reconnection with or modify any part of the public sewers, he/she must obtain a
written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall be filed on
blanks furnished by the City. The application shall include a description of
the property, the name of the property owner, the amount and date of any prior
assessment for construction of the public sewers, a general description of the
materials to be used and the manner of construction, the line of the building
sewer and the place of connection, if known, the intended use of the sewer, and
name and address of the person who will do the work. The administrative officer
may allow amendments to the application or permit that do not conflict with
this Chapter. The permit shall be issued bearing the date of issuance, if the
proposed work meets all the requirements of this Chapter and if all fees
required under this Chapter have been paid. Work under any permit must be begun
within six (6) months after it is issued. (1983 Code §
4-5-7)
4-6-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The administrative officer may at any time revoke any permit for any violation
of this Chapter and require that the work be stopped. The owner or plumber may
appeal such action to the City Council in the manner provided in Section
4-6-4 of this Chapter. (1983 Code §
4-5-8; 1996 Code)
4-6-9: FEE FOR PERMIT:
Before any permit is issued, the person who makes application, shall pay one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit
and supervising, regulating and inspecting the work. (Ord. 85-5, 8-5-1985, eff.
8-10-1985)
4-6-10: SPECIAL CONNECTION CHARGE:
If the property to be connected to a public sewer has not been assessed for any
part of the cost of construction of the public sewers, the owner shall pay a
special connection charge to the City for the use of the public sewers before
the permit is issued. The amount of this fee shall be an equitable portion of
the cost of the public sewers in relation to the benefits received by the
property and the fee shall be established by the City Council. (Ord. 85-6, 8-
19-1985, eff. 9-1-1985)
4-6-11: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
In no case shall a joint sewer be allowed where the property abuts on a street,
alley or easement in which there is a public sewer. Other buildings in adjacent
areas which are required to be connected shall be separately and independently
connected to the public sewers unless the City Council in a duly adopted
resolution specifically permits joint connections, in accordance with plans
approved by the Council. (1983 Code §
4-5-11)
4-6-12: GRADE:
All sewer pipes shall be laid with a uniform grade from the building to the
public sewer and no offsetting will be allowed without written permission of
the administrative officer. (1983 Code §
4-5-12)
4-6-13: EXCAVATIONS:
Excavations to do work under this Chapter shall be dug so as to occasion the
least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of
water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at
all times, and warning lights placed from one-half (1/2) hour before sunset to
one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise. In refilling the excavation, the earth must
be laid in layers and each layer tamped thoroughly to prevent settlement, and
this work and any street, sidewalk, pavement or other public property that is
affected, must be restored to as good a condition as it was previous to the
excavation. The plumber must maintain the affected area in good repair to the
satisfaction of the City Council for three (3) months after refilling. No
excavation shall be made within six feet (6') of any laid water pipe while the
ground is frozen and no water or sewer pipe shall be exposed to frost, except
by special written permission of the administrative officer. (1983 Code § 4-5-
13)
4-6-14: MAKING THE CONNECTION:
Any connection with a public sewer must be made under the direct supervision of
the administrative officer or his/her authorized assistant. The connection
shall be made at the property line with that part of the sewer already
extending to the property line. If there is no sewer connection extending from
the public sewer to the property line, the administrative officer shall
supervise a measurement for the location of the "Y" branch in the public sewer.
Excavations shall be made at the point designated by the administrative officer
and if no "Y" branch is found there, then the plumber shall connect directly
with the public sewer at that point, but only with an approved saddle, and no
broken or cut pipe material shall be permitted to remain in the sewer. The
administrative officer may give permission in writing to a property owner to
make a connection at other points if the property owner has shown good reason
for the change. (1983 Code § 4-5-14)
4-6-15: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES:
No owner or occupant of any building shall discharge or permit to be discharged
into the sanitary sewer any substances which will clog the pipes, produce
explosive mixtures, destroy or materially damage the pipes or joints, or
interfere unduly with the sewage disposal process 1 . (1983 Code § 4-5-15)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-5-5 of this title.
4-6-16: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
All private sewers and their connections with the public sewers must be
inspected and approved in writing by the administrative officer before they are
covered, and the administrative officer shall keep a record of such approvals
in his/her office. If the administrative officer refuses to approve the work,
the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work so that it
will meet with his/her approval. Each person who uses or intends to use the
public sewers shall permit the administrative officer or his/her authorized
assistant to enter the premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or
repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority. (1983 Code § 4-5-16)
4-6-17: COMPLETION BY THE CITY:
Should any excavation be left open or partly refilled for twenty four (24)
hours after the private sewer is installed and connected with the public sewer,
or should the work be improperly done, the administrative officer shall have
the right to finish or correct the work, and the council shall assess the costs
to the property owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, he/she must
pay the costs before he/she can receive another permit, and the plumber's bond
required by section
3-8-1 of this code shall be security for the assessment. If the property owner
is assessed, such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as
general property taxes. (1983 Code § 4-5-17)
4-6-18: INFILTRATION AND INFLOW (I&I):
In order to abate problems associated with "infiltration and inflow", which is
defined as the invasion of stormwater into the sanitary sewer system from
broken, cracked/misaligned mains, leaking manholes or manholes that have water
flowing over their covers, plus private (resident and business) services that
are cracked or broken and stormwater connections from foundation/footing
drains, sump pits and roof drains into sanitary sewers, the city is required to
adopt this section pursuant to the Iowa department of natural resources mandate
and therefore adopts the following provisions:
   A.   The city shall identify sources of I&I within the city by using
wastewater department staff and an engineering firm to complete inspections of
the private sewer connections.
      1.   In order to facilitate this process, duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties that have a connection to the city's sewer system
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection and observation both prior
to and after all repair work completed on private sewer connections per this
section. The city shall not charge an inspection fee for sewer rehabilitation
inspections related to this section.
      2.   Should the property owner deny access to the property for I&I
testing and/or inspection, the city of Knoxville will consider the property
noncompliant with the city's I&I sewer rehabilitation program. A letter
notifying the owner of noncompliance will be sent to the property owner and the
property owner will be given thirty (30) days upon receipt of notice to
schedule the inspection or a fifty dollar ($50.00) per month fee shall be
applied to the property owner's utility bill until inspection or testing can
confirm compliance. If the property owner has failed to allow access after a
ninety (90) day period of time, the monthly fee will increase to seventy five
dollars ($75.00) until inspection or testing can confirm compliance.
   B.   Public sewers and manholes shall be repaired to eliminate all I&I.
      1.   When a roof, footing or foundation drain, or any other illegal
connection into the sanitary sewer system is identified, including when two (2)
private sewer laterals share a wye connection to the sewer main, it shall be
disconnected from the sanitary sewer system.
   C.   The owner of each property with a sanitary sewer connection will be
notified if there are any sources of I&I existing within their private sewer
connection. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to repair and
remove any sources of I&I.
   D.   Upon notification of a connection other than a sump pump or leaking
service from the city (regular first class mail) of I&I flowing from the
private sanitary sewer into the sewer main, any sewer connection, including
illegal, broken, faulty or otherwise illegal connection, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to abate within a period of ninety (90)
days. All owners that retain a contractor to make the repairs within ninety
(90) days of notification or less shall be eligible for one of the following
finance options:
      1.   Twenty five percent (25%) reimbursement (not to exceed $875.00) for
the disconnection and/or repair costs, or
      2.   Loan amounts may range from three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to
seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) with a three percent (3%) interest rate.
Loan term may vary but shall not exceed ten (10) years. Loan requests will be
approved by the city manager or his/her designee. If financial hardship can be
demonstrated with regard to cost in excess of seven thousand dollars
($7,000.00), the council may approve a higher loan amount. Examples of loan
repayment schedules are outlined below:
 
Loan Amount Interest Rate Loan Term
$3,000.00   3%            5 years
4,000.00    3%            7 years
5,000.00    3%            8 years
5,500.00    3%            9 years
7,000.00    3%            10 years
 
      3.   Once an inspection of the repair work on private sewer connections
has been completed by the Knoxville wastewater department staff, the property
is deemed "compliant" with the I&I sewer rehabilitation program and in the
cases where monthly noncompliance fees have been charged to the property owner,
the noncompliance fee will be removed.
      4.   Inspection by city staff, both prior to and after repairs, shall be
necessary for a reimbursement or loan. In addition, a billing statement for
services performed shall accompany the request for reimbursement.
   E.   For those property owners who opt not to repair the source of I&I,
whether it be a broken, illegal, faulty or otherwise illegal connection, from
the sanitary sewer after the ninety (90) day period, a fifty dollar ($50.00)
per month fee shall be applied to the utility bill until the disconnection/
repair has been performed, but not to exceed one year. By the end of the one
year period, the owner shall have completed the disconnection. If the owner has
failed to repair the illegal connection within the year, the monthly fee will
increase to seventy five dollars ($75.00) per month until repairs have been
made.
By the end of the second one year period, the owner shall have completed the
disconnection. If the owner has failed to repair the illegal connection, the
city will seek to enforce this policy using all lawful means, including, but
not limited to, the prosecution of a municipal infraction which could result in
a civil penalty, court cost, and/or a court order requiring that repairs be
made within a certain time period.
   F.   In consideration of the fact that stormwater connections from sump pump
drains and other similar drains into the sanitary sewer have been illegal since
1975, upon written notification from the city of Knoxville, via regular first
class mail, property owners shall have a period of thirty (30) days to remove
all methods/systems of connection of sump pumps, downspouts or other drainage
systems which are illegally connected to a sanitary sewer.
For those property owners who opt not to disconnect a sump pump, downspout or
other illegal connections from the sanitary sewer after the thirty (30) day
period, a fifty dollar ($50.00) per month fee shall be applied to the utility
bill until the disconnection has been performed.
Within two (2) years after notification the owner shall have made the
disconnection. If the owner has failed to repair the illegal connection, the
city will enforce this policy using all lawful means, including, but not
limited to, the prosecution of a municipal infraction which could result in a
civil penalty, court costs, and/or a court order requiring that repairs be made
within a certain time period. If this procedure is required, no financing
options will be available to the owner for this repair.
   G.   In no case shall a joint sewer be allowed where the property abuts on a
street, alley or easement in which there is a public sewer. Other buildings in
adjacent areas, which are required to be connected, shall be separately and
independently connected to the public sewers unless the city council in a duly
adopted resolution specifically permits joint connections, in accordance with
plans approved by the council.
(Ord. 13-06, 6-3-2013)
4-6-19: SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS:
   Sewer service shall be provided to any customer outside the corporate limits
of the City, who is billed through Knoxville Water Works and which the City has
agreed to serve at rates one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the residential/
commercial rates. No such customer, however, will be served unless the customer
shall have signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances,
rules and regulations applying to sewer service established by the Council and
agreeing to be voluntarily annexed into the corporate limits of the City at
such future time as the City Council may determine is prudent. Customers
located outside the City limits shall be responsible for all costs related to
the customer hooking up to the City’s sewer system.
(Ord. 24-15, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 7
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Enforcement, Authority And Administration
4-7-3: Nuisances Prohibited
4-7-4: Specifically Declared Nuisances
4-7-5: Abatement Process; Purpose
4-7-6: Remedies
4-7-7: Emergency Abatement
4-7-8: Failure To Comply With Agreement To Abate
4-7-9: Collection Of Costs
4-7-10: Penalty
4-7-11: Abatement Schedule
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
FRONT YARD AREA: All that area between the front property line and a line drawn
along the front face or faces of the principal structure on the property and
extended to the side property lines.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the senses
or an obstacle to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. All structures and premises both
occupied and vacant shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to create, contribute to, cause blight,
or restrict the public's right to health and safety.
OUTSIDE: To be outside of an enclosed storage facility and visible from any
other property, including public right of way.
PERSON COMMITTING OR MAINTAINING A NUISANCE: A property owner and/or occupant
who may be responsible for or creates a nuisance.
SIDE YARD CORNER LOT: The yard area adjacent to the street right of way on a
corner lot extending from the front yard along the side of the structure to the
rear property line.
WEEDS: Noxious or otherwise, unattended vines, brush and scrub bushes, grass
and other similar vegetation. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-2: ENFORCEMENT, AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Responsibilities Of City Manager: The responsibilities of the city
manager, or his designee, shall include making decisions on conditions for
abating violations of this chapter.
   B.   Priority Of Enforcement: The city manager, or his designee, shall have
the authority to establish priorities for the abatement of nuisance violations
and implement appropriate procedures to abate each category of violations so
established. The procedures established shall be accomplished in accordance
with subsection E of this section.
   C.   Agreements To Abate: The city manager, or his designee, shall have the
authority to enter into agreements with violators for the abatement of city
code violations. The procedures in the form of the agreements to abate shall be
established pursuant to the requirements of subsection E of this section.
   D.   Right Of Entry: The city manager, or his designee, shall have the right
to enter upon any property at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying
out his duties in the enforcement of abatement violations. In the event that
the owner of the property located within the city refuses to permit entry to
the city manager or his designee, the city manager may make an application to
any judge of the court for the issuance of an entry warrant. Any warrant issued
pursuant to such application shall command such owner or occupant to permit
entry to the city manager, or his designee.
   E.   Procedures And Guidelines: The city manager shall be empowered to
promulgate procedures and guidelines to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-3: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is hereby prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord.
13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-4: SPECIFICALLY DECLARED NUISANCES:
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances affecting public peace,
safety and general welfare:
   A.   Noxious Exhalation: The erecting, continuing or using any building or
other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which by
occasioning noxious exhalation, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes
injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or
the public.
   B.   Water Corruption: The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural
course, or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   C.   Obstructions:
      1.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings or otherwise the
public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying
grounds.
      2.   Trees, hedges, billboards, signboards, advertising signs, and other
items whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so
obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue,
highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to
render dangerous the use thereof.
   D.   Cotton Bearing Trees: Cotton bearing cottonwood trees and all other
cotton bearing poplar trees.
   E.   Airport Obstructions: Any object or structure hereafter erected within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the limits of any municipal or regularly
established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial
navigation, including take off and landing, unless such object or structure
constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   F.   Inflammable Junk: The depositing or storing of inflammable junk, such
as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by dealers and such
articles within the fire limits of any city, unless it be in a building of
fireproof construction.
   G.   Smoke Emissions: The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
   H.   Dead And Infected Trees: Dead trees and/or trees infected with Dutch
elm disease or any other disease which has the potential to spread and affect
other vegetation, trees, etc.
   I.   Debris Storage: The outside piling, storage or keeping of old
machinery, junk, furniture, tires, household furnishings or appliances or
component parts thereof, or other debris within the city.
   J.   Refuse: The depositing of, maintaining, permitting, or failing to
remove garbage, trash, rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on any property
within the city, including large quantities of organic debris and materials,
which accumulated by other than natural means, except neatly maintained compost
piles.
   K.   Occupational Materials: The outside storage of pipe, lumber, forms,
machinery or other occupational materials upon property in a residential
district.
   L.   Weeds: All weeds growing on lots and parcels of ground within the city
limits shall, after dates set forth below, automatically be deemed a health,
safety and fire hazard and shall be cut no later than said date shown below for
each cutting. In cases of a second or third growth of said weeds, the owners or
occupants shall again cut or otherwise destroy the growth before the time set
below.
      1.   Required Cutting Dates:
   June 1
   July 15
   August 15
And all times when weeds or grass reach the heights below.
      2.   Height Restrictions:
 
Maximum            Land Use          
Vegetation Height
8 inches           Developed residential, commercial and industrial zoned areas
12 inches          Undeveloped residential, commercial and industrial zoned
                   areas
18 inches          Unplatted property and agriculture zoned property unless
                   planted for farm cropping purposes
 
      3.   Responsibility Of Owner Or Occupants: The property owner or
occupants shall also be jointly or severally responsible for the cutting of
such growths on the abutting space between the lot line and the curb line or
edge of the traveled way within the street right of way, whether in front of or
along the side of the lot or parcel of ground, and one-half (1/2) of any alley
abutting the property.
      4.   Notification; Assessment Of Costs: The city manager, or his
designee, shall notify the property owner/occupants when the weeds are longer
than the limit set out in this subsection. If the weeds are not cut within
forty eight (48) hours upon receipt of notification, the city will have the
weeds or growths cut and assess the cost to be collected according to section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
   M.   Residential Property; Not Planted After Construction: Property in a
residential district not seeded, sodded, or otherwise planted with a ground
cover more than sixty (60) days after any disturbance in the front yard or side
yard of the property caused by construction, grading, or other activity,
excluding gardens; or at any time prior to the sixty (60) days if the property
is causing erosion or drainage problems on the same or nearby properties,
including public streets.
   N.   Wood Accumulation: The accumulation of any piles of wood which are not
neatly stacked, or secured in a stable manner to avoid collapse. Woodpiles must
be stored in the side yard or rear yard of residential properties.
   O.   Exterior Wall Surfaces Not Maintained: Any structure, or portion
thereof, in any zoning district whose exterior wall surfaces are not maintained
and kept in repair using materials compatible with the remaining undamaged wall
surfaces and recognized as acceptable pursuant to city building codes. Upon
receipt of notification, property owners shall have no more than thirty (30)
days to repair any structure, or portion thereof, or exterior wall surfaces of
buildings.
   P.   Construction Materials: Any construction materials, including piles of
dirt, sand, and sod, left in the open on property or street right of way more
than thirty (30) days after construction has been completed or a certificate of
occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first.
   Q.   Mailbox And Receptacle Placement: A placement of mailboxes and other
news receptacles on public right of way not in conformance with the following
diagram:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb550e2311696eef4b3f0e6e93f890449faa3be2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3111.png]
 
(Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
   R.   Water Discharge: The discharge of water from a sump pump, roof or
footing drain onto public right of way, sidewalk or street. Water must
dissipate into the yard behind the property line before reaching any public
right of way, sidewalk, or street. (Ord. 16-08, 12-19-2016)
   S.   Snow/Ice Accumulation: The accumulation of snow, ice, or other
impediments on any sidewalk for more than twenty four (24) hours following
cessation of the snowing, ice or freezing rain.
   T.   Snow/Ice Deposition: The depositing of snow or ice onto sidewalks or
streets, removing of snow or ice from private property onto the right of way or
the piling of snow within fifty feet (50') of an intersection that results in
snow piled in excess of twenty four inches (24") in height.
   U.   Unsecured Areas: Any unsecured areas, buildings or places that could
cause accidental or unauthorized access where such access threatens the health
or safety of public.
   V.   Accessory Structures: All accessory buildings or structures, including
garages, fences, walls, that are not maintained in a structurally sound manner,
are not well built or kept in good repair, or do not perform their intended
function, or have sharp points, spikes, hooks, projection barbs, or other
devices that are in themselves hazardous; except barbed wire which may be used
to enclose agricultural land. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
   W.   Yard And Garage Sales: Yard and garage sales, flea markets and other
sales for more than five (5) consecutive days or more than two (2) times a
calendar year are not permitted except for the ten (10) day period during the
Knoxville National Races when all yard and garage sales, flea markets and other
sales are permitted. All such sales must be operated so as not to create a
nuisance from scattered and/or windblown items. (Ord. 14-09, 11-3-2014)
4-7-5: ABATEMENT PROCESS; PURPOSE:
The city has adopted this abatement process in order to allow the city and its
residents to resolve city nuisances without having to use the municipal
infractions chapter of this code. The abatement process will allow the city and
its residents an opportunity to reach a mutual agreement, concerning any
nuisances. If a mutual agreement cannot be reached, or if the agreement is
breached, then the city can use title 1, chapter 4 of this code, to enforce a
penalty. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-6: REMEDIES:
The city manager or designees shall have, but not by way of limitation, the
following remedies available to him or his designees with respect to abatement
of nuisance violations:
   A.   No Action: After careful consideration of the facts and circumstances,
the city manager may authorize no action be taken on a complaint of an alleged
nuisance violation.
   B.   Informal Contact: The city manager, or his designee, shall have the
authority to effectuate the abatement of nuisance violations through informal
meetings or conversations.
   C.   Agreement To Abate: The city manager, or his designee, may enter into
an agreement with a violator whereby the violator agrees to abate the violation
within a certain time frame based upon certain conditions within the agreement.
   D.   Notice And Order Of Cessation: The city manager, or his designee, may
issue a notice and order to the violator ordering the cessation of the illegal
condition within a specified period of time based upon the nature of the
violation. Whenever abatement proceedings are commenced by the filing of a
notice and order by the city manager, or his designee, such notice and order
shall:
      1.   In Writing: Be in writing.
      2.   Posted Conspicuously: The notice and order must be posted
conspicuously at the premises and mailed to the last known address of such
person by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice may also be
personally served on the owner, or agent of the owner, other persons with an
interest in the property, and/or occupant of such premises, as applicable.
      3.   Describe Existing Violation: Describe with particularity the
asserted violation existing on the premises or property which gives rise to the
issuance of the notice and order.
      4.   Specify Abatement Period: Specify the period in which the violation
must be abated or otherwise corrected.
      5.   Statement Seeking Remedies: A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time described, the city will seek remedies as described in this section.
   E.   Abatement By City: If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may perform the
required action to abate and assess the cost of the expenses incurred as
provided in section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
In the event the city is required to abate a nuisance as set out in the first
paragraph of this subsection, the city hereby establishes the following charges
in regards to various abatement procedures:
Administrative fee                      $50.00 for each occurrence
Impoundment fees                        $ 25.00
Notice charges                          25.00
Preservation and abatement charges:
 Air compressor                         20.00 per hour
 Bucket truck                           30.00 per hour
 Dump truck                             80.00 per hour
 Front end loader                       150.00 per hour
 Grader/maintainer                      80.00 per hour
 Labor (per person overtime)            45.00 per hour
 Labor (per person straight time)       30.00 per hour
 Lawn tractor                           20.00 per hour
 Pickup truck                           30.00 per hour
 Sewer machine                          40.00 per hour
 Skid loader                            35.00 per hour
 Small push mower                       10.00 per hour
 Street sweeper                         140.00 per hour
 Tractor with brush cutter              45.00 per hour
 Trailers                               15.00 per hour
 Water truck                            30.00 per hour
 Zero turn mower                        20.00 per hour
 Snow removal and mowing charged in 1
 hour minimum and in 1 hour increments
 after that for man hours and
 equipment, including travel time.
Storage charges                         $10.00 per day if stored by the city,
                                        otherwise actual costs
Street signs                            Actual costs (including shipping) plus
                                        labor, equipment and administrative fee
Towing charges                          Actual cost
 
   F.   Repeat Violations: Any person who commits the same offense within the
same calendar year after the initial notification and abatement may be charged
with a municipal infraction, without notice, and the violation may be abated
without further notice.
   G.   Additional Remedies: Remedies provided in this section shall be
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies which may be available to the
city manager, including municipal infractions or fines. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to preclude the city manager from seeking such other
remedies in addition to, or in lieu thereof, the remedies herein granted. (Ord.
13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-7: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any action which
may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The city shall assess
the cost as provided in section
4-7-9 of this chapter after notice to the property owner under the applicable
provision of subsection 4-7-6D of this chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH AGREEMENT TO ABATE:
In the event that any agreement to abate entered into pursuant to this chapter
is not complied with according to its terms, the city manager may enforce a
penalty through title 1, chapter 4 of this code and/or remedies provided in
section
4-7-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-9: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
The city shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the property
owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown
by the statement has not been paid within one month, the city shall certify the
costs to the county auditor and it shall then be collected with, and in the
same manner, as general property taxes. (Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-10: PENALTY:
Persons who violate the terms of this chapter, with the exception of subsection
4-7-4S, "Snow/Ice Accumulation", or 4-7-4T, "Snow/Ice Deposition", of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and punished by the
provisions set out in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
Persons who violate subsection 4-7-4S, "Snow/Ice Accumulation", or 4-7-4T,
"Snow/Ice Deposition", of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for first offense, fifty dollars ($50.00) for
second offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for third and subsequent
offenses. In addition to any fine, the violator shall also be responsible for
the costs of removal if the city is required to remove said snow or ice. (Ord.
13-05, 5-20-2013)
4-7-11: ABATEMENT SCHEDULE:
As set forth herein, the following abatement schedule outlines time allowances
to remedy or abate nuisances within the city of Knoxville, Iowa:
Class 1                                              24 Hours
Smoke emissions                                      4-7-4G
Snow/ice accumulation                                4-7-4S
Snow/ice deposition                                  4-7-4T
Yard and garage sales                                4-7-4W
Class 2                                              48 Hours
Noxious exhalation                                   4-7-4A
Water corruption                                     4-7-4B
Obstructions                                         4-7-4C
Cotton bearing trees                                 4-7-4D
Inflammable junk                                     4-7-4F
Dead and infected trees                              4-7-4H
Debris storage                                       4-7-4I
Refuse                                               4-7-4J
Occupational materials                               4-7-4K
Weeds                                                4-7-4L
Wood accumulation                                    4-7-4N
Mailbox and receptacle placement                     4-7-4Q
Unsecured areas                                      4-7-4U
Accessory structures                                 4-7-4V
Class 3                                              Other  Time
Airport obstructions                                 4-7-4E 30 days
Residential property; not planted after construction 4-7-4M 60 days
Exterior wall surfaces not maintained                4-7-4O 30 days
Construction materials                               4-7-4P 30 days
Water discharge                                      4-7-4R 30 days
 
(Ord. 13-05, 5-20-2013; amd. Ord. 14-09, 11-3-2014)
CHAPTER 8
LITTERING
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definition
4-8-2: Dumping Restricted
4-8-3: Litter From Vehicles, Transporting Refuse
4-8-4: Trucks And Automobiles, Littering
4-8-5: Public Places
4-8-6: Maintenance Of All Private Or Public Property
4-8-7: Use Of Receptacles
4-8-8: Air-Borne Materials
4-8-9: Violation; Remedy
4-8-1: DEFINITION:
Litter is defined as any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste.
Litter may include but is not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris,
rubbish, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging, livestock fecal matter, any nauseous or offensive matter of
any kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or
anything else of an unsightly nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or
otherwise disposed of improperly. (Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-2: DUMPING RESTRICTED:
No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public
or private property in this City, or upon or into any stream or body of water
in this City unless:
   A.   The property has been designated by the City for the disposal of
litter;
   B.   The litter is placed in a receptacle or other container intended by the
owner or tenant of that property for the deposit and containment of litter.
(Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-3: LITTER FROM VEHICLES, TRANSPORTING REFUSE:
No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or
private property or upon or into any pond, stream or body of water in this City
except as permitted by law, nor shall any person transport by any means garbage
or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site
to and deposit such material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along streets or in public parks. (Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-4: TRUCKS AND AUTOMOBILES, LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any public
street, lane, alley, or park in the City unless the cargo is in containers or
covered by a tarpaulin or tied down in such a manner as to prevent any part of
its contents from falling or being scattered upon any such public street, lane,
alley, or park in said City. (Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-5: PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Premises Kept Clean: The owner or person in control of any property
which is held out to the public as a place of assemblage, for the transaction
of business, for recreation or as a public way and including but not limited to
restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, convenience stores, stores,
hotels, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment
buildings, housing projects, construction sites, loading and unloading docks,
gas stations, and hospitals and clinics shall at all times keep the premises
clean of all litter thrown or left on said premises and shall take measures
including daily cleanup of the premises to prevent litter or litter drifting or
blowing to adjoining premises.
   B.   Receptacles Required: Receptacles of sufficient size, number and
location shall be placed on all premises, public and private, for the
disposition and containment of litter.
   C.   Receptacles Conspicuously Identified: The owner or person in control of
any property which is held out to the public as a place for assemblage, the
transaction of business, recreation or as a public way shall conspicuously
identify receptacles for the disposal of litter. (Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-6: MAINTENANCE OF ALL PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a clean
and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half (1/2) of
alleys, curbs or rights of way up to the edge of the pavement of any public
street. In addition, no owners or occupants of such abutting property shall
discharge any litter, including grass clippings and lawn debris, into the
street right of way. (Ord. 03-05, 5-21-2001)
4-8-7: USE OF RECEPTACLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to in
any manner dispose of litter except in receptacles provided for such premises.
(Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-8: AIRBORNE MATERIALS:
All household and commercially generated garbage, rubbish, where practical, and
materials that are subject to movement by the wind or air shall be
containerized or deposited in a securely tied plastic bag before the same are
allowed to leave the premises where they were collected. (Ord. 80-2, 2-4-1980)
4-8-9: VIOLATION; REMEDY:
In addition to or in lieu of any sentence imposed under subsection 1-4-2B of
this code, the court may order that person convicted of such a violation be
required to remove and properly dispose of the "litter" as defined in this
chapter. If said person fails to do so, the city may remove such litter and
dispose of same. The city shall then tax the costs of such removal and disposal
against the person convicted of said violation. (Ord. 03-05, 5-21-2001)
CHAPTER 9
PRIVATE WATER WELLS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Scope
4-9-2: Permit Required
4-9-3: Registration Of Preexisting Wells
4-9-4: Permit Process
4-9-5: Penalty
4-9-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all private water wells located
or to be constructed within the city of Knoxville, Iowa, including, but not
limited to, new construction and modification of existing wells. (Ord. 15-13,
8-17-2015)
4-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct a private well in the city of Knoxville, Iowa, or
own/use a well constructed after the effective date of this provision, unless a
permit has been issued for the well by the Knoxville city manager. This permit
shall be in addition to any permits required by the state or county. This
requirement shall not apply to monitoring wells used for soil and groundwater
investigation. (Ord. 15-13, 8-17-2015)
4-9-3: REGISTRATION OF PREEXISTING WELLS:
Any person who owns property in the city of Knoxville, Iowa, which has a well,
other than a monitoring well, which was constructed prior to the effective date
hereof, shall register said well with the city and the water department.
Registration forms for this may be obtained from the water department or from
the city clerk's office. There will be no fee charged for the registration of a
preexisting well. (Ord. 15-13, 8-17-2015)
4-9-4: PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Any person desiring a well permit shall make application to the city of
Knoxville on the form prescribed by the city. The city manager shall determine
the necessary information, date and testing required for the issuance of the
permit.
   B.   In determining whether to issue a permit or not, the city manager shall
consider the availability of public water to serve the real property, building
or facility, the estimated amount of water to be consumed, possible
contamination of the water, and the purpose for which the water will be used.
The applicant shall be required to have an environmental assessment completed
to determine if there are known sources of contamination within five hundred
feet (500') of the proposed site.
   C.   If the property, building or facility to be served is located within
two hundred feet (200') of the public water, the city manager shall
automatically deny the permit, and the applicant shall be required to use the
public water system.
   D.   If the city manager determines that the water is in an area of
contamination or is otherwise unfit, he/she may deny the permit or make such
limitations as to the use of the water from said private well as are necessary
to protect life and property. In determining what the actual area of
contamination is, the city manager shall consider current levels and areas of
contamination, as well as where the contamination might reasonably be expected
to expand to the foreseeable future.
   E.   The application shall not be deemed complete until all information,
data and testing results required by the city manager have been submitted to
him/her for consideration and required fee paid in full.
   F.   The city manager shall rule upon the permit application within thirty
(30) working days of the submitting of the completed application. The city
manager may, upon good cause, extend said period for approval of the
application an additional thirty (30) working days by issuing a written notice
to the applicant. Any application that is not acted upon in a timely manner by
the city manager shall be deemed to have been denied upon the expiration of
time provided by this section.
   G.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the
Knoxville city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
manager within ten (10) business days of the decision. The Knoxville city
council shall meet to determine the appeal within forty five (45) days of the
date the appeal is filed.
   H.   The applicant shall pay an application fee in the amount set by
resolution of the council.
   I.   All required testing and collection of information and data shall be at
the applicant's expense. (Ord. 15-13, 8-17-2015)
4-9-5: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provisions of subsection 1-4-
2B of this code. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation. At the discretion of the city
attorney, a violation of the provisions of this chapter may be pursued as a
municipal infraction according to the terms of section
1-4-3 of this code in lieu of criminal prosecution. (Ord. 15-13, 8-17-2015)
CHAPTER 10
STORMWATER UTILITY
SECTION:
4-10-1: Purpose And Objective
4-10-2: Creation Of Stormwater Management And Drainage Systems Utility
4-10-3: Definitions
4-10-4: Stormwater Utility Fund
4-10-5: Stormwater Utility Budget
4-10-6: Rate Structure And Stormwater Service Charge
4-10-7: Powers Of Director Of The Stormwater Utility
4-10-8: Powers And Duties Of The City
4-10-9: Responsibility For The Stormwater Management And Drainage Systems
4-10-10: Requirements For On Site Stormwater Systems, Enforcement And
Inspections
4-10-11: Right To Appeal
4-10-12: Billing And Collection
4-10-13: Adjustments To Stormwater Service Charges
4-10-14: Exemptions And Credits Applicable To Stormwater Service Charges
4-10-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and procedure for
managing and controlling the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff, within
the city limits of Knoxville, Iowa. The management shall include the
establishment of a stormwater utility to provide revenues for whatever aspects
of this requirement are deemed appropriate by the city.
   B.   The city finds, determines and declares that the stormwater drainage
system provides benefits and services to all property within the city limits.
Such benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate
systems for collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of
stormwater for quality and quantity management that minimize impacts on
receiving waters.
   C.   In order to manage additions and improvements to the city stormwater
systems, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater
management program operating and capital investment needs. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-
2016)
4-10-2: CREATION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS UTILITY:
   A.   The function of the stormwater management and drainage systems utility
(hereinafter referred to as "stormwater utility") within the public works
department is to provide for the safe and efficient capture of stormwater
runoff, mitigate the damaging effects of stormwater runoff, correction of
stormwater problems, to fund activities of stormwater management, and include
design, planning, regulations, education, coordination, construction,
operations, maintenance, inspection and enforcement activities.
   B.   There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the city of
Knoxville, Iowa, which shall be responsible for creating revenue for stormwater
management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the
management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater
systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the operational direction
of the public works director. The corporate limits of the city, as increased
from time to time, shall constitute the boundaries of the stormwater utility
district.
   C.   The city shall establish a stormwater utility fund in the city budget
and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the
purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and
responsibilities of the utility. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADJUSTMENT: A modification in a nonresidential customer's stormwater service
fee for certain activities that impact stormwater runoff or impact the city's
costs of providing stormwater management.
CITY: City of Knoxville.
DETACHED DWELLING UNIT: Developed land containing one structure which is not
attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a
bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached
dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located
on one or more individual lots or parcels of land.
DEVELOPED AGRICULTURAL PROPERTIES: A lot or parcel of real estate used as a
"farm", which may contain one or greater dwelling units and/or other building
structures but does not include undeveloped properties.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY: Property altered from its natural state by the construction
or installation of a structure thus increasing the amount of rainwater or
surface water runoff.
DIRECTOR: The director of the stormwater utility.
ERU RATE: The dollar value periodically determined and assigned to each ERU as
a charge for stormwater management services, expressed as six dollars ($6.00)
per ERU.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average impervious area of a detached
dwelling unit property within the city, and used as the basis for determining
stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties. Three thousand
thirty four (3,034) square feet shall be equivalent to one ERU.
EXEMPT PROPERTY: Includes public streets, alleys and sidewalks; all undeveloped
properties.
GROUNDWATER: Subsurface water or water stored in pores, cracks, and crevices in
the ground below the water table.
IMPERVIOUS AREA: The number of square feet of hard surfaced areas which either
prevent or resist the entry of water into soil surface, as it entered under
natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or cause water to run off the
surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present
under natural conditions as undeveloped property. This includes, but is not
limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks,
pavement, athletic courts, and semi- impervious surfaces such as gravel which
are used as driveways or parking lots.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES: All properties not encompassed by the definition of
residential shall be defined as nonresidential. Nonresidential properties shall
include: apartment building properties; condominium properties; mobile home
parks; commercial property; industrial property; institutional property;
governmental property; churches; hospitals; schools; transient rentals; parking
lots; federal, state and local properties; and any other property not mentioned
in the lists of properties.
OCCUPANT: The person residing or doing business on the property. In a family or
household situation, the person responsible for the obligation imposed shall be
the adult head of the household. In a shared dwelling or office situation, the
adult legally responsible for the management or condition of the property shall
be responsible.
OWNER: The legal owner(s) of record as shown on the tax rolls of the city of
Knoxville, except where there is a recorded land sale contract, the purchaser
thereunder shall be deemed the owner.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: All single-family and duplex properties within the city
of Knoxville.
SERVICE CHARGES: The periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a parcel of
developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the
city of Knoxville stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable
parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services
and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious
area on each parcel of developed land.
STORM SEWER: A sewer, which carries stormwater, surface runoff, street wash
waters, and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
other than permitted discharges.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All manmade facilities, structures, and natural
watercourses owned by the city of Knoxville, used for collection and conducting
stormwater to, through, and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet
including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and
appurtenant features, canals, creeks, catch basins, ditches, streams, gullies,
ravines, flumes, culverts, siphons, streets, curbs, gutters, dams, floodwalls,
levees, and pumping stations.
STORMWATER FACILITIES: Various stormwater and drainage works that may include
inlets, pipes, pumping stations, conduits, manholes, energy dissipation
structures, stream channels, outlets, retention/detention basins, infiltration
practices and other structural components.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The tasks required to control stormwater runoff using
stormwater management systems, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the public, and comply with relevant state and federal regulations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS: Address the issues of drainage management
(flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion, and sedimentation) of
receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through
improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works,
instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention,
detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage.
STORMWATER UTILITY: The utility established under this chapter for the purpose
of managing stormwater and imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected
with such stormwater management.
SURFACE WATER: Water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface
of the ground including lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams, puddles,
channelized flow and runoff.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been
modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to
land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped
land shall have minimal concrete pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel
surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface.
USER: The owner and/or occupant of any developed property within the limits of
the city of Knoxville, and any person who uses property which maintains
connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for
stormwater management. The occupant of any habitable property is deemed the
user. If the property is not occupied, then the owner shall be deemed the user.
WATERCOURSE: A natural overland route through which water passes, including
drainage courses, streams, creeks, and rivers. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-4: STORMWATER UTILITY FUND:
   A.   Funding for the stormwater utility's activities may include, but is not
limited to: stormwater service charges; stormwater permits and inspection fees;
other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and private grants,
or loans.
   B.   All service charges and all sources of revenue generated by or on
behalf of the stormwater utility shall be deposited in a stormwater utility
fund and used exclusively for management of the stormwater utility. (Ord. 16-
05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-5: STORMWATER UTILITY BUDGET:
The city shall adopt an operating and capital budget for the stormwater utility
each fiscal year. The budget shall set forth revenues for such fiscal year and
estimated expenditures for operations, maintenance, improvements, replacement
and debt service. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-6: RATE STRUCTURE AND STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
Any property, lot, parcel of land, building or premises that is tributary
directly or indirectly to the stormwater system of the city, shall be subject
to a charge based upon the quantity of impervious area situated thereon. This
charge is not related to the water and/or sewer service and does not rely on
occupancy of the premises to be in effect. All properties having impervious
area within the city of Knoxville will be assigned an equivalent residential
unit (ERU) or a multiple thereof, with all properties having any impervious
area receiving at least one ERU, which shall be considered the base rate.
   A.   Establishment Of Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) Rate And Stormwater
Utility Charge:
      1.   ERU Equivalency: For the purpose of this chapter, an ERU is
equivalent to three thousand thirty four (3,034) square feet of impervious
area.
      2.   Determination Of Stormwater Utility Fee:
         a.   The stormwater utility fee for single-family residential shall be
one hundred percent (100%) of the ERU rate.
The rate shall be set at six dollars ($6.00) per month.
The monthly rate for each fiscal year thereafter shall be determined by
resolution of the city council prior to July 1 of each year.
         b.   The stormwater utility fee for multi-family residential shall be
set at three dollars ($3.00) per unit per month.
The monthly rate for each fiscal year thereafter shall be determined by
resolution of the city council prior to July 1 of each year.
         c.   The stormwater utility fee for school and church/religious
properties shall be set at six dollars ($6.00) per ERU per month:
Monthly charges for a commercial account shall not exceed thirty five dollars
($35.00) per month.
The monthly rate based for each fiscal year thereafter shall be determined by
resolution of the city council prior to July 1 of each year.
The number of ERUs on each property shall be determined by the stormwater
utility.
OR,
A base rate of one ERU plus six dollars ($6.00) multiplied by the numerical
factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the
number of square feet in one ERU.
         d.   The stormwater utility fee for commercial properties shall be set
at six dollars ($6.00) per ERU per month:
Monthly charges for a commercial account shall not exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month.
The monthly rate based for each fiscal year thereafter shall be determined by
resolution of the city council prior to July 1 of each year.
The number of ERUs on each property shall be determined by the stormwater
utility.
OR,
A base rate of one ERU plus six dollars ($6.00) multiplied by the numerical
factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the
number of square feet in one ERU.
         e.   The stormwater utility fee for industrial properties shall be set
at six dollars ($6.00) per ERU per month:
Monthly charges for a commercial account shall not exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00) per month.
The monthly rate based for each fiscal year thereafter shall be determined by
resolution of the city council prior to July 1 of each year.
The number of ERUs on each property shall be determined by the stormwater
utility.
OR,
A base rate of one ERU plus six dollars ($6.00) multiplied by the numerical
factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the
number of square feet in one ERU. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-7: POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF THE STORMWATER UTILITY:
Stormwater service charges incurred pursuant to this chapter may be collected
by the stormwater utility director or designee who is also responsible for the
regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such stormwater charges.
(Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-8: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY:
The city shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities with
respect to the stormwater utility:
   A.   Administer the design, construction, maintenance and operation of the
utility system, including capital improvements designated in the comprehensive
drainage plan.
   B.   Acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand,
replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such facilities,
operations, and activities, as are deemed by the city to be proper and
reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, but are not limited to, surface and underground
drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, and such other
facilities relating to collection, runoff, treatment and retention as will
support a stormwater management system.
   C.   The city shall separately account for the stormwater utility finances.
The stormwater utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all
operation and maintenance costs and costs of borrowing. The budget is subject
to approval by the city council. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a
year shall be retained in a segregated fund, which shall be used for stormwater
utility expenses in subsequent years. Stormwater utility fees collected shall
be deposited in the stormwater utility fund and shall be used for no other
purpose. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
   A.   The city stormwater management and drainage systems consists of all
rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways,
channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes,
head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political
boundaries of the city of Knoxville which control and/or convey stormwater
through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public
streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of
operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which:
      1.   Are located within public streets, rights of way, and easements;
      2.   Are subject to easements of rights of entry, rights of access,
rights of use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation,
maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or
      3.   Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access
for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities.
Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are
located on private property or public property not owned by the city of
Knoxville and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and
facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and
facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner.
   B.   It is the intent of this section to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create
any special duty or relationship with an individual person or to any specified
property within or without the boundaries of the city of Knoxville. The city of
Knoxville expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and
defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its
officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of
duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. (Ord. 16-05, 8-
1-2016)
4-10-10: REQUIREMENTS FOR ON SITE STORMWATER SYSTEMS, ENFORCEMENT AND
INSPECTIONS:
   A.   All property owners and developers of developed real property within
the city of Knoxville shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on site
stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge
stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city, state, and federal laws
and regulations.
   B.   Pursuant to Iowa Code section 364.12(3) or successor section of the
state code, any failure to meet this obligation may constitute a nuisance and
may be subject to an abatement action filed by the city. In the event a
nuisance is found to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such
reasonable time as allowed by the city, the city may enter upon the property
and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual
cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied
against the property. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority
of this section, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon
private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon
reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct
surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. (Ord. 16-
05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-11: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied in
error may appeal in the following manner:
   A.   An appeal must be filed in writing with the city of Knoxville city
manager. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a
survey prepared by a registered Iowa land surveyor or professional engineer
containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area
and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of
the property to rainfall events.
   B.   Using the information provided by the appellant, the city manager shall
conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the
appeal in writing within thirty (30) days.
   C.   In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater
service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter.
   D.   A decision of the city manager which is adverse to an appellant may be
further appealed to the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of
notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the
city council by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The city
council shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days. All decisions
of the city council shall be served on the appellant by registered mail, sent
to the billing address of the appellant.
   E.   All decisions of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-
2016)
4-10-12: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Bill: A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United
States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of
the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to
receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to
whom the bill is initially directed, liability for payment of the stormwater
management charge attributable to that property shall be joint and several as
to the owner and occupant.
   B.   Due And Payable: All comprehensive stormwater service charges are due
and payable thirty (30) days after the date of billing.
   C.   Penalty: A penalty of five percent (5%) shall be added to a
comprehensive stormwater service charge when the charge is not paid in said
thirty (30) days; or
A one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month late charge shall be billed based
on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes
delinquent; or
Each stormwater service charge rendered under or pursuant to this chapter is
hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, parcel of land, building or
premises that are tributary directly or indirectly to the stormwater system of
the city, and, if the same is not paid within sixty (60) days of invoice date,
it shall be certified to the county treasurer, who shall place a lien on said
property as allowed by law and be collected in the same manner as property
taxes.
   D.   Certification: The director shall certify to the city clerk any
comprehensive stormwater service charge, which is owed after a sixty (60) day
payment period. All certified service charges constitute a lien upon the
premises served by the stormwater system for which the service charges were
made and shall be collected in the same manner as property taxes. Failure to
send or receive a bill for comprehensive stormwater service charge is not a
defense to the collection of the service charges.
   E.   Collection: Suits for collection shall be commenced by the city in the
Iowa district court for Marion County. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent
collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent
jurisdiction. The city may employ any lawful means to collect funds owed, and
is not restricted to filing a lawsuit.
   F.   Common Statement: The stormwater utility service charge may be billed
on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services,
usually on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-13: ADJUSTMENTS TO STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
Increase adjustments (debit) can be made to nonresidential service charges by
property owners adding additional impervious area such as rooftops, parking
lots, driveways and walkways. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
4-10-14: EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS APPLICABLE TO STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   All public or private property shall be subject to stormwater utility
service charges except as provided in this section. A stormwater utility
service charge formula is available in the office of the stormwater utility.
The following areas are exempt from stormwater utility service charges:
      1.   "Undeveloped property" as defined in this chapter.
      2.   Streets, alleyways, and highways in the public and private domain
are exempt from utility service charges or connection fees.
      3.   Railroad rights of way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater
service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other
developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater
service charges. (Ord. 16-05, 8-1-2016)
CHAPTER 11
AMBULANCE SERVICE
SECTION:
4-11-1:    Purpose
4-11-2:    Definitions
4-11-3:    Ambulance Service Required To Be Licensed
4-11-4:    Exemptions From Chapter Provisions
4-11-5:    Application For Ambulance Service License
4-11-6:    Criteria For Ambulance Service License
4-11-7:    Standards For Licensed Ambulance Services
4-11-8:    Requirements For Ambulances, Equipment And Supplies
4-11-9:    Medical Director For Ambulance Services
4-11-10: Liability Insurance
4-11-11: Procedures Regarding License Application
4-11-12: Renewal Of Ambulance License
4-11-13: Revocation
4-11-14: Reports
4-11-15: Prohibited Activities
4-11-16: Liability Limitations
4-11-17: Enforcement
4-11-18: Administration
4-11-19: Stand By At Events
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the Knoxville City Council in enacting this chapter to
establish local standards for the provision of state-of-the-art clinical
quality, efficient, timely, and professional Ambulance Service, and prehospital
emergency medical services in the areas of licensure, certification and permits
for ambulance service providers and prehospital emergency medical services care
providers. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings. Other words and phrases
used in this chapter shall have the meanings attributed to them in Iowa Code
Chapter 147A (2023) and 641 Iowa Administrative Code Chapter (“IAC”) 132 (2023)
(NOTE: unless otherwise indicated all references to the Code of Iowa or Iowa
Administrative Code will be as the same existed at the enactment of this
ordinance as may be amended from time to time) unless a different meaning is
plainly required by the context.
                     Any motor vehicle that is specifically designed, modified,
AMBULANCE:           constructed, equipped, staffed, and used regularly to
                     transport patients.
                     Any service program that utilizes ambulances to provide
AMBULANCE SERVICE:   emergency medical services and emergency or nonemergency
                     ground transport of patients to or from a health care
                     facility or between health care facilities.
ATTENDANT-DRIVER :   An individual responsible for the operation and driving of
                     an ambulance.
EMS:                 Prehospital emergency medical services.
FIRE CHIEF:          The duly appointed Knoxville Fire Chief or his/her
                     authorized representative.
                     Direction, advice or orders provided by a Medical Director
                     (as defined under this chapter) or a supervising physician
MEDICAL DIRECTION:   or physician designee (as defined in 641 IAC 132.1) in
                     accordance with written parameters and protocols to
                     ambulance service personnel.
                     Any duly licensed physician(s) appointed by an ambulance
                     service licensed under this chapter to be responsible for
MEDICAL DIRECTOR:    overall medical direction of the ambulance service and who
                     meets the qualifications for a medical director of an
                     ambulance service as the term is defined under 641 IAC
                     132.1.
                     Any individual(s) who is(are) injured, sick or otherwise
PATIENT or PATIENTS: incapacitated and in need of emergency medical services or
                     ground transport to or from health care facilities or
                     between health care facilities in an ambulance.
 
 
              An individual, partnership, association, corporation
PERSON:       (governmental or private), Limited Liability Company or any other
              legal entity including any receiver, trustee, assignee, or
              similar representative.
PHYSICIAN:    An individual licensed under Iowa Code Chapter 148, 150 or 150A.
POLICE CHIEF: The duly appointed Knoxville Police Chief or his/her authorized
              representative. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
 
4-11-3: AMBULANCE SERVICE REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED:
   A.   No person shall operate an ambulance service within the limits of the
City of Knoxville, Iowa, unless such person holds a current and valid license
for such ambulance service pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Every ambulance service retained by any person to provide prospective
or standby service at designated events and gatherings within the limits of the
City of Knoxville, Iowa, shall comply fully with every requirement of this
chapter.
   C.   No ambulance service license shall be transferable. In the event of a
change of ownership the new owner shall be required to obtain a license
pursuant to this chapter and to comply in all respects with all applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to the operation of an
ambulance service in the City of Knoxville, Iowa, at that time.
   D.   Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of
one year unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-
2023)
4-11-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER PROVISIONS:  
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Vehicles being used in an emergency when a lack of transporting
resources, such as in a disaster situation, would cause an unnecessary delay in
patient care;
   B.   Vehicles owned or controlled by the United States government or the
government of the State of Iowa;
   C.   Vehicles operated only on private property or within the confines of
institutional grounds;
   D.   Vehicles or aircraft responding at the request of a licensed ambulance
service pursuant to a mutual aid agreement or affiliation agreement approved by
the City of Knoxville, Iowa;
   E.   Persons or vehicles providing ambulance service for patient transports
originating outside of the limits of the City of Knoxville, Iowa, or nonstop
patient transports through the City of Knoxville, Iowa;
   F.   First responders who provide EMS care but are not engaged in the
transport of patients;
   G.   Persons not regularly engaged in the business of ambulance or medical
transportation services who provide incidental emergency assistance to family
members and acquaintances, including transportation to a medical facility in a
private vehicle;
   H.   Persons or vehicles of the Marion County Sheriff’s Department,
Knoxville Police Department, or other law enforcement agencies transporting
persons in custody to or from health care facilities. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-5: APPLICATION FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE: 
Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made upon such forms as may be
prescribed by the City. Applicants shall file with the City Clerk an
application in writing that shall give the following information:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance
service and ambulance;
   B.   The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant does
business and proposes to do business;
   C.   The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and
care of patients;
   D.   The location and descriptions of the place or places from which the
applicant intends to operate;
   E.   Description of system for providing medical direction;
   F.   Applicant shall submit with the application a Certificate of Insurance
meeting the requirements outlined in
4-11-10  and provide an inspection report for each vehicle showing proof of
annual ambulance vehicle inspection conducted by an Automotive Service
Excellence (ASE) certified mechanic as outlined in section
4-11-8 .
   G.   An accompanying license fee in an amount as may be set from time to
time by resolution of the City Council;
   H.   Evidence of its current ability to meet the eligibility criteria for an
ambulance service license set forth in Section
4-11-6  of this chapter, along with a statement of its agreement to
continuously meet such criteria during the period covered by the license;
   I.   A statement acknowledging and agreeing to follow the standards for
licensed ambulance services set forth in Section
4-11-7  of this chapter and the requirements for ambulances, equipment and
supplies set forth in Section
4-11-8  of this chapter during the period covered by the license;
   J.   Such other information as the City Council shall deem reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 23-09,
7-17-2023)
4-11-6: CRITERIA FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE:
In order to be eligible to receive a license to operate an ambulance service
within the limits of the City of Knoxville, an applicant shall meet the
following criteria at the time of application for such license, and if such
license is granted, shall continue to meet such criteria during the licensure
period:
   A.   An ambulance service must hold and maintain a valid certificate of EMS
service authorization issued by the Iowa Department of Public Health pursuant
to 641 IAC 132 to operate at the paramedic level in the City of Knoxville,
Iowa.
   B.   An ambulance service must have available for operation within the City
of Knoxville at all times an adequate number of ambulances and qualified
personnel to provide 24-hour per day, 7-day per week (“24/7”) ambulance
service, including a minimum of two advanced life support ambulances to be
staffed by at least one paramedic, plus one other EMT.
   C.   An ambulance service must have a supervisor on duty 24/7. That
supervisor may be in either an ambulance or a non-transporting supervisory
vehicle. The non-transporting vehicle must be equipped at the advanced life
support level. This supervisor must be able to respond while on duty at all
times.
   D.   An ambulance service must have the capability to operate an ambulance
dispatch center, continuously and 24/7, and located in the city limits of
Knoxville equipped with a geographically reference Computer-Aided Dispatch
(CAD) system covering the entire service area of the ambulance service. The
ambulance dispatch center shall be equipped with telephone equipment capable of
receiving and passing to the computer-aided dispatch system location
information for both wire-line and wireless requests for service. The CAD
system shall be capable of processing Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD)
protocols and call types, and shall have real time connectivity to the primary
dispatching authority receiving medical calls for the city.
   E.   The ambulance dispatch center, its vehicles, and employees shall
acquire and maintain equipment capable of operating on the Marion County-wide
radio system and the State of Iowa regional and statewide medical
communications frequencies. Access to the countywide radio system shall be
obtained through the Joint Communications Agency and approved by the Marion
County E911 Governance Board. Ambulance services that use the countywide radio
system as their primary means of communication are subject to the rules and
regulations of the system, including user fees.
   F.   An ambulance service must have and maintain a specific plan for
requesting assistance, mutual-aid, or automatic aid when they have no units
available for an incident under normal operating conditions and mass-casualty
incidents. The plan should be updated annually and signed by all involved
ambulance services. The ambulance service will provide the signed plan to the
Fire Chief for review on the first business day of May and if approved the plan
will be in effect for the next fiscal year. If the plan requires a mid-year
change, the ambulance service will submit the requested change to the Fire
Chief. The Fire Chief has 30 days to accept or reject the proposed changes.
(Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-7: STANDARDS FOR LICENSED AMBULANCE SERVICES:
Once licensed, every ambulance service shall:
   A.   Conform to the standards, requirements, and regulations provided for in
this chapter, Chapter 147A, Code of Iowa, 641 IAC 132 and any other statute,
ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the operation of ambulance services
and ambulances;
   B.   Conform to any additional rules and regulations as determined by the
City Council or contained in this chapter;
   C.   Utilize only ambulances that meet the requirements for ambulances set
forth in Section
4-11-8  of this chapter;
   D.   On emergency response or 911 call, be able to provide at a minimum one
paramedic and one emergency medical technician as that designation is defined
in 641 IAC 131; unless an incident overwhelms regular on-duty staffing;
   E.   Ensure that personnel duties are consistent with each ambulance service
employee’s level of certification and the level or care authorized under this
chapter and any applicable statute, rule, or regulation;
   F.   Maintain accurate and current personnel rosters and files on ambulance
service employees. These rosters on file shall include the names and addresses
of all personnel and descriptions of each individual employee’s most up-to-date
qualifications;
   G.   Notify the City Council, in writing, of its intent to discontinue
operations at least 90 days prior to the effective date of the intended
discontinuance of ambulance service;
   H.   The exemptions from liability in certain circumstances, now codified at
Iowa Code Section 147A.10, are extended to all ambulance services and personnel
properly licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR AMBULANCES, EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES:
Once licensed, every ambulance service shall meet the following requirements
for its ambulances, equipment, and supplies:
   A.   In the event an ambulance service wishes to include a new or different
ambulance under an ambulance service license, the new or different ambulance
must conform on all respects to this chapter and all state statutes and
regulations relating thereto;
   B.   No ambulance shall be driven, permitted to be driven, operated, or used
in or on any street, alley, or public way in the City of Knoxville, Iowa, which
does not have as permanent equipment, such permanently mounted lights, sirens,
and special markings to designate it as an ambulance;
   C.   All ambulances covered by an ambulance service license shall be
equipped with radios that shall allow two-way communication between the
ambulance and both Marion County Hospitals;
   D.   Every ambulance covered by an ambulance service license, its equipment,
and the principal place of business, as designated on the license application,
and all records relating to the maintenance and operation of the ambulance and
ambulance service shall be open to inspection by the City Council or its
designated representatives;
   E.   Every ambulance covered by an ambulance service license shall be
inspected annually. The inspection must be performed by an Automotive Service
Excellence (ASE) certified mechanic or by a mechanic certified by the
manufacturer of the ambulance inspected or similar automobile service
certification organization. The inspection must show that at the time of
inspection the ambulance inspected met, at a minimum, the National Truck and
Equipment Association’s Ambulance Manufacturer Division (AMD) performance
specifications as set forth in Iowa Administrative Code Section 641-132.8(4),
as amended. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-9: MEDICAL DIRECTOR FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES:
Every ambulance service shall have a Medical Director who shall be a duly
licensed physician, and who shall be responsible for the overall medical
direction of the ambulance service. The responsibilities of the Medical
Director may be delegated by the Medical Director to a qualified individual of
equivalent or higher training than the service being offered by the ambulance
service.
   A.   The responsibilities of the Medical Director shall include but are not
limited to:
      1.   Maintaining liaison with other physicians and hospital personnel;
      2.   Monitoring and evaluating the clinical activities of the ambulance
service;
      3.   Coordinating and assessing continuing education programs for
ambulance service personnel;
      4.   Providing individual evaluation and consultation to the ambulance
service personnel;
      5.   Developing, updating, and recommending to the ambulance service
clinical protocols for the ambulance service;
      6.   Ensuring that medical direction is available and provided 24/7;
   B.   The Medical Director shall be currently certified in advanced cardiac
life support as defined by the American Heart Association or American Red
Cross.
   C.   The Medical Director shall be a physician at Knoxville Hospital and
Clinics. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-10: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   No ambulance service license shall be issued under this chapter, nor
shall such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated
in Knoxville, Iowa, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance
coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State
of Iowa, for the ambulance service and for each and every ambulance owned and/
or operated by or for the applicant or licensee. The minimum limits of
liability of the insurance policy will be as follows:
      1.   To cover the insured’s legal liability for personal injury or death
resulting therefrom, for each ambulance, for any recovery by one person as a
result of any one accident or cause, one million dollars; and for all persons
receiving personal injury as a result of any one accident or other cause, three
million dollars.
      2.   To cover the insured’s legal liability for damage to or destruction
of any property as a result of any one accident or other cause, one million
dollars.
   B.   Certificates evidencing said insurance policies shall be submitted with
application for approval prior to the issuance of each license. The
certificates shall be subject to all requirements as the City Council may adopt
from time to time.
   C.   Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision (i)
for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, (ii) that the liability of the insurer shall not be
affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured, and (iii) that
until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from
liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the
end of the year, or any act of or omission of the named insured.
   D.   Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period
to be covered by the license applied for and the notice to the City of
Knoxville, Iowa, and to the insured before any cancellation or termination of
the policy earlier than its expiration date and the cancellation or other
termination of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the
licenses issued for the ambulances covered by such policy, unless another
insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be
provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
(Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-11: PROCEDURES REGARDING LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   The Fire Chief shall within 20 days after receipt of an application for
an ambulance service license as provided for herein, cause such investigation
as he/she deems necessary to be made of the applicant and of its proposed
operations and the vehicles, equipment, and premises designated in the
application. The Fire Chief shall submit his/her report and recommendation to
the City Council upon completion thereof.
   B.   Upon receipt of the afforested report and recommendation from the Fire
Chief, the City Council will then review the same and authorize the issuance of
a license for a specified ambulance service to be valid for a period of one
year unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated if the City Council finds
the following conditions have been met:
      1.   The public convenience and necessity require the proposed ambulance
service;
      2.   Each such ambulance, its required equipment and the premises
designated in the application, comply with the requirements and standards
prescribed in this chapter and with the regulations promulgated under such
chapter;
      3.   All the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws
and ordinances have been met. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-12: RENEWAL OF AMBULANCE LICENSE:
Renewal of any ambulance service license hereunder, upon expiration for any
reason or after revocation, shall require conformance with all the requirements
of this chapter that may exist at the time of any renewal. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-
2023)
4-11-13: REVOCATION:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter or of regulations promulgated hereunder
shall be sufficient grounds for revoking any license or permit issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   Upon suspension, revocation, or termination of any license hereunder,
operations as an ambulance service shall cease and no person shall permit
further operation with such ambulances as such. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-14: REPORTS:
   A.   Each licensee hereunder shall maintain accurate records, upon such
forms as may be prescribed, and containing such information as may be required
by the Police Chief of Knoxville, Iowa, concerning the transportation of each
patient within Knoxville, or from one place herein to another place within or
beyond its limits. Such records pertaining to injury on public property shall
be available for inspection by the Police Chief at any reasonable time.
   B.   Each licensee shall present a key performance metrics report at the
City of Knoxville Public Safety Departments at times required by the Fire
Chief. Those metrics will be determined by the Public Safety Departments. (Ord.
23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-15: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Except as provided in Section
4-11-4  of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, including any
ambulance service provider, its agents, or employees, to intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly:
   A.   Make a false statement of a material fact, or omit disclosure of a
material fact, in any application or report required under this chapter;
   B.   Perform or allow the performance of first responder, EMT or trainee
services by any first responder, EMT or trainee who currently has his/her
certification suspended, revoked, or terminated by the State of Iowa;
   C.   Perform the services of a first responder or EMT unless in full
conformity with state law, this chapter and the administrative rules
established hereunder;
   D.   Provide ambulance service within the city limits of Knoxville, Iowa,
unless authorized by this chapter;
   E.   Falsify, deface, or obliterate any license, certificate or permit
issued under this chapter;
   F.   Transport a patient for compensation in any vehicle other than an
ambulance except as provided herein;
   G.   Wear any badge or device while providing emergency medical care that
does not accurately represent the certification level or affiliation of the
individual wearing it;
   H.   Deny or delay the provision of ambulance service or other EMS care to
any individual on account of race, creed, religion, age, sex, national origin,
physical or mental disability, place of residence, financial condition, or the
presence or absence of medical insurance; provided, that it shall not be a
violation of this chapter for ambulance service personnel to obtain at the time
of service, information required for effective billing, to comply with state or
federal regulations pertaining to patient care and transport or to comply with
special benefit eligibility procedures established by medical insurers or
medical service providers;
   I.   Charge for any service, equipment or supplies not provided to or for
the benefit of the patient;
   J.   No ambulance service shall be operated, and no individual shall drive,
attend, or permit it to be operated on the streets, alleys, or any public way
or place of Knoxville, Iowa, unless it shall be under the immediate supervision
and direction of an attendant-driver. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-16: LIABILITY LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create a cause of action, claim or any
third-party beneficiary rights in favor of specific individuals against the
City of Knoxville, Iowa, its hospital, an ambulance service licensed hereunder
or their officials, employees, or agents. Any duty created by this chapter is a
general duty running in favor of the public. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-17: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Fire Chief or designee,
or the Police Chief or designee. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
4-11-18: ADMINISTRATION:
The Fire Chief and City Clerk are each authorized to administrate the terms and
provisions of this chapter and may promulgate such administrative rules or
standard operating procedures as may be necessary to do so. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-
2023)
4-11-19: STAND BY AT EVENTS:
For large events i.e., Nationals, Nascar, World of Outlaw, Ragbri and such
events in town the Fire Chief or his designee will use the CTC medical services
event calculator to determine number of ambulances needed for stand by
coverage. It will also be the responsibility of the event organizer to complete
and submit the application and agreement for extra duty and stand by
information to the service director 8 weeks in advance.
   A.   Inaccurate reporting of suspected attendance will be investigated by
the fire chief or designee with a recommendation to City Council.
   B.   Ambulance used for the standby event must meet the requirements in this
code. (Ord. 23-09, 7-17-2023)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Authority Of Police And Fire Officials
5-1-3: Required Obedience To This Chapter And State Law
5-1-4: Tires; Noise
5-1-5: Driving On Sidewalks
5-1-6: Stops At Intersecting Through Highways And Other Intersections
5-1-7: Speed Limits
5-1-8: Speed; State Highways
5-1-9: Truck Routes
5-1-10: Competine Multipurpose Trail; Vehicle Prohibition
5-1-11: Bicycles
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in this title are defined by the laws of Iowa,
such definitions shall apply to this title. (Ord. 79-14, 7-16-1979)
5-1-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
   A.   Police Department:
      1.   Provisions of this title and Iowa law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road shall be enforced by the officers of the Police Department.
      2.   The officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws.
In the event of a fire or other emergency, officers of the Police Department
may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws.
   B.   Fire Department: Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of
a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (Ord. 79-14, 7-
16-1979)
5-1-3: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO THIS CHAPTER AND STATE LAW:
Any person who shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of
a police officer, or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or
who shall fail to abide by the provisions of this title and the applicable
provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and
the statutory law of the road is in violation of this title. These sections of
the code are:
   A.   321.32, 321.174, 321.190, 321.193 and 321.218 through 321.224 -
- display of registration and license to drive.
   B.   321.229 through 321.234 -- obedience to a peace officer and
responsibility of public officers, emergency vehicles and bicycles to obey
traffic regulations.
   C.   321.256 through 321.260 -- traffic signs, signals and markings.
   D.   321.261 through 321.266 and 321.268 -- accidents and accident
reporting.
   E.   321.275 -- operation of motorcycles.
(Ord. 79-14, 7-16-1979)
   F.   321.277, 321.278, 321.285 through 321.288 and 321.294 -- reckless
driving, drag racing, speed, control of vehicle and minimum speed.
(Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
   G.   321.297 through 321.310 -- driving on right, meeting, overtaking,
following or towing.
   H.   321.311 through 321.318 -- turning and starting, signals on turning and
stopping.
   I.   321.319 through 321.324 -- right-of-way.
   J.   321.325 through 321.334 and 321.340 -- pedestrian rights and duties and
safety zones.
   K.   321.341 through 321.344 -- railroad crossings.
(Ord. 79-14, 7-16-1979)
   L.   321.353 through 321.361 -- stop at sidewalks, stopping, standing and
parking.
   M.   321.362 through 321.372 -- unattending vehicle, obstructing driver's
view, crossing median, following fire apparatus, or crossing fire hose and
putting glass, etc., on streets and school buses -- discharging students.
(Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
   N.   321.384 through 321.409, 321.415, 321.418 through 321.423 -- lighting
equipment required and time of use.
(Ord. 79-14, 7-16-1979)
   O.   321.430 through 321.443, 321.445, and 321.447 through 321.450 -
- brakes, horns, sirens, mufflers, wipers, mirrors, tires, flares, windows,
safety belts and safety harnesses, and special markings for transporting
explosives.
(Ord. 90-6, 6-4-1990)
   P.   321.452 through 321.463, 321.465 and 321.466 -- size, weight and load.
(Ord. 79-14, 7-16-1979)
   Q.   601.E -- handicapped parking.
   (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
   R.   321.180 -- instruction permits.
   S.   321.194 -- special minors' licenses.
   T.   321.216 -- unlawful use of license or nonoperator's identification
card.
   U.   321.284 -- open container in motor vehicles.
   V.   321.381 -- movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   W.   321.390 -- reflector requirements.
   X.   321.446 -- child restraint devices.
   Y.   321G.3 through 321G.20 -- snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles.
   Z.   321L.3 through 321L.7 -- handicapped parking.
   (Ord. 97-11, 5-19-1997)
   AA.   321.20B -- failure to prove security against liability (nonaccident
related).
   BB.   321.20B -- failure to prove security against liability (accident
related).
   CC.   321.174A -- operation with expired license.
   DD.   321.180B -- violation of graduated driver's license conditions.
   EE.   321.277A -- careless driving.
   FF.   321.284A -- open container in motor vehicle (passenger).
   GG.   321.320 -- allowing unauthorized person to drive.
   HH.   321.98 -- operation without registration.
   II.   321.260(a) -- interference with devices, signs or signals.
   JJ.   321.A32 -- driving while suspended.
   KK.   321.218 -- driving while suspended.
(Ord. 99-12, 9-20-1999)
   LL.   Reserved.
(Ord. 18-02, 2-19-2018)
   MM.   321.404A -- light restricting devices prohibited.
(Ord. 99-12, 9-20-1999)
   NN.   321J.21 -- driving while suspended.
(Ord. 01-02, 1-15-2001)
   OO.   321.174a -- operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
(Ord. 02-09, 7-1-2002)
   PP.   321.234A -- all-terrain vehicles -- highway use.
(Ord. 05-04, 4-18-2005)
5-1-4: TIRES; NOISE:
Any person operating a motor vehicle upon the streets shall do so in such a
manner as to not cause the tires of said vehicle to screech or make other
unnecessary or unusual noises. (Ord. 534, 8-19-1963)
5-1-5: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a motor vehicle, as defined by the Iowa Code, shall not drive
upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway, and shall not park any
motor vehicle upon or within any sidewalk area. (Ord., 10-7-1974)
5-1-6: STOPS AT INTERSECTING THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND OTHER INTERSECTIONS:
At the intersections of through highways and at intersections upon streets
other than through highways, where, because of heavy cross traffic or other
traffic conditions, particular hazards exist, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to determine whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more
entrances to any such intersection and shall present said recommendations to
the Council, and upon approval by the Council by resolution, shall erect an
appropriate sign at every such place when a stop or yield is required. (Ord.
79-1, 1-15-1979; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
5-1-7: SPEED LIMITS:
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets shall drive the same in a
careful and prudent manner, at a rate of speed that will not endanger the
property of another or the life or limb of any person, and shall in no event
drive the same at a greater rate of speed than the following:
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the streets shall drive the same in a
careful and prudent manner, at a rate of speed that will not endanger the
property of another or the life or limb of any person, and shall in no event
drive the same at a greater rate of speed than the following:
Twenty (20) miles per hour:
   In any business district.
   Main Street from Roche Street to Fourth Street.
Twenty five (25) miles per hour:
   Attica Road between Washington Street and Main Street.
   Bell Avenue from the junction of Highway 14 to Ellis Drive
   In any residential or school district.
   Pleasant Street from junction of Iowa 14 to Roche Street.
   Roche Street from Pleasant Street to Main Street.
   Willetts Drive between Pleasant Street and Howard Street.
Thirty (30) miles per hour:
   118th Street from West Pleasant Street north to the corporate limits.
   Bell Avenue from Lincoln to Willetts Drive.
   Main Street from Fourth Street to Attica Road.
   North Seventh Street from the end of the paving to the City limits.
   Pleasant Street from Willetts Drive to junction of Highway 14.
   Willetts Drive from Pleasant Street to Bell Avenue.
Thirty five (35) miles per hour:
   Attica Road from East Main to south City limits.
   Attica Road from junction of Robinson Street to east City limits.
   East Main Street from Attica Road to Robinson Street.
   East Pleasant Street from Seventh Street to a point one-half (1/2) mile
east.
   Godfrey Lane from Pleasant Street to County Route T-15.
   West Pleasant Street from Willetts Drive to 118th Street.
Forty five (45) miles per hour:
   East Main from Robinson Street to the east City limits.
   East Pleasant Street from a point one-half (1/2) mile east of the
intersection of Seventh Street and East Pleasant Street to Godfrey Lane.
   North side of Airport Industrial Drive for its entire length.
   West Pleasant Street from 118th Street to the City limits. (Ord. 09-22, 11-
16-2009; amd. Ord. 22-05, 8-1-022; Ord. 24-01, 2-5-2024; Ord. 24-03, 3-18-2024)
5-1-8: SPEED; STATE HIGHWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on the State
highways passing through the City, at a speed greater than the following:
Thirty (30) miles per hour:
Ash Street to Robinson Street.
Thirty five (35) miles per hour:
Jackson Street to Ash Street.
Robinson Street to Gordon Drive.
Forty (40) miles per hour:
Gordon Drive to Bell Avenue for southbound traffic and from Gordon Drive to the
south line of the south drive of the present Wheel Estates Mobile Home Park for
northbound traffic.
Forty five (45) miles per hour:
North City limits to Jackson Street.
Fifty (50) miles per hour:
North and southbound on Highway 14 from three hundred feet (300') south of Bell
Avenue to three hundred feet (300') past the entrance to 1574 Highway 14 South.
Northbound from Newbold (the old Industrial Park Road) to fifty feet (50')
south of Bell Avenue.
Sixty five (65) miles per hour:
West City limits to the east City limits on Highway 92/5. (Ord. 86-1, 7-21-
1986; amd. Ord. 01-04, 4-2-2001; Ord. 02-10, 8-5-2002)
5-1-9: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Truck Route Established: There is hereby established a truck route
through the City which shall be as follows: (Ord. 489, 8-7-1958; amd. Ord. 83-
4, 12-5-1983)
From the West Corporation Line of the City, thence eastward along Pleasant
Street to Roche Street, thence southward along Roche Street to Main Street,
thence eastward along Main Street to the East Corporation Line; and, from the
North Corporation Line, thence southward along Lincoln Street to the South
Corporation Line; and from the intersection of Main Street and Attica Road,
thence southward along Attica Road to the South Corporation Line.
(Ord. 489, 8-7-1958; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
   B.   Use Of Truck Route Required: All trucks and semitrailer trucks having a
gross weight of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or more are hereby required to
remain upon the above described routes when passing through the City.
   C.   Exceptions To Use Of Truck Route: This chapter shall not prohibit the
use of other public streets or alleys, when necessary for the making of local
deliveries or pick ups, provided that the truck making such local deliveries or
pick ups shall follow the most direct route between the truck route and the
point of delivery or pick up. (Ord. 489, 8-7-1958; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
5-1-10: COMPETINE MULTIPURPOSE TRAIL; VEHICLE PROHIBITION:
   A.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the Competine Multipurpose
Trail. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to civil penalties
as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code.
   B.   No person shall park any motor vehicle at any place on the Competine
Multipurpose Trail. In addition, no person shall park any motor vehicle on the
land adjacent to the Competine Multipurpose Trail unless such area is paved and
no other signs or ordinances prohibit such parking. Any person violating this
subsection shall be subject to civil penalties as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this Code. (Ord. 08-05, 4-21-2008)
5-1-11: BICYCLES:
   A.   Traffic Code Applies To Persons Riding Bicycles: Every person riding a
bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this
State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by traffic
ordinances of this City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such
person dismounts from a bicycle he shall be subject to all regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
   B.   Riding On Sidewalks And Prohibited Areas:
      1.   Yield To Pedestrians: Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right- of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. When riding
on sidewalks, bicycles shall be ridden in single file only.
      2.   Riding Prohibited On Certain Streets: Bicycles may be pushed, but
may not be ridden upon the sidewalks along: Main Street between First Street
and Fourth Street; Second Street between Marion Street and Montgomery Street;
Robinson Street between First Street and Fourth Street; Third Street between
Marion Street and Montgomery Street.
      3.   Signs: The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person.
   C.   Additional Regulations: The Chief of Police may adopt other regulations
applicable to bicycles, subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 13-
11, 10-7-2013; amd. Ord. 18-02, 2-19-2018)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Authority To Erect Signs And Paint Curbs
5-2-2: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
5-2-3: Angle Parking
5-2-4: Markings
5-2-5: Three Hour Parking Zone
5-2-6: Snow Ordinance For City Streets
5-2-7: Long Vehicles
5-2-8: Certain Vehicles; Illegal To Leave Parked
5-2-9: Reserved Parking
5-2-10: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
5-2-11: Parking Within The City Right Of Way
5-2-12: Compact Vehicle
5-2-13: Handicapped Parking
5-2-14: Storm Emergency Parking
5-2-15: Parking Prohibitions In City Parks
5-2-16: Fire Lanes
5-2-17: Alley Parking
5-2-18: Parking On The Square
5-2-1: AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS AND PAINT CURBS:
When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles
constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions
require, the chief of police may cause curbings to be painted with a yellow or
orange color and erect no parking or no standing signs or restricted parking
signs. This determination shall be subject to review by the city council. It
shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park his/her
vehicle in violation of any such paintings or signs. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
5-2-2: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle on a street or alley for the principal purpose
of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   B.   For washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except such repairs as
are necessitated by an emergency.
   C.   Displaying advertising.
   D.   Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established
marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under ordinances of this city.
(Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
   E.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle may stop, stand, or park on a
sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      7.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet (10')
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone.
      8.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing,
except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
      9.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
      10.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      11.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      12.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway outside
of cities or within a highway tunnel.
      13.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
      14.   In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
   F.   Except in those locations marked to allow angle parking, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be
stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and
within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb. (Ord. 06-06, 7-24-2006)
5-2-3: ANGLE PARKING:
The chief of police, as traffic conditions require, shall determine upon what
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or
portions thereof indicating the method of angle parking. Such determination
shall be subject to approval by council resolution. (Ord. 77-11, 11-21-1977)
5-2-4: MARKINGS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park any vehicle across
any such line or marking painted on the curb or street or to park said vehicle
in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so
designated by such lines or markings. (Ord., 5-5-1975)
5-2-5: THREE HOUR PARKING ZONE:
A three (3) hour parking limit is hereby established for areas designated by
resolution by the city council. Parking a motor vehicle in such a designated
area beyond the three (3) hour limit shall be a violation of this chapter.
Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of this
section, authorized city personnel finding such vehicle shall attach an
overtime parking notice to said vehicle. Parking violations which are admitted
may be paid by the payment as set forth by city resolution. Parking violations
which are denied shall be charged and proceed before a court the same as other
traffic violations. Each instance of parking a motor vehicle in excess of the
three (3) hour limit shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 06-06, 7-24-
2006)
5-2-6: SNOW ORDINANCE FOR CITY STREETS:
   A.   Parking Prohibited During Snow Emergency:
      1.   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public street, street parking or alley during any snow emergency proclaimed by
the police chief unless the snow has been removed or plowed from said street,
street parking or alley and the snow has ceased to fall. A snow emergency
parking ban shall continue from its proclamation through the duration of the
snow or ice storm and the twenty four (24) hour period after cessation of such
storm except as above provided upon streets which have been fully opened (curb
to curb).
      2.   Such a ban shall be uniform application and the chief of police is
directed to widely publicize the requirements, using all available news media
in early November of each year. When predictions or occurrences indicate the
need, the police chief shall proclaim a snow emergency and shall inform the
news media to publicize the proclamation and the parking rules thereunder. Such
emergency shall be extended or shortened when conditions warrant.
      3.   The foregoing prohibition shall be modified within the area of the
central business district and more specifically described as follows:
         a.   Main Street from Harlan Street to Fourth Street.
         b.   Second Street from Pleasant Street to Washington Street.
         c.   Third Street from Pleasant Street to Washington Street.
         d.   Robinson Street from Roche Street to Fifth Street.
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the above described area during
normal business hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
and during normal weekend, evening or holiday hours as defined by the Main
Street organization. (Ord. 93-3, 2-15-1993)
      4.   There shall be a fine set by city resolution for each violation of
the provisions of this subsection. Members of the police department are hereby
authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a public street, street
parking or alley to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage
designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by
the city, when there has been a violation of the provisions of this subsection.
In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for violation of the provisions of this subsection
shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing charges and storage.
(Ord. 06-06, 7-24-2006)
      5.   Snow removal priority list shall be maintained by the police chief
and reviewed annually by that office along with the public works director.
(Ord. 93-3, 2-15-1993; amd. 1996 Code)
   B.   Snow Dumping On Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, push or place or cause
to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property,
sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way or right of way of streets so as
to obstruct gutters or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street, or to
create a hazardous condition therein, or to obstruct the view of or conceal any
traffic sign, except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the
business district, it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the streets
temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner
or agent, and only after first making arrangements for such prompt removal at
the owner's cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time.
         a.   It shall also be unlawful for any person to throw, push or place
or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property,
sidewalks or driveways onto the property of another or the right of way located
between the sidewalk and the street adjoining another person's property.
         b.   The sole exception to the above is where a business in the
central business district has sidewalks that abut the curb, in which case the
landowner or his/her agent may dump snow in the street from said sidewalk.
      2.   There shall be a ten dollar ($10.00) fine for dumping snow on city
streets as described in subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 93-3, 2-15-1993)
5-2-7: LONG VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, including automobile, motor truck,
carrier, van, stock trailer, bus or other vehicle of any kind more than twenty
feet (20') in length to stop, park or be left standing upon any street except
for the purpose of loading or unloading, and then only so long as is necessary
for loading or unloading and not to exceed thirty (30) minutes at any one time.
(Ord. 06-06, 7-24-2006)
5-2-8: CERTAIN VEHICLES; ILLEGAL TO LEAVE PARKED:
It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing on any public street, alley, or
city owned or city controlled parking areas for a period of more than twenty
four (24) hours any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other vehicle. Parking
violations which are admitted may be paid by the payment of a fine as set forth
by city resolution. Parking violations which are denied shall be charged and
proceed before a court the same as other traffic violations. Each instance of
parking a motor vehicle in excess of the twenty four (24) hour limit shall
constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 06-06, 7-24-2006)
5-2-9: RESERVED PARKING:
In any area which has been designated by the city council, as a three (3) hour
parking area, the city may grant a reserved parking space. Application for such
reserved parking space is to be made in writing and presented to the chief of
police. Upon approval, a reserved parking space may be granted and the use of
such space allowed upon the payment of the fee for such space as designated by
resolution by the council. (Ord. 90-12, 11-19-1990; amd. Ord. 94-7, 8-15-1994)
5-2-10: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that the particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of this chapter and the defendant named in
the information was the registered owner at the time in question. (Ord. 534, 8-
19-1963)
5-2-11: PARKING WITHIN THE CITY RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   No additional parking shall be allowed between the curb line and
property line (the "parking area"), except at the direction of the city
council. (Ord. 94-11, 11-7-1994)
   B.   Existing improved parking in the parking area with curb cuts may
continue. However, areas that are not hard surfaced shall be surfaced with
asphaltic or concrete pavement six inches (6") thick. (Ord. 94-11, 11-7-1994;
amd. 1996 Code)
   C.   Existing parking in parking areas with a surface of one inch (1") of
gravel with barrier type curbs, must replace those curbs within one year with
nonbarrier type curbs. These areas shall be surfaced as required by subsection
B of this section.
   D.   A "parking space" is defined as an area nine feet (9') wide and twenty
feet (20') long. In no instance shall cars extend over the sidewalk or beyond
the back of the curb and into the street.
   E.   For each residentially zoned lot abutting a street, not more than
twenty four feet (24') in width of frontage in the parking area can be used for
parking. If the existing parking in the parking area is less than twenty four
feet (24') at the time of the adoption of this section, the parking may not be
expanded to twenty four feet (24'). This provision does not apply to variances
previously granted by the city council or the board of adjustment.
   F.   At intersections of streets in developed areas, improved parking areas
shall not be allowed within twenty five feet (25') of the corner of the
property lines unless the parking area was previously improved to city
standards. This requirement does not reduce an area to less than twenty four
feet (24') in width if parking is now located within this area on a lot. The
parking area can be relocated outside of this requirement and must meet all
other requirements as established by this section.
   G.   For each commercially zoned lot abutting a street the entire parking
area being used for parking may be improved as required by this section.
However, if located on a corner lot the improved parking area shall not be
allowed within twenty five feet (25') of the corner of the property lines
unless parking area was previously improved to city standards.
   H.   It shall be the responsibility of abutting landowners to submit plans
for any and all improvements regarding this section. The abutting landowner is
also responsible for the removal of the nonpaved parking if he/she decides not
to pave the parking area and return the area to grass. If it is necessary to
remove a portion of the parking due to the size of the parking, the abutting
landowner shall be required to return the area to grass. (Ord. 87-5, 8-10-1987)
   I.   Parking violations committed pursuant to this section which are
admitted may be paid by the payment of a fine as set by city resolution.
Parking violations pursuant to this section which are denied shall be charged
and proceed before a court the same as other traffic violations. Each instance
of parking a motor vehicle in violation of this section shall constitute a
separate violation. (Ord. 06-06, 7-24-2006)
   J.   Hard surfaced parking areas established in the right of way of
residential properties shall be deemed private parking for that residential
property. Each adjoining property owner may erect a sign that reads "Private
Parking, Violators May Be Towed". These signs must be placed on private
property a minimum of one foot (1') behind the sidewalk and meet the dimensions
of twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18") with the top of the sign being
no taller than four feet (4') from ground level. Adjoining property owner will
be responsible for parking enforcement. (Ord. 11-18, 12-19-2011)
5-2-12: COMPACT VEHICLE:
Any vehicle, sixteen feet (16') in length from the foremost point on the front
bumper to the rearward most point on the rear bumper as measured directly
between the two (2) points or less, shall be considered a compact vehicle
within the city. (Ord. 88-2, 5-2-1988)
5-2-13: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
   A.   Pursuant to the laws of the state, the areas shown on exhibit 1 which
is on file with the city clerk, and by this reference made a part hereof, is
hereby designated as the city business district.
   B.   The parking spaces shown on exhibit 1 are hereby designated as
"handicapped parking" within the designated business district of the city.
(Ord. 90-14, 12-3-1990)
5-2-14: STORM EMERGENCY PARKING:
   A.   Parking Prohibited During Storm Emergency:
      1.   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public street, street parking or alley during any storm emergency proclaimed by
the police chief unless the storm debris has been removed from said street,
street parking or alley. A storm emergency parking ban shall continue from its
proclamation through the date and time each street is cleared of debris.
      2.   Such a ban shall be uniform application and the chief of police is
directed to widely publicize the requirements, using all available news media
and other forms of communication. The police chief shall proclaim a storm
emergency and shall inform the news media to publicize the proclamation and the
parking rules thereunder. Such emergency shall be extended or shortened when
conditions warrant. (Ord. 97-19, 12-15-1997)
      3.   There shall be a fine as set by city resolution for the violation of
the provisions of this section. Members of the police department are hereby
authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a public street, street
parking or alley to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage
designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by
the city, where there has been a violation of the provisions of this section.
In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for violation of the provisions of this section shall be
required to pay the reasonable costs of towing charges and storage. (Ord. 06-
06, 7-24-2006)
5-2-15: PARKING PROHIBITIONS IN CITY PARKS:
No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle inside or on the
grass at the city parks. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to
maintenance personnel while in the performance of their duties, designated
parking areas for scheduled athletic events at city parks, or during special
events approved by the city council. Parking violations which are admitted may
be paid by the payment of a fine as set forth by city resolution. Parking
violations which are denied shall be charged and proceed before a court the
same as other traffic violations. Each instance of parking a motor vehicle in
violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 06-06,
7-24-2006)
5-2-16: FIRE LANES:
   A.   Designation: The fire chief or authorized representative shall approve,
require, and designate public and/or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for
the efficient and effective operation of fire vehicles, personnel, and
apparatus. Only those fire lanes approved by the fire chief or authorized
representative will be enforced. A fire lane shall be posted with signs at
least every forty (40) linear feet. Said fire lane shall be deemed to encompass
that area within a twenty foot (20') radius of any fire lane sign or markings
posted pursuant to this section. Posted signs will comply with the "Manual Of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and at a minimum contain the following
language: "Fire Lane-Tow Away Zone". Markings will include a painted red curb
or edge line extending twenty feet (20') either side of a posted sign. Upon
application to and approval by the fire chief or authorized representative, a
private property owner may be granted a fire lane designation for such
property. Installation of approved signage on private property will be the
responsibility of the permit applicant/property owner. If an applicant/property
owner is required by the city to post a fire lane, upon request, the signs will
be provided by the city at cost or the applicant/property owner can obtain an
approved sign from a vendor. When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided
herein, it shall be presumed that said area is designated as a fire lane by or
with the authority of the fire chief.
   B.   Application For Fire Lane Designation: Businesses requesting fire lane
designation shall submit a letter of request, accompanied by a map of the
property with fire lane designation shown in red, to the fire chief or
authorized representative. The letter and map shall remain on file at city
hall. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/manager to notify
the city when fire lane signage and painting is completed. No enforcement shall
occur until said fire lane is inspected and written approval is on file at city
hall. Copy of said approval shall be provided to the property owner/manager.
   C.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to have an unattended vehicle
standing, stopped, or parked in or otherwise blocking or obstructing any
portion of a designated fire lane at any time. Signs and markings shall be
posted and placed to identify such fire lanes and to serve notice that
standing, stopping, and/or parking is prohibited therein. Such illegally parked
vehicles will be subject to fines and/or towing at the expense of the owner.
All designated fire lane signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible
condition at all times and replaced when necessary to ensure adequate
visibility. This maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permit
applicant/property owner.
   D.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor or municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
   E.   Enforcement: It will be the responsibility of the police department to
enforce the provisions of this section as they apply to both public and private
properties. The Knoxville police department is hereby authorized to ticket,
tow, or cause to be towed, pursuant to the code of Iowa, as amended, any
vehicle that has been parked or placed in a fire lane in violation of the
parking laws of this city and/or state. This shall serve as appropriate notice
of such authorization to the Knoxville police department under the code of
Iowa, as amended. By applying for a fire lane designation, any applicant/
private property owner and its employees and assigns hereby agree to release,
indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from
any damages or liability resulting from any ticketing or towing authorized
under this section. (Ord. 06-07, 8-21-2006)
5-2-17: ALLEY PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, including automobile, motor truck,
carrier, van, stock trailer, bus or other vehicle of any kind to park or be
left standing so that any part of the vehicle protrudes into the alley right of
way except for the purpose of loading or unloading, and then only so long as is
necessary for loading or unloading and not to exceed thirty (30) minutes at any
one time. (Ord. 06-09, 11-6-2006)
5-2-18: PARKING ON THE SQUARE:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on the square from the period of
two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M., seven (7) days a week and
at all times when the snow ordinance is in effect. However, a resident who
lives on the square and who has obtained a parking sticker from the City, shall
be entitled to park on the square during the two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to six
o’clock (6:00) A.M. period except when the snow ordinance is in effect.
Residents are still subject to the 3-hour parking zone requirements during
times other than two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
Residents who live on the square shall be required to obtain a parking sticker
from the City annually for the cost of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Residents
will be required to provide proof of their address prior to obtaining a
sticker. (Ord. 21-01, 2-1-2021)
CHAPTER 3
BICYCLES 1
(Rep. by Ord. 13-10, 10-7-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-1-11 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Removal Of Abandoned Vehicles
5-4-4: Notification Of Owners And Lien Holders
5-4-5: Impoundment Fees And Bond
5-4-6: Hearing Procedures
5-4-7: Auction Or Disposal Of Abandoned Vehicles
5-4-8: Junk Vehicles Declared A Nuisance
5-4-9: Authority To Enforce
5-4-10: Notice To Abate
5-4-11: Duty Of Owner To Remove Or Repair
5-4-12: Hearing Procedures; Junk Vehicle
5-4-13: Abatement By Municipality
5-4-14: Collection Of Cost Of Abatement
5-4-15: Exceptions
5-4-16: Interference With Enforcement
5-4-17: Penalty
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens and safety of property of this city by providing for removal of
abandoned motor vehicles and the elimination of the open storage of abandoned
and junk motor vehicles and machinery except in authorized places. (Ord. 87-6,
9-21-1987)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any of the following:
   A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than forty eight (48) hours and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or
more wheels or other parts which render the vehicle totally inoperable; or
   B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
seventy two (72) hours; or
   C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or has
been placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property for more than twenty four (24) hours; or
   D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of the department
and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days; or
   E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by the department to
create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned for a period of fifteen (15) days
if its owner or operator is unable to move the vehicle and notifies the
department and requests assistance in the removal of the vehicle.
DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of Knoxville, Iowa.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle stored within the corporate limits of the city of
Knoxville, Iowa, and which has any one or more of the following
characteristics:
   A.   Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield or window or headlight
or any other cracked or broken glass.
   B.   Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door or bumper or hood or
door handle or window handle or steering wheel, trunk top or trunk handle or
tailpipe.
   C.   Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, or snakes, or
any other vermin or insects.
   D.   Any motor vehicle if it lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or
other structural parts which render said motor vehicle totally inoperable, or
which cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as an operating
vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
   E.   Any other vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete
condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and
safety.
   F.   Any unlicensed vehicle, other than those officially placed in storage
through the county motor vehicle department.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not "public
property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any public right of way open for the purposes of vehicular
travel.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include
without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 87-6,
9-21-1987; amd. Ord. 07-01, 1-2-2007; Ord. 09-01, 1-19-2009)
5-4-3: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority To Remove: The department may, without prior notice or
hearing, remove and impound any "abandoned vehicle" as defined in section
5-4-2 of this chapter. The department may hire other personnel, equipment, and
facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of
abandoned vehicles.
   B.   Impoundment Areas: The impoundment and storage of all vehicles pursuant
to this chapter shall be in such areas or places designated by the city
council.
   C.   Record Of Impounded Vehicles: When a vehicle is taken into custody and
impounded under the provisions of this chapter, the department shall maintain a
record of the vehicle, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's
trade name, body style, vehicle identification number, and license plate and
year displayed on the vehicle. The records shall include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, person or firm doing the towing,
reason for towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
   D.   Vehicles Used As Evidence: Nothing in this chapter shall govern the
procedures of any police officer in taking into custody and impounding any
vehicle to be used or proposed to be used as evidence in a criminal case
involving crimes other than violations of this chapter. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-4: NOTIFICATION OF OWNERS AND LIEN HOLDERS:
   A.   Notify Owner: When a vehicle is taken into custody under the provisions
of this chapter or under any provisions of state law, the department shall
notify, within three (3) days, by certified mail with five (5) days return
receipt, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lien holders of
record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property
found in the vehicle, addressed to their last known address of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed. The notice shall:
      1.   Describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle.
      2.   Describe the personal property found in the vehicle.
      3.   Describe the location of the facility where the vehicle is being
held.
      4.   Inform the persons receiving notice:
         a.   Of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property
within twenty one (21) days after the effective date of the notice;
         b.   That the right can be exercised upon payment of all towing,
preservation, notice and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in
custody;
         c.   That failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right
to reclaim the vehicle within the reclaiming period shall be deemed a waiver by
the owner and all lienholders of all right, title, claim, and interest in the
vehicle;
         d.   That failure to reclaim the vehicle is deemed consent to the sale
of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher.
      5.   State that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or
personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or
personal property by the Department or the assessment of fees and charges
provided by this Chapter may request a hearing to contest these matters in
accordance with the provisions of Section
5-4-6 of this Chapter.
      6.   State that a request for a hearing must be in writing and received
by the Department prior to the expiration of the twenty one (21) day reclaiming
period.
      7.   State that in the event a hearing is requested immediate release of
the vehicle may be obtained by posting a cash bond as required by subsection 5-
4-5C of this Chapter.
   B.   Extend Time For Reclamation: The owner or any person receiving notice
may, by written request received by the Department prior to the expiration of
the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period, obtain an additional fourteen (14)
days within which the vehicle may be reclaimed.
   C.   Published Notice: Notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to
meet the requirements of this Chapter. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles but shall be published within the same
time requirements and shall contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in this Section. Published notice shall be used if:
      1.   The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; or
      2.   The registration contains no address for the owner; or
      3.   It is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity
and address of all lienholders.
   D.   Failure To Reclaim: If the persons receiving notice do not request a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the reclaiming period, the owner of the vehicle or owners of the
personal property shall no longer have any right, title, claim or interest in
or to the vehicle.
   E.   No Right To Reclaim: No court in any case of law in equity shall
recognize any right, title, claim or interest of the owner and lienholders
after the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-5: IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND BOND:
   A.   Evidence Of Identity: Before the owner or other person lawfully
entitled to possession of any vehicle that has been impounded under the
provisions of this Chapter or any other provision of law may recover such
vehicle, such person shall present to the Department evidence of such person's
identity and right to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its
return, and shall pay the costs of:
      1.   An impoundment fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00);
      2.   Towing charges.
      3.   Preservation charges.
      4.   Storage charges.
      5.   Notice charges.
   B.   Charges Set By Council: The amount of the charges specified in
subsection A1 of this Section shall be set by the Council. The towing charges,
preservation charges and storage charges shall be limited to the actual costs
of such charges.
   C.   Posting Cash Bond: If a hearing is requested under subsection 5-4-4A5,
the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle shall be
permitted to secure the immediate release of the vehicle upon posting a cash
bond in an amount equal to the sum of:
      1.   The fees required by subsection A of this Section.
      2.   The amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which there
is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant.
(Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Request For Hearing: The registered owner, any lienholder of record, or
duly authorized agents thereof, may object to the legality of the impoundment
or the assessment of fees and request a hearing thereon. Request for a hearing
after an impoundment shall be made in writing and received by the Department
prior to the expiration of the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period. No person
shall be entitled to more than one hearing on each impoundment. The objector
shall be informed of the reason for the impoundment and a hearing shall be held
before a hearing officer who shall be the City Manager or his designee. Upon
request of the objector, the hearing may be set for a later time and date.
(Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987; 1996 Code)
   B.   Decision Of Hearing Officer: At the hearing, the hearing officer shall
consider the objection, make a decision as to the legality of the impoundment
and immediately notify the objector in writing of the decision. The decision
shall state either of the following:
      1.   That impoundment is authorized by law, an explanation for the basis
of that decision, and an itemization of the charges assessed pursuant to
subsection 5-4-5A. Any bond posted under subsection 5-4-5C shall be applied to
the satisfaction of the charges itemized by the hearing officer.
      2.   That impoundment is not authorized by law, and if the vehicle has
been impounded, that the vehicle will be released to the objector upon
compliance with subsection 5-4-5A and that all costs of removal, preservation,
storage, and notification accruing through the fourth day after the hearing
officer's decision are waived and will be paid by the City. All costs accruing
thereafter shall be paid by objector prior to recovery of the vehicle. Any bond
posted under subsection 5-4-5C shall be refunded, less any amounts for
outstanding or unsettled traffic violations.
   C.   Decision Final: The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
   D.   Failure To Appear: Failure of the objector to appear at the scheduled
hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to hearing and the bond shall be
forfeited.
   E.   Determination As Abandoned Vehicle: The only issue to be considered at
the hearing shall be the validity of the determination that the vehicle is an
abandoned vehicle. The hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any
outstanding or unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-
1987)
5-4-7: AUCTION OR DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
The Department shall follow the procedures in Iowa Code, section 321.89(4) for
the auction or disposal of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-8: JUNK VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Except as hereinafter provided, it is hereby declared that the parking,
leaving, or storage of a junk vehicle upon either public or private property
within the corporate limits of the City constitutes a threat to the health and
safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of section 657.1 of
the Code of Iowa. If any junk vehicle is stored upon private property or public
property in violation thereof, the owner of the property shall be prima facie
liable for said violation. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-9: AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE:
The Department may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in
this Chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the
identity of vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts
thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 91-3, 5-20-
1991)
5-4-10: NOTICE TO ABATE:
   A.   Whenever the Department shall find a junk vehicle placed or stored on
public or private property within the City in violation of Section
5-4-8 of this Chapter, the Department shall notify, by certified mail with five
(5) days return receipt, the following persons:
      1.   The last known registered owner of the vehicle.
      2.   All lienholders of record.
      3.   The owner of the property.
      4.   The occupant of the property.
   B.   The notice to abate shall:
      1.   Describe, to the extent possible, the year, make, model, and color
of the vehicle.
      2.   Describe the location of the vehicle.
      3.   State that the vehicle constitutes a nuisance under the provision of
this Chapter.
      4.   State that the owner of the property shall remove or repair the said
junk vehicle within twenty one (21) days.
      5.   State that any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may
request, in writing, within the twenty one (21) day limit, a hearing to
determine whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists.
      6.   State that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed or
if no request for a hearing is made within twenty one (21) days, the City will
abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the property owner.
   C.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. If the notice is returned
undelivered by the U.S. Post Office, action to abate the nuisance shall be
continued to date not less than twenty one (21) days from the date of such
return. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-11: DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE OR REPAIR:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: The owner of the property upon which a junk
vehicle is stored in violation of the provisions of Section
5-4-8 of this Chapter shall within twenty one (21) days after receipt of the
notice to abate from the Department remove the motor vehicle or machinery to a
lawful place of storage without the City limits, or repair the defects that
cause such motor vehicle or machinery to violate the provisions of this
Chapter, including licensing in the case of a motor vehicle not currently
licensed.
   B.   Delay Removal Pending Decision: If a hearing is requested under Section
5-4-12 of this Chapter, the duty of the owner to remove or repair the junk
vehicle shall be suspended pending the decision. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-12: HEARING PROCEDURES; JUNK VEHICLE:
   A.   Request For Hearing: Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or
condition may request a hearing before the City Manager or his designee, to
determine whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists.
   B.   Filing Request: A request for a hearing shall be made in writing and
filed with the City Clerk within the twenty one (21) day limit or
      1.   The right to hearing shall be considered waived; and
      2.   It will be conclusively presumed that the nuisance or prohibited
condition exists and it must be abated as ordered.
   C.   Time And Place For Hearing: The City Manager shall, within fifteen (15)
days after the filing of the request for hearing, fix the time and place of the
hearing, which shall be within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request.
   D.   Written Decision: At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager,
shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If a nuisance
is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time.
   E.   Final Decision: The decision shall be final. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-13: ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
Municipality. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-14: COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expenses incurred to the property
owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown
by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify
the costs to the County Auditor and the costs shall then be collected with, and
in the same manner, as general property taxes. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-15: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   A vehicle in an enclosed building.
   B.   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
district properly zoned therefor, as authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of
this City, when necessary to the operation of said business enterprise.
   C.   A vehicle in an appropriate storage space or depository maintained in a
lawful place and lawful manner by this City. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-16: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT:
Any person who shall interfere in any way with the enforcement provision of
this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor and punished
accordingly. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-1987)
5-4-17: PENALTY:
Any person failing to remove or repair any junk vehicle or machinery stored on
private property in violation of Section
5-4-8 of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or a
fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or both. (Ord. 87-6, 9-21-
1987)
CHAPTER 5
NOISE CONTROL, MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Purpose
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: Maximum Operating Sound Levels
5-5-4: Adequate Mufflers Or Sound Dissipative Devices
5-5-5: Motor Vehicle Horns And Signaling Devices
5-5-6: Standing Motor Vehicles
5-5-7: Exempt Vehicles
5-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish noise regulating standards for
motor vehicles in the City. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the contents clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall have the meaning shown:
dBA: The composite abbreviation for A-weighted sound level, and the unit of
sound level, the decibel.
GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING OR GCWR: The value specified by the
manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a combination vehicle.
MUFFLER OR SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE: A device for abating the sound of escaping
gases of an internal combustion engine.
SOUND LEVEL: The A-weighted sound pressure level measured with a fast response
using an instrument complying with specifications for sound level meters of the
American National Standards Institute, Inc., (ANSI SI.4-1971 or the latest
approved revision thereof) or its successor bodies, except that only A-
weighting and fast dynamic response need be provided.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An apparatus or instrument including a microphone,
amplifier, attenuator, output meter and frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound levels. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
5-5-3: MAXIMUM OPERATING SOUND LEVELS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a motor
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right of way at any time in such a manner
that it emits sound which exceeds the level set forth in Table 1 of this
Section for the specified speed limit zone, regardless of the actual speed of
the motor vehicle or motorcycle.
Table 1. Motor vehicle and motorcycle maximum sound levels measured at fifteen
(15) meters fifty feet (50') with a sound level meter.
In the event the distance is less than fifty feet (50'), such listed sound
level will be corrected to reflect the equivalent sound levels for the actual
distance.
 
                                           Sound Level In dBA
                                          Speed Limit Speed Limit
Vehicle Class                              35 MPH Or   Over 35
                                           Less        MPH
Motor carrier vehicle engaged in
interstate commerce of GVWR or             86          90
GCWR of 10,000 lbs. or more
All other motor vehicles of GVWR           86          90
or GCWR of 10,000 lbs. or more
Any motorcycle                             82          86
Any other motor vehicle or any combination 76          82
of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle
 
(Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
5-5-4: ADEQUATE MUFFLERS OR SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICES:
   A.   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or
motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device in
good working order and in constant operation.
   B.   No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or
rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repairs or
replacement, any muffler sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or
motorcycle. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
5-5-5: MOTOR VEHICLE HORNS AND SIGNALING DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to sound any horn or other auditory signaling device which
produces the sound level in excess of 85 dBA at fifteen (15) meters fifty feet
(50'), except as a warning of danger. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
5-5-6: STANDING MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or any auxiliary
engine of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross weight rating of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than twenty
(20) minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of property zoned and used for residential purposes except
where vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure. This Section
shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of
the engine to unload or load their vending loads. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-1980, eff.
7-1-1980)
5-5-7: EXEMPT VEHICLES:
The following are exempt from the operation of this Chapter:
   A.   Emergency vehicles, designated as such by the State and ambulances on
emergency call.
   B.   Construction or agricultural equipment and street maintenance equipment
that are on a job site or traveling on streets and highways. (Ord. 80-8, 6-16-
1980, eff. 7-1-1980)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Establishment And Purpose
6-1-2: Organization
6-1-3: Standards For Training
6-1-4: Duties Of Police Chief
6-1-5: Civil Service
6-1-6: Uniforms
6-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Police Department is hereby established to provide for preservation of the
peace and enforcement of law within the corporate limits of the City. It is the
purpose of this Chapter to specify how the Police Department shall be organized
and operated. (1983 Code §
2-1-1)
6-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
The Police Department shall consist of all law enforcement officers performing
duties authorized by law or ordinance. The Department shall be headed by a
Police Chief appointed by the City Manager (with the approval of the Council).
(1983 Code §
2-1-2)
6-1-3: STANDARDS FOR TRAINING:
The Police Chief and police officers shall comply with the minimum standards
for training as required pursuant to chapter 80b, Iowa Code. (1996 Code)
6-1-4: DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF:
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief:
   A.   To perform all duties of the Marshal or Police Chief which are required
by State law and City ordinance;
   B.   To enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations, and to bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court;
   C.   To execute and return all writs and other processes directed to him;
   D.   To have charge of the City jail and of all persons held therein,
including conveying prisoners from the City jail to other facilities;
   E.   To aid Municipal officers in the execution of their official duties,
when requested; to execute order of City boards and commissions; and to report
to the Council upon his activities as Police Chief, when requested;
   F.   To be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles and equipment for
the Department; (1983 Code §
2-1-3)
   G.   To make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter, as needed for the detailed operation of the Police Department, subject
to the approval of the City Manager. Such rules shall cover off-duty and on-
duty conduct and activity of members, the wearing and care of the uniform, the
use and practice with side arms and other police weapons, the use of police
radio and other communications, and such other matters as the Police Chief
determines to be necessary for the operation of the Police Department. In the
event of an emergency, the Police Chief may make temporary rules for the
protection of the system until due consideration by the City Manager may be
had. (1983 Code §
2-1-3; 1996 Code)
6-1-5: CIVIL SERVICE:
The provisions regarding policies of chapters 400 and 411 of the 1975 Code of
Iowa as amended are hereby adopted. (1983 Code §
2-1-4)
6-1-6: UNIFORMS:
The City shall furnish police officers with two (2) sets of uniforms. (1983
Code §
2-1-5)
CHAPTER 2
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Force Established; Purpose
6-2-2: Training Standards
6-2-3: Status Of Reserve Peace Officers
6-2-4: Carrying Weapons
6-2-5: Supplementary Capacity
6-2-6: Supervision Of Reserve Peace Officers
6-2-7: Employee-Pay
6-2-8: Benefits When Injured
6-2-9: Insurance
6-2-10: No Participation In Pension Fund Or Retirement System
6-2-11: Bylaws, Rules And Regulations
6-2-1: FORCE ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
A force of reserve peace officers for the City is hereby established to
supplement the regular Police Department of said City in crime prevention and
control, preservation of the peace and enforcement of the law within the
corporate limits of said City. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-2: TRAINING STANDARDS:
   A.   Initial Training: The Chief of Police of the Police Department shall
establish minimum initial training standards requiring at least thirty (30)
hours of instruction for members of the reserve force. Upon satisfactory
completion of training, the Chief of Police shall certify the individual as a
reserve peace officer. Initial training shall be completed within one year from
the date of appointment. The training standards established by the Chief of
Police shall be approved by the Council of the City. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980; 1996
Code)
   B.   Additional Training: During the second through fourth year, forty (40)
hours of training shall be provided each year, including ten (10) hours working
with a regular officer. (1996 Code)
6-2-3: STATUS OF RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS:
Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the orders and at the
discretion of the Chief of Police. While in the actual performance of official
duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights,
privileges, obligations and duties as other peace officers. (Ord. 80, 7-21-
1980)
6-2-4: CARRYING WEAPONS:
A reserve peace officer shall not carry a weapon in the line of duty until he
or she has been approved by the City Council and certified by the Iowa Law
Enforcement Academy Council. Individuals serving as reserve peace officers for
the City as of July 1, 1980, are exempt from the certification requirements of
this Section pending completion of approved training or until July 1, 1981,
whichever comes first. After approval and certification, a reserve peace
officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when authorized by the
Chief of Police. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-5: SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY:
Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the
regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular peace officers
without first complying with all requirements for regular peace officers. (Ord.
80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-6: SUPERVISION OF RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS:
Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to regular peace officers, shall
not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of regular peace
officers, and shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Chief of Police, unless
the Chief of Police designates alternate apparel for use when engaged in
assignments involving special investigation, civil process, court duty, jail
duties and handling of mental patients. Reserve peace officers shall not wear
an insignia of rank. The Police Department shall appoint a regular force police
officer as the reserve force coordinating and supervising officer. The regular
peace officer shall report directly to the Chief of Police. (Ord. 80, 7-21-
1980)
6-2-7: EMPLOYEE-PAY:
While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be
considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of one dollar
($1.00) per year. The Council of the City may provide additional monetary
assistance for the purchase and maintenance of uniforms and equipment used by
reserve peace officers, but not to exceed the allowance provided in section
337A.2 of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-8: BENEFITS WHEN INJURED:
Hospital and medical assistance and benefits as provided in chapter 85 of the
Code of Iowa shall be provided by the Council of the City to members of the
reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
(Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-9: INSURANCE:
Liability and false arrest insurance shall be provided by the Council of the
City to members of the reserve force while performing official duties in the
same manner as for a regular peace officer. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-10: NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
Reserve peace officers shall not be eligible for participation in a pension
fund or retirement system created by the laws of this State of which regular
peace officers may become members. (Ord. 80, 7-21-1980)
6-2-11: BYLAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The reserve peace officer force shall adopt bylaws for its organization and
rules and regulations for its operation, all with the advice and consent of the
City Manager and Chief of Police. Said bylaws, rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be effective only upon approval by the Council of the
City. (Ord. 80-12, 7-21-1980)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Minors Where Beer Is Sold
6-3-2: License Holder To Prohibit Minors
6-3-3: Assault
6-3-4: Disturbing The Peace
6-3-5: Fighting
6-3-6: Unlawful Assembly
6-3-7: Excessive Noise
6-3-8: Carrying A Concealed Weapon
6-3-9: Burning
6-3-10: Resisting An Officer
6-3-11: Under The Influence Of Controlled Substance
6-3-12: Posting
6-3-13: Discharging Firearms
6-3-14: Public Property
6-3-15: False Alarms
6-3-16: Unlawful Use Of Telephone
6-3-17: Abandoned Refrigerators
6-3-18: Blocking The Public Way
6-3-19: Snowmobile Curfew
6-3-20: Barbed Wire And Electrical Fences
6-3-21: Throwing And Shooting
6-3-22: Liquor And Beer Possession; Consumption
6-3-23: Trapping
6-3-24: Drug Paraphernalia
6-3-25: Cigarette Sales
6-3-26: Roller Skates, Bicycles And Skateboards
6-3-27: Criminal Mischief
6-3-28: Trespassing
6-3-29: Interference With Official Acts
6-3-30: Closing Of Public Parks
6-3-31: Sniffing Glue Or Other Chemical Substances
6-3-1: MINORS WHERE BEER IS SOLD:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
enter or remain within any place of business, where beer or intoxicating
liquors are sold and where the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor accounts for
fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross business transacted therein.
A licensed establishment holding a class B beer permit that also holds either a
native brewer's license or a brewer's notice from the federal government is
hereby exempted from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 09-26, 12-7-2009)
If a place of business where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold and where
the sale of beer or intoxicating liquors accounts for fifty percent (50%) or
more of the gross business transacted therein, is also providing entertainment
(bands) in the establishment and a member of the band is under the age of
twenty one (21) years, then at least seven (7) days prior to the date the minor
will be performing in the establishment, the establishment shall file an
application with the chief of police which sets out the name of the band, the
dates they will appear at the establishment and the name and date of birth of
the individual member of the band who is under the age of twenty one (21). Upon
receipt of the application, the police chief is hereby authorized to make
appropriate investigation and then issue a written approval for the underage
person to be in the establishment on those dates if appropriate. If the
establishment fails to submit an application at least seven (7) days prior to
the date the minor will be performing at the establishment, the chief of police
is still authorized to approve the application; however, the business owner/
applicant shall be required to pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) late application
fee. (Ord. 14-04, 4-7-2014)
6-3-2: LICENSE HOLDER TO PROHIBIT MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a class B permit or a class C
liquor license in whose place of business the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor accounts for fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross business
transacted therein, to allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to enter his/her place of business or to remain therein. It shall be unlawful
for any person to take into the place of business of the holder of a class B
beer permit or a class C liquor license wherein the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor accounts for fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross
business transacted therein, any person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
regardless of whether or not such person is the child or ward of the person
entering such place of business.
A licensed establishment holding a class B beer permit that also holds either a
native brewer's license or a brewer's notice from the federal government is
hereby exempted from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 09-26, 12-7-2009)
All veteran service organizations (VFW, Am Vets or American Legion) who hold a
class B permit or a class C liquor license are exempted from the requirements
that persons under the age of twenty one (21) years are prohibited from
entering the business or to remain therein even if the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquors accounts for fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross
business transacted therein. (Ord. 13-07, 7-1-2013)
If a place of business holding a class B permit or a class C liquor license in
whose place of business the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor accounts for
fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross business transacted therein, is also
providing entertainment (bands) in the establishment and a member of the band
is under the age of twenty one (21) years, then at least seven (7) days prior
to the date the minor will be performing in the establishment, the
establishment shall file an application with the chief of police which sets out
the name of the band, the dates they will appear at the establishment and the
name and date of birth of the individual member of the band who is under the
age of twenty one (21). Upon receipt of the application, the police chief is
hereby authorized to make appropriate investigation and then issue a written
approval for the underage person to be in the establishment on those dates if
appropriate. If the establishment fails to submit an application at least seven
(7) days prior to the date the minor will be performing at the establishment,
the chief of police is still authorized to approve the application; however,
the business owner/applicant shall be required to pay a fifty dollar ($50.00)
late application fee. (Ord. 14-04, 4-7-2014)
6-3-3: ASSAULT:
   A.   Definition: A person commits an assault when, without justification,
the person does any of the following:
      1.   Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is
intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
      2.   Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate
physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
      3.   Intentionally points any firearm toward another, or displays in a
threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another.
Provided, that where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and
such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace, the act shall not be an assault. (1996
Code)
   B.   Prohibited Act: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply, or to
threaten or attempt to apply, an unlawful and unpermitted physical force to the
person of another in a rude and insolent manner, or with the intent to do
physical harm, with the apparent ability to execute any attempt or threat.
(Ord. 508, 8-15-1960)
6-3-4: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance in a
tavern, store, public meeting or any other place where citizens are peacefully
and lawfully assembled. (Ord. 506)
6-3-5: FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons voluntarily or by agreement to
engage in any fight, or use any blows or violence towards each other in any
angry or quarrelsome manner in a public place, to the disturbance of others.
(Ord. 506)
6-3-6: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It shall be unlawful for three (3) or more persons in a violent or tumultuous
manner to assemble together to do an unlawful act, or when together, to commit
or attempt to commit an act, whether lawful or unlawful, in any unlawful,
violent or tumultuous manner, to the disturbance of others. (Ord. 506)
6-3-7: EXCESSIVE NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to disturb the peace by excessive, loud or unusual noise,
by blowing horns or ringing bells, or by the use of sirens, radios or any type
of speaking devices or noise makers, except as permitted by the provision of
this code. (Ord. 506)
6-3-8: CARRYING A CONCEALED WEAPON:
Any person who shall carry on his/her person any concealed weapon shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, except that this provision shall not apply to
police officers or other persons whose duty is to execute process or warrants
or make arrests, or others having permits to carry concealed weapons pursuant
to Iowa Code, section 724.4. (Ord. 424, 11-5-1951; amd. 1996 Code)
6-3-9: BURNING:
   A.   Garbage And Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or
cause to be burned outside of a building any garbage or refuse other than dry
leaves or twigs and branches with a diameter not to exceed three inches (3").
   B.   Leaves And Branches:
      1.   Person In Attendance: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or
cause to be burned outside of a building dry leaves or twigs and branches with
a diameter not to exceed three inches (3") unless there is a person in
attendance during such burning with a suitably attached water hose capable of
quenching the fire in case it should start to spread.
      2.   Burning On Streets Or Alleys: The burning of leaves or other
material on any of the streets or alleys, including paved streets or alleys, or
in grader ditches, adjoining the traveled portion of such streets or alleys, is
hereby prohibited.
      3.   Adjoining Landowners: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or
cause to be burned outside of a building any dry leaves or twigs and branches
with a diameter not to exceed three inches (3") not owned or generated by the
owner of the property where the burning occurs; except, adjoining landowners
may burn said leaves or branches together. (Ord. 91-7, 9-16-1991)
6-3-10: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
No person shall knowingly or wilfully resist or oppose the police chief or the
city police officers, or any other peace officer or any person authorized by
law, in serving or attempting to execute any legal writ, rule, order or process
whatsoever or resist any such officer in the discharge of the officer's duties
without such writ, rule order or process. (Ord. 441, 1-18-1954)
6-3-11: UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE:
A person shall not be under the influence or simulate being under the influence
of a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act
in Public Places. (Ord. 20-07, 8-3-2020)
6-3-12: POSTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or place any sign, cardboard or
foreign substance upon or paint any sign upon, or deface in any manner any
post, telegraph, telephone or fence post, tree or other private or public
property without the permission of the owner thereof 1 . (Ord. 297, 11-21-1921)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-14-3 of this code.
6-3-13: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement officers to fire
or shoot a shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver within the City limits without
first securing a special permit from the Mayor. The Mayor may issue a special
permit to allow the firing of a shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver within the
City limits for good cause shown. (Ord. 297, 11-21-1921)
6-3-14: PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Commission of any of the acts named in the following Section by any person will
constitute a violation of this Chapter:
   A.   Defacing Public Grounds: To cut, break or deface any tree or shrub in a
public park, public place or on any avenue thereto by wilfully defacing,
cutting, breaking or injuring, except by authority of the Park Commission or
City Manager. (Ord. 76-14, 4-5-1976)
   B.   Injuring New Pavement: Wilfully injuring new pavement in any street
alley or sidewalk by wilfully driving, walking or making marks on such pavement
before it is ready for use. (Ord. 76-14, 4-5-1976; 1996 Code)
   C.   Destroying Park Equipment: To destroy or injure any property or
equipment in public swimming pools, playgrounds, parks or public places by
wilfully defacing, breaking, damaging, mutilating or cutting.
   D.   Injury To Public Library Books Or Property: To wilfully, maliciously or
wantonly tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any
newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property
belonging to any public library or reading room. (Ord. 76-14, 4-5-1976)
   E.   Removing, Defacing Or Destroying Street Signs Or Markings: To wilfully
remove, throw down, deface, destroy or carry away from any highway, street,
alley, avenue or bridge, any light, guard, sign or marking erected or placed
thereon for the purpose of regulating traffic and providing for the safety
thereof without the consent of the person in control of the device.
   F.   Removing, Destroying Or Injuring Flags, Flagpoles And Equipment: To
wilfully remove, throw down, deface, destroy or carry away from any flagpole
erected on the City right of way, any flag or flagpole equipment, without the
permission of the City Manager. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
6-3-15: FALSE ALARMS:
Any person who gives or causes to be given any false alarm of a fire shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 110, 6-7-1987)
6-3-16: UNLAWFUL USE OF TELEPHONE:
It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to intimidate, threaten,
harass, annoy or offend, to telephone another and use any obscene, lewd or
profane language or suggest any lewd or lascivious act, or threaten to inflict
injury or physical harm to the person or property of any person. It shall also
be unlawful to disturb by repeated anonymous telephone calls, the peace, quiet
or right of privacy of any person at the place where the telephone call or
calls were received. (Ord. 75-12, 11-3-1975)
6-3-17: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful to place, or to allow to be placed any discarded,
abandoned, unattended or unused refrigerator, ice box or similar container
equipped with an air-tight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which
cannot be released from the inside, in a location accessible to children
outside any building or within any unoccupied or abandoned building without
first removing the door, lid, snap lock or other locking device from said ice
box, refrigerator or similar container. This provision applies equally to the
owner of any such refrigerator, ice box or similar container and to the owner
or occupant of the premises where the hazard is permitted to remain. (1983 Code
§ 7-1-26)
6-3-18: BLOCKING THE PUBLIC WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to collect, assemble or group
together and after being so collected, assembled or grouped together, to stand
or loiter on any sidewalk, park on any street corner, or at any other place to
the hindrance or obstruction to free passage of any person or persons passing
on or along any sidewalk or street. (1983 Code § 7-1-27)
6-3-19: SNOWMOBILE CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the City
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.,
except for the operation for emergency purposes by peace officers or parties
designated by peace officers. (1983 Code § 7-1-28)
6-3-20: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRICAL FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any fences consisting of barbed wire or of
material carrying any electrical charge without a special permit from the
mayor. (1983 Code § 7-1-29)
6-3-21: THROWING AND SHOOTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw stones or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous
instruments or toys on or into any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or public
place. It shall also be unlawful for any person, while on one's own property or
another's, to fire or shoot any of the above instruments in a reckless or
careless manner which could threaten and injure other persons' adjoining
private or public property or any public space. The discharge of arrows by a
qualified bow hunter participating in a sanctioned hunt within the city shall
be exempt from this restriction. (Ord. 08-10, 9-19-2008)
6-3-22: LIQUOR AND BEER POSSESSION; CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or consume
alcoholic liquor or beer upon the public streets or highways, or alcoholic
liquors or beer in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license, or to possess or consume alcoholic liquors or beer on any
public school property or while attending any public or private school related
functions, to possess any open container of alcoholic liquors or beer upon the
public streets or highways, including the sidewalk within the public right of
way and on any private parking lot, within the city. (Ord. 01-09, 7-16-2001)
   B.   Young Park: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume
alcoholic liquors or beer on the premises of Young park in the city. (Ord. 82-
5, 5-3-1982)
   C.   Penalty: Any person who is found to have violated subsection A or B of
this section shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus
surcharge and costs. A court appearance shall not be required if the fine is
paid in full prior to the date set for the person's court appearance. (Ord. 97-
10, 5-19-1997)
6-3-23: TRAPPING:
No person shall set out or use a steel claw, or box trap outside of any
structure or building for the purpose of taking, killing, maiming, wounding,
ensnaring, trapping or capturing an animal or which is injurious to persons or
animals except for the following:
   A.   Any trap designed for the primary use of capturing mice, rats, gophers,
moles, or aquatic rodents which are trapped in water;
   B.   Any trapping by a governmental unit to capture animals which are
creating a public nuisance or for the protection of public or private property;
   C.   Any trapping by a business or person licensed by the state department
of natural resources to trap and relocate nondomestic animals or wildlife.
   D.   Any business or person wishing to trap in the city limits shall file a
copy of its or his or her license from the state department of natural
resources with the city clerk at the city hall. (Ord. 98-01, 3-2-1998)
6-3-24: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prohibit the use, possession
with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of "drug paraphernalia" as defined
herein.
   B.   Controlled Substance Defined: The term "controlled substance", as used
in this section, shall be as defined in the uniform controlled substance act,
chapter 204 of the Iowa Code, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
   C.   Drug Paraphernalia Defined: The term "drug paraphernalia", as used in
this section, shall mean all equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
uniform controlled substance act, chapter 204 of the Iowa Code. It includes,
but is not limited to:
      1.   Growing Kits: Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
      2.   Processing Kits: Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
      3.   Isomerization Devices: Isomerization devices used, intended for use
or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
a controlled substance.
      4.   Testing Equipment: Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of controlled substances.
      5.   Scales: Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for
use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
      6.   Dilutents: Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine,
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose used, intended for use or
designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
      7.   Separators And Sifters: Separation gins and sifters used, intended
for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
      8.   Mixing Devices: Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
      9.   Containers: Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
      10.   Storage Containers: Containers and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
      11.   Injecting Devices: Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
      12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Devices: Objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing heroine,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls.
         b.   Water pipes.
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices.
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
         e.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such
as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand.
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
         g.   Chamber pipes.
         h.   Carburetor pipes.
         i.   Electric pipes.
         j.   Air-driven pipes.
         k.   Chillums.
         l.   Bongs.
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   D.   Determining Factors: In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this Section, the following factors
should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
      1.   Statements: Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
      2.   Prior Convictions: Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object under any State or Federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
      3.   Proximity To Violation: The proximity of the object in time and
space to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, chapter
204 of the Iowa Code.
      4.   Proximity To Substances: The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
      5.   Residue: The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object.
      6.   Evidence Of Intent: Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent
of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom
the owner knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, chapter 204 of
the Iowa Code.
      7.   Innocence Of An Owner: The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, chapter 204 of the Iowa Code, should not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
      8.   Instructions: Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use.
      9.   Descriptive Materials: Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
      10.   Advertising: National and local advertising concerning its use.
      11.   Displayed: The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
      12.   Licensed Distributor Or Dealer: Whether the owner or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
      13.   Sales Ratios: Direct or circumstantial evidence of ratio of sales
of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      14.   Legitimate Uses: The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
      15.   Expert Testimony: Expert testimony concerning its use.
   E.   Person Defined: "Person", as used in this section, shall mean an
individual, corporation, business, trust, estate, partnership or association,
or any other legal entity.
   F.   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to use,
or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the uniform controlled substance act, chapter 204 of the Iowa
Code.
   G.   Manufacture, Delivery Or Offering For Sale Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is
unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture
with intent to deliver or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the
drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for
use, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of the uniform controlled substance
act, chapter 204 of the Iowa Code.
   H.   Legislative Intent: It is the purpose and intent of the board of
supervisors to promote the health, safety and morals of the citizens of
Knoxville. The use or administration of controlled substances is clearly
illegal. The banning of all objects in close connection and adopted for the use
of controlled substances should also be controlled because of lack of social or
practical purposes of such objects or paraphernalia, whether the use be by
adults or minors. It is also strong public policy to protect children from the
unsupervised exposure and familiarity with drug paraphernalia. In addition to
education about the items in school and at home, it is also essential to
discourage open use, possession, manufacture and commerce of these drug-related
items.
   I.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision or subsection of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
   J.   Nuisance: In addition to the above, or in lieu thereof, violation of
this section shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated in the manner
provided in Iowa Code 364.12(3)(h) by injunction in Iowa district court or by
the nuisance abatement proceedings as set forth in this code. (Ord. 92-8, 10-
19-1992)
6-3-25: CIGARETTE SALES:
An employee of a retailer who sells, gives, or otherwise supplies any tobacco,
tobacco products, or cigarettes to any individual under the age of eighteen
(18) is guilty of a simple misdemeanor 1 .
If an employee violates the provisions of this section, the schedule of
penalties shall be as follows:
   A.   For a first violation, the scheduled fine is one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   B.   For a second violation, the scheduled fine is two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   C.   For a third or subsequent violation, the scheduled fine is five hundred
dollars ($500.00) 2 . (Ord. 01-05, 4-16-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 453A.3(1)(b).
2 1. IC § 805.8(11)(b).
6-3-26: ROLLER SKATES, BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use roller skates, in-line skates,
bicycles, skateboards or other similar devices in and around the downtown
square or on any public or private facility (unless they are an owner or
invitee) other than the skatepark. The above devices may be used as a mode of
transportation on city sidewalks and streets in a safe and responsible manner
that would not put the public at risk of injury or harm. Person(s) violating
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 03-05,
8-18-2003)
6-3-27: CRIMINAL MISCHIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person not having a right to do so to
intentionally damage, deface, alter, or destroy any tangible property. Persons
violating this section shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-07, 5-
17-2004)
6-3-28: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon or in property
without justification, after being notified or requested to abstain from
entering, or to remove or to vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person
in lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, or any peace
officer, or public employee whose duty is to supervise the use or maintenance
of the property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or in property for the
purpose of interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or in property and wrongfully
using or removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon
or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual
permission of the owner in lawful possession. Persons violating this section
shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-07, 5-17-2004)
6-3-29: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer. Persons violating this section shall
be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 04-07, 5-17-
2004)
6-3-30: CLOSING OF PUBLIC PARKS:
   A.   Public Parks: It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain
upon or in city of Knoxville public parks, between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. without justification. This includes
all properties associated with Auld park, Young's park, Edwards' park, the
skatepark, and the Recreation Center outdoor use areas.
   B.   Provisions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any event
previously sanctioned by the city or the Knoxville chamber of commerce
occurring in the parks during such restricted hours.
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a simple
misdemeanor as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 07-05, 8-
6-2007)
6-3-31: SNIFFING GLUE OR OTHER CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES:
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or
nervous system, smell or inhale the fumes from any glue, cement, aerosol spray,
inhalers, and other solvents or chemicals having the property of releasing
vapors; however, this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any medicine
or anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. (Ord. 20-08, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. DOGS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Running At Large
6-4A-2: Animal Waste Removal
6-4A-3: Duties Of Animal Control Officer
6-4A-4: Release Of Impounded Dog
6-4A-5: Removal From Pound
6-4A-6: Disturbing The Peace
6-4A-7: Not Permitted On Park Or Cemetery Premises
6-4A-8: Penalties
6-4A-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
The owner or custodian of any dog that runs at large at any time within the
City shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A dog shall be deemed running at
large unless it is located within the fenced in premises of its owner,
contained within a duly operational invisible electric fence, attached to a
leash held by a competent person or secured by a leash upon and within the
owner's property to prevent escape, restrained within a motor vehicle; or in an
animal hospital or kennel. (Ord. 09-14, 5-18-2009)
6-4A-2: ANIMAL WASTE REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in charge of a dog or other animal
to fail to clean up and/or remove, as soon as possible, any excrement or
droppings deposited by said dog or other animal on any public property, public
right-of-way, or property of another. The provisions of this section do not
apply to dogs used to guide the visually impaired, or other dogs used to aid
persons with disabilities while such dogs are acting in this capacity. (Ord.
03-09, 11-17-2003)
6-4A-3: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, his/her deputies and
assistants, to capture any dog running at large within the City during the
prohibited period and impound such dog for a period of up to seven (7) days. If
such officer or officers are unable to catch such dog in order to impound the
same, they shall have the authority to shoot said dog with a tranquilizer gun
or in case of a vicious dog, he/she may call a law enforcement officer to shoot
the dog with safety. (Ord. 318, 5-6-1929; amd. Ord. 03-09, 11-17-2003; Ord. 18-
14, 9-4-2018)
If there is no currently appointed animal control officer, the Chief of Police
may designate a person or persons to fulfill these duties. (Ord. 18-14, 9-4-
2018)
6-4A-4: RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED DOG:
If, within seven (7) days after the impounding of a captured dog the
reclamation fee and all expenses associated with impounding the dog have been
paid by the owner to the Police Department or Marion County Humane Society the
dog shall be released to its owner, otherwise the animal control officer shall
cause such dog to be released to the Marion County Humane Society. No animal
over six (6) months of age will be released from impound prior to providing
current proof of rabies vaccination. (Ord. 18-14, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-5: REMOVAL FROM POUND:
Any person who shall, without the consent of the Knoxville Police Department
and the Humane Society, take or remove any dog from said pound, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-14, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-6: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to
cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and
habitual howling, yelping, barking or otherwise. (Ord., 6-2-1973; amd. Ord. 03-
09, 11-17-2003)
6-4A-7: NOT PERMITTED ON PARK OR CEMETERY PREMISES:
No owner of a dog shall allow or permit such dog to be on the premises of any
of the City parks or cemeteries of the City, whether or not said dog is on a
leash or under the control of some person. (Ord. 02-02, 2-18-2002; amd. Ord.
03-09, 11-17-2003)
6-4A-8: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article for a first offense
shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) which shall be due and
payable at the Knoxville Police Department or Marion County Humane Society. Any
person violating any provision of this article and being a second or subsequent
offender shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable at
the Knoxville Police Department or Marion County Humane Society. Only
violations that occurred during the prior twenty four (24) months will be
considered when determining if the current violation is a first, second, or
subsequent violation. (Ord. 18-14, 9-4-2018)
ARTICLE B. CATS
SECTION:
6-4B-1: Running At Large
6-4B-2: Animal Waste Removal
6-4B-3: Duties Of The Animal Control Officer
6-4B-4: Release Of Impounded Cat
6-4B-5: Action Of Cats Constituting A Nuisance
6-4B-6: Removal From Pound
6-4B-7: Penalties
6-4B-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any cat to allow the same to
run at large, at any time within the City. A cat shall be deemed running at
large unless it is located within the fenced in premises of its owner,
contained within a duly operational invisible electric fence, attached to a
leash held by a competent person, or secured by a leash upon and within the
owner's property to prevent escape, restrained within a motor vehicle; or in an
animal hospital or kennel. (Ord. 03-08, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 18-15, 9-4-2018)
6-4B-2: ANIMAL WASTE REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in charge of a cat or other animal
to fail to clean up and/or remove, as soon as possible, any excrement or
droppings deposited by said cat or other animal on any public property, public
right-of-way, or property of another. (Ord. 03-08, 11-17-2003)
6-4B-3: DUTIES OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, his/her deputies and
assistants, to capture any cat "running at large", as defined herein, and any
cat for which a complaint has been made stating the cat is disturbing any
person or property and is causing a "nuisance" as defined herein, and impound
such cat for a period of up to seven (7) days. In the case of a vicious cat,
the officer may call a law enforcement officer to shoot the cat with safety.
(Ord. 81-7, 6-1-1981, eff. 7-1-1981; amd. Ord. 03-08, 11-17-2003; Ord. 18-15,
9-4-2018)
If there is no currently appointed animal control officer, the Chief of Police
may designate a person or persons to fulfill these duties. (Ord. 18-15, 9-4-
2018)
6-4B-4: RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED CAT:
If, within seven (7) days after the impounding of a captured cat the
reclamation fee and all expenses associated with impounding the cat have been
paid by the owner to the Police Department or Marion County Humane Society the
cat shall be released to its owner, otherwise the animal control officer shall
cause such cat to be released to the Marion County Humane Society. No animal
over six (6) months of age will be released from impound prior to providing
current proof of rabies vaccination. (Ord. 18-15, 9-4-2018)
6-4B-5: ACTION OF CATS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a cat to allow or permit such cat
to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a cat to allow or permit such cat
to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons. (Ord. 81-7,
6-1-1981, eff. 7-1-1981)
   C.   No owner of a cat shall allow or permit such cat to be on the premises
of any of the City parks or cemeteries of the City, whether or not said cat is
on a leash or under the control of some person. (Ord. 02-03, 2-18-2002)
6-4B-6: REMOVAL FROM POUND:
Any person who shall, without the consent of the Knoxville Police Department
and the Humane Society, take or remove any cat from said pound, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-15, 9-4-2018)
6-4B-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article for a first offense
shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) which shall be due and
payable at the Knoxville Police Department or Marion County Humane Society. Any
person violating any provision of this article and being a second or subsequent
offender shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable at
the Knoxville Police Department or Marion County Humane Society. Only
violations that occurred during the prior twenty four (24) months will be
considered when determining if the current violation is a first, second, or
subsequent violation. (Ord. 18-15, 9-4-2018)
ARTICLE C. ILLEGAL AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4C-1: Definitions
6-4C-2: Keeping Of Illegal Animals Prohibited
6-4C-3: Illegal Animal Exceptions
6-4C-4: Impoundment And Disposition Of Illegal Animals
6-4C-5: Keeping Of Dangerous Animals Prohibited
6-4C-6: Dangerous Animal Exceptions
6-4C-7: Impoundment And Disposition Of Dangerous Animals
6-4C-8: Immediate Seizure Or Destruction Of Animals
6-4C-9: Permanent Removal From City
6-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Article, have the
meanings given in this Section:
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal including a dog, except for an illegal animal per
se, as listed in this Section, that has bitten or clawed a person or persons
while running at large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has
exhibited vicious propensities in present or past conduct, including such that
said animal:
   A.   Has bitten or clawed a person or persons on two (2) separate occasions
within a twelve (12) month period; or
   B.   Did bite or claw once causing injuries above the shoulders of a person;
or
   C.   Could not be controlled or restrained by the owner at the time of the
attack to prevent the occurrence; or
   D.   Has attacked any domestic animal or fowl on three (3) separate
occasions within a twelve (12) month period.
ILLEGAL ANIMAL: A. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which
is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting
serious injury upon or causing disease among, human beings or domestic animals
and having known tendencies as a species to do so;
   B.   Any animals declared to be illegal by the Board of Health or the City
Manager or his or her designee;
   C.   Any nondomesticated member of the order carnivora which as an adult
exceeds the weight of twenty (20) pounds;
   D.   The following animals which shall be deemed to be illegal animals per
se:
      1.   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx and bobcats;
      2.   Wolves, coyotes and foxes;
      3.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks and mink;
      4.   Raccoons;
      5.   Bears;
      6.   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
      7.   Bats;
      8.   Alligators, crocodiles and caimans;
      9.   Scorpions;
      10.   Snakes and reptiles that are venomous;
      11.   Snakes that are constrictors over six feet (6') in length;
      12.   Gila monsters;
      13.   Oppossums;
      14.   All apes, baboons and macaques;
      15.   Piranhas. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994)
6-4C-2: KEEPING OF ILLEGAL ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any illegal animal as a pet, nor act as
a temporary custodian for such animal, nor keep, shelter or harbor such animal
for any other purpose or in any other capacity within the City, except as
provided in Section
6-4C-3 of this Article. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994)
6-4C-3: ILLEGAL ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in Section
6-4C-2 of this Article shall not apply to the keeping of illegal animals in the
following circumstances:
   A.   The keeping of illegal animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational
or medical institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction, research
or study.
   B.   The keeping of illegal animals for exhibition to the public by a bona
fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show.
   C.   The keeping of illegal animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
   D.   The keeping of illegal animals by a wildlife rescue organization with
appropriate permit from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   E.   Any illegal animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to chapter 491 or 491A of
the Iowa Code.
   F.   The keeping of snakes and reptiles that are venomous and the keeping of
snakes that are constrictors six feet (6') in length and over, by any
individual eighteen (18) years of age or older who:
      1.   Has received a degree of bachelor of science, based upon courses of
instruction which include courses in herpetology, from an accredited college
level institution; or
      2.   Has successfully completed a course of instruction taught under the
auspices of the City Zoo on the proper handling, care and keeping of such
animals; or
      3.   Has completed a course of instruction of at least twenty (20) hours
duration at an accredited educational institution on the care, handling and
keeping of reptiles; and
      4.   Has applied for and received from the City Clerk a permit to keep
such animals, such application to be on a form approved by the City Council.
   G.   The keeping of illegal animals pursuant to a license issued by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994)
6-4C-4: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF ILLEGAL ANIMALS:
   A.   May Be Destroyed: In the event that an illegal animal is found at large
and unattended upon public property, park property, public right of way or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person
or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Animal Control Officer
or his or her designee, or the Chief of Police, be destroyed if it cannot be
confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the
confinement or capture of an illegal animal found at large, nor shall it have a
duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
   B.   Investigation Of Complaint; Seizure Of Animal: Upon the complaint of an
individual that a person is keeping; sheltering or harboring an illegal animal
per se on premises in the City, the Animal Control Officer shall cause the
matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the facts indicate that
the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring an
illegal animal per se in the City, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately
seize any such animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of
seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period the individual or
entity keeping, sheltering or harboring such illegal animal per se has not
petitioned the Marion County District Court seeking return of such illegal
animal per se, the Animal Control Officer shall cause the animal to be disposed
of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed
under Section
6-4C-3 of this Article to possess illegal animals, or destroy such animal in a
humane manner.
   C.   Remove Animal From City: Upon the complaint of any individual that a
person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal other than an
illegal animal per se on premises in the City, the Animal Control Officer shall
cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation the facts
indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or
harboring such an illegal animal in the City, the Animal Control Officer shall
order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the
City, permanently place the animal with an organization or group allowed under
Section
6-4C-3 of this Article to possess illegal animals, or destroy the animal,
within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be
contained in a notice to remove illegal animal, which notice shall be given in
writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the illegal animal, and
shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to
remove illegal animal shall not be required where such illegal animal has
previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person in which case
the Animal Control Officer shall cause the animal to be immediately seized or
destroyed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious
physical harm or death to any person.
   D.   Appeal Order To Remove: The order to remove an illegal animal, other
than an illegal animal per se, issued by the Animal Control Officer may be
appealed to the City Council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of
appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of
the order contained in the notice to remove illegal animal. Failure to file
such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the
order of the Animal Control Officer.
   E.   Notice Of Appeal; Hearing: The notice of appeal shall state the grounds
for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the
City Clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days
of the receipt of notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good
cause. The hearing shall be confined to the record made before the City Manager
or his or her designee and the arguments of the parties or their
representatives, but no additional evidence shall be taken. After such hearing,
the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Animal Control Officer.
Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed
with the City Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing, or any continued
session thereof.
   F.   Disposition Of Animal: If the City Council affirms the action of the
Animal Control Officer, the City Council shall order in its written decision
that the individual or entity owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such
illegal animal, remove such animal from the City, permanently place such animal
with an organization or group allowed under Section
6-4C-3 of this Article to possess illegal animals, or destroy it. The decision
and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom
rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of
the Animal Control Officer is not appealed and is not complied with within
three (3) days or the order of the City Council after appeal is not complied
with within three (3) days of its issuance, the Animal Control Officer or his
or her designee is authorized to seize and impound such illegal animal. An
animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the
end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the
decision and order of the Animal Control Officer or City Council was issued has
not petitioned the Marion County District Court for a review of said order, the
Animal Control Officer shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale,
permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under
Section
6-4C-3 of this Article to possess illegal animals, or destroy such animal in a
humane manner. Failure to comply with an order of the Animal Control Officer
issued pursuant hereto and not appealed, or of the City Council after appeal,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994; 1996 Code)
6-4C-5: KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter or harbor for any reason within the City a
"dangerous animal" so defined herein, except as provided in Section
6-4C-6 of this Article. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994)
6-4C-6: DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in Section
6-4C-5 of this Article shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals
under the control of a law enforcement or military agency. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-
1994)
6-4C-7: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Declare Animal As Dangerous: The Animal Control Officer or his or her
designee, in his or her discretion or upon receipt of a complaint alleging that
a particular animal is a "dangerous animal" as defined herein, may initiate
proceedings to declare such animal a dangerous animal. A hearing on the matter
shall be conducted by the City Manager or his or her designee. The person
owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring the animal in question shall be given
not less than seventy two (72) hours written notice of the time and place of
said hearing. Said notice shall set forth the description of the animal in
question and the basis for the allegation of dangerousness. The notice shall
also set forth that if the animal is determined to be dangerous, the owner will
be required to remove it from the City or allow it to be destroyed. The notice
shall be served upon any adult residing at the premises where the animal is
located, or may be posted on those premises if no adult is present to accept
service.
   B.   Order To Remove Animal: If, after hearing, the City Manager or his or
her designee determines that an animal is dangerous, the City Manager or his or
her designee shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping
the animal to remove it from the City, or to cause it to be destroyed in a
humane manner. The order shall immediately be served upon the individual or
entity against whom issued in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the
order is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the City
Manager or his or her designee is authorized to seize and impound the animal.
An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at
the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the
order of the City Manager or his or her designee was issued has not appealed
such order to the City Council, the manager or his or her designee shall cause
the animal to be destroyed.
   C.   Appeal Order To Remove: The order to remove or destroy a dangerous
animal issued by the City Manager or his or her designee may be appealed to the
City Council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be
filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order to
remove or destroy the dangerous animal. Failure to file such written notice of
appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   D.   Notice Of Appeal; Hearing: The notice of appeal shall state the grounds
for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the
City Clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days
of the receipt of notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good
cause. The hearing shall be confined to the record made before the City Manager
or his or her designee and the arguments of the parties or their
representatives, but no additional evidence shall be taken. After such hearing,
the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the City Manager or his or
her designee. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and
shall be filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing, or
any continued session thereof.
   E.   Disposition Of Animal: If the City Council affirms the action of the
City Manager or his or her designee, the City Council shall order in its
written decision that the individual or entity owning, sheltering, harboring or
keeping such dangerous animal shall remove such animal from the City or cause
it to be destroyed in a humane manner. The decision and order shall immediately
be served upon the person or entity against whom rendered in the same manner as
the order to remove or destroy. If the original order of the City Manager or
his or her designee is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3)
days, or the order of the City Council after appeal is not complied with within
three (3) days of its issuance, the Animal Control Officer or his or her
designee is authorized to seize and impound such vicious animal. An animal so
seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the
impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the decision and
order of the City Manager or his or her designee or the City Council was issued
has not petitioned the Marion County District Court for a review of said order,
the City Manager or his or her designee shall cause the animal to be destroyed
in a humane manner.
   F.   Failure To Comply With Order: Failure to comply with an order of the
City Manager or his or her designee issued pursuant hereto and not appealed, or
of the City Council after appeal, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense.
   G.   Costs Of Impoundment Paid By Owner: Any animal which is alleged to be
dangerous and which is under impoundment or quarantine at the animal shelter
shall not be released to the owner, but shall continue to be held at the
expense of the owner pending the outcome of the hearing. All costs of such
impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner if the animal is
determined to be dangerous. If the animal is not determined to be vicious, all
costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 94-4,
6-6-1994; 1996 Code)
6-4C-8: IMMEDIATE SEIZURE OR DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS:
Any animal found at large which displays dangerous tendencies or is an illegal
animal may be processed as a dangerous animal pursuant to Section
6-4C-7 of this Article, and said animal may be immediately seized anywhere
within the City unless the animal is so dangerous that it cannot safely be
apprehended even after consultation with a Department of Natural Resources
representative, in which case the Animal Control Officer or his or her designee
is authorized to destroy it immediately. Any dog which has been previously
declared vicious or which is believed to be vicious and is not properly
confined may be treated as a dangerous animal, and be immediately seized
anywhere within the City. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994; 1996 Code)
6-4C-9: PERMANENT REMOVAL FROM CITY:
Any animal required by any provision of this Article to be removed, voluntarily
or otherwise from the City, shall be so removed by its owner or the person
harboring or having control of such animal who shall provide the Animal Control
Officer a notarized statement designating the place to which the animal has
been removed. An animal not removed as required, or an animal which has been
removed and which is again found illegally within the City shall be humanely
destroyed. (Ord. 94-4, 6-6-1994; 1996 Code)
ARTICLE D. LIVESTOCK AND FOWL
SECTION:
6-4D-1: Purpose
6-4D-2: Definitions
6-4D-3: Permitted Fowl At Large
6-4D-4: Permitted Fowl Enumerated
6-4D-5: Coops, Roosts And Laying Boxes
6-4D-6: Urban Livestock Permit Required
6-4D-7: Permit Fee
6-4D-8: Inspection
6-4D-9: Exemptions
6-4D-10: Violation
6-4D-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Livestock Allowed: No livestock, with the exception of permitted fowl,
shall be allowed within the city of Knoxville, Iowa. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
 
AT LARGE:               Escaped or loose.
COOP:                   A cage, enclosure or small building or structure for
                        housing permitted fowl.
                        An animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
LIVESTOCK:              ovine, or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, emus; farm
                        deer as defined in Iowa Code Section 170.1; or poultry.
PERMITTED FOWL:         Female chickens, hens, or quail.
ROOST:                  A place where winged animals and especially birds
                        customarily roost.
                        A city issued, urban livestock permit shall be required
                        for anyone to own, raise or otherwise maintain
URBAN LIVESTOCK PERMIT: permitted fowl within the city limits. (Ord. 13-09, 9-
                        16-2013; amd. Ord. 22-07, 10-19-2022; Ord. 23-04, 6-5-
                        2023)
 
6-4D-3: PERMITTED FOWL AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any domesticated fowl to
run at large within the corporate limits of the city. To prevent fowl at large,
fowl should be contained in a coop that includes a cover and may have clipped
wings. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-4: PERMITTED FOWL ENUMERATED:
It shall be lawful for any person to keep, raise and/or maintain any fowl
within the corporate limits of the city in R-1, R-2 and/or R-3 districts under
the following terms and conditions:
   A.   Permitted Fowl:
      1.   For purposes of this chapter, only permitted fowl shall be allowed
within the city of Knoxville.
      2.   There shall be no more than five (5) permitted fowl allowed for each
single-family dwelling. No permitted fowl shall be allowed in multi-family
complexes including duplexes.
      3.   Feed for permitted fowl must be stored in ratproof containers.
      4.   There shall be no outside slaughtering of permitted fowl within the
city limits.
   B.   Roosters: Roosters shall not be allowed. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-5: COOPS, ROOSTS AND LAYING BOXES:
In addition to other requirements of this chapter that specify standards
applicable to the keeping of permitted fowl, any person who owns, keeps, or
harbors permitted fowl shall provide a coop or other similar shelter which
meets the following criterion:
   A.   Protection From Predators: Any coop or shelter shall be screened or
walled in a manner that allows the permitted fowl to be reasonably protected
from predators.
   B.   Zoning Requirements: Enclosures must be situated at least twenty five
feet (25') from the nearest neighbor's residence and must meet accessory
structure zoning requirements as outlined in section
9-4-4 of this code.
   C.   Size: Any coop or shelter shall be a minimum of three (3) square feet
in size per fowl if the fowl have an enclosed outdoor run, or ten (10) square
feet in size per fowl if the fowl do not have an enclosed outdoor run.
   D.   Clean And Sanitary: Any coop or shelter shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary fashion to prevent the unreasonable accumulation of waste or other
noxious substances, the emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of vermin.
   E.   Roost Required: For each chicken, one roost with a minimum size of
eight (8) square inches shall be required.
   F.   Laying Box Space Required: For every three (3) chickens, a minimum of
one laying box space with a minimum size of one square foot shall be required.
Each laying box shall contain adequate clean bedding material such as hay or
other soft material.
   G.   Offensive Odors: Enclosures must be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition at all times and must be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent
offensive odors. Offensive odors shall be dealt with as outlined in subsection
4-7-4A of this code. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-6: URBAN LIVESTOCK PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to raise, keep, or otherwise own permitted fowl within the
city of Knoxville for any purpose including personal, commercial or other,
shall first obtain an urban livestock permit with the city of Knoxville.
Permits may be granted to a:
   A.   Property owner; and
   B.   Tenant, with approval of the property owner. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-7: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for the annual urban livestock permit shall be determined by city
council. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-8: INSPECTION:
Any person who owns, raises and/or maintains permitted fowl shall have an
annual inspection completed as part of the urban livestock permit application.
(Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-9: EXEMPTIONS:
This article does not pertain to the following:
   A.   Birds/fowl kept as indoor pets.
   B.   Birds/fowl which are lawfully transported through the corporate limits
of the city of Knoxville.
   C.   Birds/fowl that may be kept or harbored, on a temporary basis, during
any fair, show, or exhibition at the Marion County Fairgrounds or for
educational and/or school related purposes as determined by the city manager or
his/her designee.
   D.   Fowl currently existing in the city at the time of adoption hereof
shall not be "grandfathered" or permitted to remain after the effective date
hereof; however, owners of the fowl will have thirty (30) days from the
effective date hereof to come into compliance. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
6-4D-10: VIOLATION:
Any person who is found noncompliant with the provisions of this article may
have their urban livestock permit revoked and will not be issued a new permit
within the next twelve (12) months. The person found noncompliant with this
article shall also be issued a municipal citation according to section
1-4-2 of this code. (Ord. 13-09, 9-16-2013)
CHAPTER 5
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Time Limits
6-5-4: Exceptions
6-5-5: Responsibility Of Adults And Places Of Business And Amusement
6-5-6: Penalties
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, by the establishment of a curfew,
the hours minors can be or remain upon the alleys, streets, other public
places, and places of business and amusement in this city. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-
1983)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
HABITUALLY VIOLATES: Any minor who has violated the provisions of this chapter
more than two (2) times.
MINOR: Any unemancipated person below the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 83-
4, 12-5-1983)
6-5-3: TIME LIMITS:
It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets,
or public places or places of business and amusement in this city between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
6-5-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The restriction provided by section
6-5-3 of this chapter shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a
guardian, parent or other person charged with the care and custody of such
minor, or other responsible person over twenty one (21) years of age, nor shall
the restriction apply to any minor who is traveling between his home or place
of residence and the place where any approved church, municipal or school
function is being held or from his place of regular employment. (Ord. 83-4, 12-
5-1983)
6-5-5: RESPONSIBILITY OF ADULTS AND PLACES OF BUSINESS AND AMUSEMENT:
   A.   Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other
person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit such
minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business, or
amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by section
6-5-3 of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in section
6-5-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Business: It is unlawful for any person operating a place of business
or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon any places of
business or amusement operated by them within the curfew hours set by section
6-5-3 of this chapter, except as provided in section
6-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
6-5-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of section
6-5-5 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty as
provided in section
1-4-2 of this code. (Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; amd. 1996 Code)
   B.   Arrest Of Minor: Any peace officer of this city while on duty is hereby
empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the provisions of sections
6-5-3 and
6-5-4 of this chapter. Upon arrest for a first violation of either of these
sections, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or
other person charged with the care and custody of the minor. If the minor
violates either of these sections a second or more time, the minor, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 04-12, 8-16-2004)
CHAPTER 6
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY TRAIL VEHICLES (UTVs)
SECTION:
6-6-1: Purpose
6-6-2: Definitions
6-6-3: Operation Of Golf Carts And UTVs Permitted
6-6-4: Required Equipment
6-6-5: Hours Of Operation
6-6-6: Speed
6-6-7: Passengers
6-6-8: Operation
6-6-9: Permits
6-6-10: Violation And Penalty
6-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts, as
authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and "UTVs"
(Utility Vehicles), on certain streets in the City. This chapter applies
whenever a Golf Cart or UTV is operated on any city street or alley, subject to
those exceptions stated herein. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-
2022)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
           A four wheeled recreational vehicle generally used for the
           transportation of person(s) in the sport of golf, that is limited in
           engine displacement to less than 800 cubic centimeters (or the
GOLF CART: electric equivalent) and total dry weight of less than 800 pounds.
           Note that a vehicle with appearance of a "golf cart" but satisfying
           the requirements of 49 CFR 572.500 (i.e., is a "low speed vehicle")
           is not subject to this chapter but rather to the Code of Iowa
           321.381A.
           A motorized vehicle, with not less than four and not more than eight
           non highway tires or rubberized tracks that has a seat that is of
           bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the
UTV:       operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. UTVs
           that operate on City streets must be eligible for State of Iowa Off-
           Highway Vehicle (OHV) registration. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd.
           Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022)
 
6-6-3: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS AND UTVs PERMITTED:
Golf carts and UTVs may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons
possessing a valid operator's license and at least eighteen (18) years of age.
UTVs may be operated upon the streets of the City and on two-lane state
highways within the City, but are not allowed on any state divided highway
within the City. All other requirements of this chapter must be met.
Golf carts and UTVs shall not be operated on any sidewalk, city right of way,
or trail system within the City. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-
21-2022)
6-6-4: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least
the following:
      1.   An unobstructed retro-reflective slow moving vehicle sign that meets
ASAE standard S276.5 or newer.
      2.   An orange safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five
(5) feet above the ground level.
      3.   Valid liability insurance covering the golf cart in the same limits
as required of automobiles by the financial responsibility provisions of
Chapter 321A of the code of Iowa.
      4.   A valid City of Knoxville permit.
   B.   UTVs operated upon City streets shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   An unobstructed retro-reflective slow moving vehicle sign that meets
ASAE standard S276.5 or newer.
      2.   An orange safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five
feet (5') above the ground level.
      3.   Valid liability insurance covering the UTV in the same limits as
required of automobiles by the financial responsibility provisions of chapter
321A of the Code of Iowa.
      4.   A valid State of Iowa OHV registration permit or non-resident user
permit.
      5.   Operational headlights at all times.
      6.   Operational tail and brake lights.
      7.   Operational horn.
      8.   A rear view mirror. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-
2022)
6-6-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and sunset.
Golfs carts owned and operated by any governmental entity or school district
are exempt from these time restrictions when used in the performance of their
duties. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022)
6-6-6: SPEED:
Golf carts and UTVs shall be subject to posted speed limits. No UTV may travel
at a speed above 35 MPH (HF2130). (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-
21-2022)
6-6-7: PASSENGERS:
No person may ride on a golf cart or UTV on any portion not designed to carry
passengers. No person may stand on or ride in the cargo area of a golf cart or
UTV while it is in motion. Each person riding must be in their own seat. No
person under 42" may ride on a golf cart or UTV. No more than three (3) people
may ride on a bench seat. If seatbelts are available, they must be used by all
occupants. No person may ride on the lap of another. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018;
amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022)
6-6-8: OPERATION:
   A.   Except as noted otherwise, therein, any person operating a golf cart or
UTV on City streets or alleys shall adhere to all traffic signs and signals,
all other City of Knoxville and State of Iowa traffic rules and regulations,
and shall obey the orders and direction of any law enforcement officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or the direction of a fire department
officer during a fire.
   B.   This chapter forbids the operation of golf carts and UTVs on
      1.   Any recreational, bike or walking trail unless the trail is
specifically designed to allow the use of motor vehicles.
      2.   Sidewalks.
      3.   City parks or any other land owned by the City, unless permission is
granted by the city council
      4.   Private property without the consent of the property owner
      5.   Primary road extensions through the city limits, however, Golf Carts
may cross these roads at approximately a ninety (90) degree angle after
yielding the right of way to cross traffic. The primary road extension for the
City of Knoxville is Lincoln St. (Highway 14). Golfs carts owned and operated
by any governmental entity or school district are exempt from this restriction
when used in the performance of their duties.
      6.   UTVs may operate on Lincoln St. (Highway 14).
   C.   Street Etiquette:
      1.   Except when executing a left turn, golf carts shall be driven as
close as practical to the right-hand edge of any street or alley.
      2.   When necessary to prevent congestion of traffic, golf carts shall be
pulled to the right-hand edge of streets and be stopped to allow other motor
vehicles traveling in the same direction to pass.
      3.   When two or more golf carts or UTVs are being operated in the same
direction and general vicinity on a City Street or Alley, they shall proceed in
single file. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022)
6-6-9: PERMITS:
Golf carts must be registered with the City of Knoxville before operating on
any public street or alley.
   A.   Golf cart permits:
      1.   A permit shall be issued once the owner has provided the following:
         a.   Proof that the owner has liability insurance covering operation
of a golf cart on city streets with limits of liability at least as great as
those required by the Code of Iowa chapter 321A.1(11) as amended.
         b.   Inspection and approval by the Police Department of the City of
Knoxville.
      2.   Any golf cart operated on the City streets shall display the City of
Knoxville permit sticker prominently on the left rear of the vehicle.
      3.   The application for a golf cart permit shall be made upon an
application form made available by the Knoxville Police Department. All
applications shall uniquely identify the name(s) and address(s) of the owner,
or the owner’s agent, the owner’s address, or bona fide place of business, and
phone number. The application shall also include a description of the golf cart
and shall be for a specific golf cart, as evidenced by its serial number.
      4.   The fee for such permits shall be set out in the fee schedule
established by Council and said fee shall be paid annually. The fee will not be
pro-rated for permits purchased during the year. The fee will not be refunded
if the golf cart is sold or the permit is suspended or revoked.
      5.   All permits will expire on December 31 of each year. Permits may be
purchased at any time during the Knoxville Police Department business hours.
      6.   The permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if
more than three (3) violations occur in any 12-month period.
      7.   Businesses selling Golf Carts are exempt from having to obtain
permits, unless the vehicle is being used for general transportation and not as
a test vehicle.
   B.   UTV permits:
      1.   UTVs must be have a State of Iowa OHV permit to operate on City
streets.
         a.   Iowa residents can acquire an OHV permit though their County
Recorders Office or through the Iowa DNR Online License and Registration
website.
         b.   Those who live outside of Iowa can purchase an OHV non-resident
user permit through the Iowa DNR Online License and Registration website. (Ord.
18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022; Ord. 24-02, 3-18-2024)
6-6-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   A violation of this ordinance shall be considered a simple misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be subject
to a fine of fifty ($50.00) plus surcharge and costs. A court appearance shall
not be required if the fine is paid in full prior to the date set for the
person's court appearance. (Ord. 18-03, 2-19-2018; amd. Ord. 22-09, 11-21-2022)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Establishment And Purpose
7-1-2: Recreation Director
7-1-3: Duties Of Recreation Director
7-1-4: Reports
7-1-5: Confirmation Of Fees And Rules
7-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Recreation Department is hereby established to operate and maintain the
recreation facilities and to supervise the recreation programs of the City.
(Ord. 84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
7-1-2: RECREATION DIRECTOR:
The City Manager shall, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint a
person to serve as Recreation Director. Such person shall serve under the
direction of the City Manager and shall receive such compensation as may from
time to time be fixed by the City Manager, subject to the approval of the City
Council. The Recreation Director shall employ, subject to the approval of the
City Manager, such assistants as necessary to complete his/her duties. (Ord.
84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
7-1-3: DUTIES OF RECREATION DIRECTOR:
The Recreation Director shall have general charge and supervision of all
recreation facilities and recreation programs of the City. (Ord. 84-7, 11-6-
1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
7-1-4: REPORTS:
The Recreation Director shall, at all times keep complete records of all
property of his/her Department and shall make such reports to the City Manager
as may be required. (Ord. 84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
7-1-5: CONFIRMATION OF FEES AND RULES:
All fees and charges for the use of any of the recreation facilities and
participation in any of the recreation programs of the Department in existence
on the date of the adoption of this Chapter are hereby confirmed. All rules for
the use of any of the facilities of this Department in existence on the date of
the adoption of this Chapter are hereby confirmed. The City Council may revise
any of the fees, charges and rules after the adoption of this Chapter. (Ord.
84-7, 11-6-1984, eff. 1-1-1985)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Removal Of Snow, Ice And Accumulations
7-2-2: Supervision Required
7-2-3: Standards
7-2-4: Permit Requirements
7-2-5: Permit Fee And Maintenance Bond
7-2-6: Dragging Objects
7-2-7: Metal Lugs
7-2-8: Load Limits
7-2-9: Bench Marks, Grades And Elevations Established
7-2-10: Control Of Accessories Placed On Central Business District Sidewalks
7-2-11: One-Way Alley
7-2-1: REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS:
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to remove snow,
ice or accumulations of any kind promptly from sidewalks. If the property owner
does not remove snow, ice or accumulations within twenty four (24) hours, the
City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection
in the same manner as Property Tax. (Ord. 09-09, 4-20-2009)
7-2-2: SUPERVISION REQUIRED:
All construction or repair of City streets, sanitary sewer and storm sewer
shall be done under the supervision of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 516, 8-21-1961; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
7-2-3: STANDARDS:
All proposed plans and specifications for said construction or repairs shall be
checked and approved by the Manager before the work is commenced and shall meet
minimum standards as approved by the Council. (Ord. 516, 8-21-1961; amd. Ord.
83-4, 12-5-1983)
7-2-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No permits shall be granted to any person to dig in a street until such person
files with the Clerk a written consent of the telephone, gas and electric
companies having utility lines in the streets under franchise granted by the
City and a written consent of the City Water Department. The Council may
authorize the issuance of a permit without such written consents in any case
where it feels that such consents are being unfairly withheld. (Ord. 83-4, 12-
5-1983)
7-2-5: PERMIT FEE AND MAINTENANCE BOND:
No permit shall be granted under this chapter until the applicant has paid to
the City an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), to be applied toward cost
of inspecting the manner in which any hole or opening is filled and closed by
the applicant, and also until the applicant has furnished the City a
maintenance bond to secure to the City that the closing of the opening in the
City street will be kept in good repair for a period of four (4) years after
the approval of the opening. The maintenance bond for contractors whose
principal place of business is in Marion County, Iowa, and for public utility
who have been granted a franchise by the City shall be in the form of a
personal surety bond made out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost
of repairing this opening. The maintenance bond for all others shall be in the
form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit or escrow agreement made out to
the City in an amount equal to the full cost of repairing this opening. (Ord.
83-4, 12-5-1983; amd. Ord. 15-11, 8-3-2015)
7-2-6: DRAGGING OBJECTS:
No person shall drag or cause to be dragged, on any street any tree or other
object without first obtaining a written permit signed by the Clerk and by the
Public Works Director or the City Manager. No such permit shall be issued
unless the signing officers are reasonably satisfied that the dragging of the
object for which the permit is signed will do no injury to the street. Any
permit issued shall specify the object to be dragged, the route to be traveled,
and the approximate date it is to be done. (Ord. 454, 9-15-1955; amd. Ord. 83-
4, 12-5-1983; 1996 Code)
7-2-7: METAL LUGS:
No vehicles containing wheels with metal lugs shall be operated on any street.
(Ord. 454, 9-15-1955; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
7-2-8: LOAD LIMITS:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated on any street in the City any
vehicle which with its load weighs in excess of ten (10) tons. (Ord. 454, 9-15-
1955; amd. Ord. 83-4, 12-5-1983)
7-2-9: BENCH MARKS, GRADES AND ELEVATIONS ESTABLISHED:
Bench marks, grades and elevations are maintained as established by the City
Council. Said bench marks, grades and elevations shall be kept on file in the
Office of the Public Works Director. (1983 Code §
5-1-8; amd. 1996 Code)
7-2-10: CONTROL OF ACCESSORIES PLACED ON CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Accessories; Approval: The Knoxville downtown streetscape program has
established an architectural and design standard for accessories to be located
on sidewalks within the Central Business Districts. Such accessories are
defined as, but not limited to, benches, trash receptacles, and planters. No
accessory shall be placed on a sidewalk within the Central Business District
without prior approval of the City of Knoxville Streetscape Committee.
   B.   Request For Placement Of Accessories: Central Business District owners
or businesses wishing to have an accessory placed on the sidewalk in front of
their location shall request such placement through the City of Knoxville
Streetscape Committee. The request can be made with or without promise of
donation by the business to defray costs of such placement but the Streetscape
Committee reserves judgment in any case as to whether such accessory is
warranted at the requested location.
   C.   Request Specifications: Businesses wishing to place an accessory of
their own purchase on a Central Business District sidewalk shall first submit a
request, complete with drawings, photographs, or renderings of the accessory,
complete with specifications, to the Streetscape Committee.
   D.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be considered a Municipal
infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 11-03, 5-
2-2011)
7-2-11: ONE-WAY ALLEY:
The alley lying between S. Second and S. Third Streets is hereby established as
a one-way alley running in an east to west direction. (Ord. 19-05, 5-20-2019)
CHAPTER 3
SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Property Owner Responsibility
7-3-4: Authority Of City
7-3-5: Contents Of Council Resolution
7-3-6: Notice To Construct
7-3-7: City To Construct Upon Failure Of Owner To Act
7-3-8: Manner Of Payment; Waiver Of Objections
7-3-9: Permit Requirements
7-3-10: Specifications For Construction
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to specify the procedure to be followed by the
Council in ordering the construction, repair, replacement or reconstruction of
sidewalks or driveways. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
DRIVEWAYS: All drives and driveway approaches located within the public right
of way.
ESTABLISHED GRADE: That grade established by this City for the particular area
in which a sidewalk or driveway is to be constructed.
PORTLAND CEMENT: Any type of cement except bituminous cement.
SIDEWALKS: All permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban
areas. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-3: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain in a
safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalks or driveways outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public
street. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-4: AUTHORITY OF CITY:
The Council may by resolution adopted by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all
the members of the Council, order and direct the owners, agents or occupants of
adjoining lots and land to construct and rebuild sidewalks or driveways or both
along or upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of said City;
however, when the owners of a majority of the linear feet of the property
fronting on the proposed improvement, and subject to assessment for the
improvement, petition for the improvement, it may be ordered by majority vote
of the whole Council. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-5: CONTENTS OF COUNCIL RESOLUTION:
Any resolution ordering or directing the construction or rebuilding of any
sidewalks or driveways shall specify the place or street along which it shall
be made or constructed, and the width thereof, and the time within which the
improvement is to be completed. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-6: NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT:
   A.   Certified Mail: Upon the passage of the resolution requiring sidewalks
or driveways construction or reconstruction by the Council, notice shall be
given by certified mail to the abutting property owner as shown by the records
of the County Auditor, requiring that, within thirty (30) days of mailing of
the notice, the sidewalks or driveways must be constructed or the property
owner must have entered into a valid contract for such construction and
furnished evidence of such contract to the City.
   B.   Form Of Notice; Signature: The notice required by subsection A shall be
signed by the City Manager and shall be substantially in the following form:
To                              , you are hereby notified that on the       day
of                 , A.D., 19     the Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa,
did by proper resolution, order and direct the construction (or rebuilding) of
a cement (sidewalk) (driveway) along the           side of Lot           in
block number            in the City. Said sidewalk or driveway to be built
according to the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to the
construction and rebuilding of sidewalk or driveway therein; said sidewalk or
driveway to be constructed or evidence of a valid contract for such
construction to be furnished to the City, within thirty (30) days after the
mailing of this notice to you, otherwise the same will be constructed by the
City under its direction and as provided for in Section
7-3-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Knoxville, Iowa, and the costs
including construction, legal, engineering, administrative and other related
costs, of said sidewalk or driveway, will be assessed to the abutting property
as in said Code provided.
   (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-7: CITY TO CONSTRUCT UPON FAILURE OF OWNER TO ACT:
   A.   Construction By City; Statement Of Cost: In case the owner of the
property fails to comply with the requirements of the notice served pursuant to
this chapter and within the time prescribed, the sidewalks or driveways shall
be constructed, said construction to be supervised by the city manager who
shall render a detailed statement of the cost thereof to the council and the
statement shall be filed with the clerk.
   B.   Cost Assessed Against Property: Within fifteen (15) days after the city
manager files the statement of costs with the clerk, the council shall by
resolution accept or reject the work. Upon accepting the work, or within ten
(10) days thereafter, the council shall ascertain the total cost and by
resolution determine the proportion or amount of the cost to be assessed
against private property. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-8: MANNER OF PAYMENT; WAIVER OF OBJECTIONS:
If the owner of any lot or parcel of land against which an assessment for
permanent sidewalks or driveways in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is
made pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of making the special
assessment, promise and agree in writing, endorsed on a certificate, or in a
separate agreement, that in consideration of having the right to pay his/her
assessment in installments he/she will not make any objection of illegality or
irregularity as to the assessment or levy of such tax upon and against his/her
property, the council may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10)
annual installments as a special assessment as provided for in chapter 364,
sections 13, 13A and 13B of the 1985 code of Iowa. Where there is no promise or
agreement by the owner in writing, the whole of the assessment so levied upon
and against the property of such owner shall be assessed against said property
in the same manner as ordinary taxes as provided for in chapter 264, section
13B of the 1985 code of Iowa. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-9: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit For Removal Required: Whenever any person shall desire to remove
any sidewalk or driveway, either for the purpose of rebuilding the same or
replacing it with a new sidewalk or driveway and whenever any person shall
desire to construct or reconstruct any sidewalk or driveway whether ordered by
the council or not, he/she shall, before proceeding with the work of removing,
constructing or reconstructing said sidewalk or driveway, obtain from the city
council, through its building inspector, a permit to do so.
   B.   Application For Permit: All applications for removal of sidewalks or
driveways or construction of sidewalks or driveways shall be accompanied by
plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of
the lot upon which the sidewalks or driveways are to be removed or constructed.
Said application shall also provide for a definite time stated as to when all
work shall be done and in case of removal when the sidewalk or driveway is to
be restored or reconstructed. Said application shall also provide that if the
sidewalk or driveway is not constructed or restored within the time stated,
that the council may cause the work to be done and assess the cost against the
abutting property as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
7-3-10: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
Sidewalks or driveways constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be of the following construction and meet the following standards:
   A.   Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and
repair of sidewalks or driveways.
   B.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide and four
inches (4") thick, except sidewalks or crossing driveways shall be at least six
inches (6") thick and each section shall be no more than four feet (4') in
length. Business district sidewalks shall be at least five feet (5') wide and
four inches (4") thick, except sidewalks crossing driveways shall be at least
six inches (6") thick, and each section shall be no more than five feet (5') in
length.
   C.   Residential and business driveways shall be at least ten feet (10')
wide and six inches (6") thick.
   D.   Such additional specifications as may from time to time be adopted by
the city council.
   E.   Sidewalks or driveways that are repaired shall be of the same width as
the original sidewalk or driveway, but shall meet all of the other above
specifications. Sidewalks or driveways replaced or constructed shall meet all
of the existing specifications.
   F.   Whenever the proposed sidewalks or driveways construction or
reconstruction is in an area of unusual topography, size or shape, or is
surrounded by such unusual conditions that the strict application of these
specifications would result in substantial hardship or injustices, the city
manager may vary or modify such specifications so that the sidewalk or driveway
may be constructed or reconstructed in a reasonable manner, but so at the same
time, the public welfare and interest of the city and surrounding area is
protected. (Ord. 85-4, 5-20-1985)
CHAPTER 4
CABLE FRANCHISE REGULATORY ORDINANCE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Authority
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: Franchise Required
7-4-4: Grant Of Franchise
7-4-5: Standards Of Service
7-4-6: System Design And Equipment Requirement
7-4-7: Regulation By Franchising Authority
7-4-8: Compliance And Monitoring
7-4-9: Indemnification And Insurance
7-4-10: Enforcement And Termination Of Franchise
7-4-11: Miscellaneous Provisions
7-4-1: AUTHORITY:
The franchising authority, after having determined that the financial, legal,
and technical ability of the grantee is reasonably sufficient to provide
services, facilities, and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related
needs of the community, may grant a franchise agreement to qualified grantees
for the construction and operation of a cable system of the terms set forth
herein. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number:
BASIC CABLE: Is the lowest priced tier of service that includes the
retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
CABLE ACT: Collectively means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as
amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons who:
   A.   Provides cable service over a cable system; or
   B.   Otherwise directly controls or is responsible for the operation of such
a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscriber of:
      1.   Video programming; or
      2.   Other programming service.
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed
to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided
to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more broadcast television stations;
   B.   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
or facilities uses any public right of way;
   C.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of title II of the Cable Act, except that such facilities
shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c)
of the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers; or
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
CITY: The City of Knoxville, Iowa and the corporate boundary of the City.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity
thereto.
FRANCHISE: The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, which
authorizes construction and operation of the system.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY: The City Council of the City of Knoxville, Iowa or the
lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
GOVERNMENTAL AND EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL: A. Channel capacity designated for
governmental and educational use; and
   B.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
GRANTEE: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity granted a franchise
hereunder, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
GROSS REVENUES: Any and all revenue received by the grantee from the operation
of the system in the service area; provided however, that such phrase shall not
include any fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any
subscriber thereof by any governmental unit of agency, and which are collected
by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
HEADEND: The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower, building,
and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at the starting
point of a broad-band telecommunications network.
HOUSE DROP: A cable that connects each building or home to the nearest feeder
line of the cable network.
MAY: See Shall And Will.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the
community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, normal business hours
shall include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade or the cable system.
OUTLET: The point of connection of the cable or wire to a television or radio
receiver.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation or governmental entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All property, real, personal or mixed, owned by a private
person, including property owned by a public utility not owned or operated by
the City.
PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE: All property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used
by the grantee, however arising from or related to or connected with the
franchise.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used by the
City, including property owned or used by a public utility owned or operated by
the City.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way lane, public way, drive circle, or other public right of way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights of ways dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the
franchising authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchising
authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing,
operating, repairing, and maintaining the system. Public Way shall also mean
any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the
service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service
use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights
of way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising
authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing and
operating the grantee's system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the system.
SERVICE AREA: The present Municipal boundaries of the franchising authority and
shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more channels.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by a cable
operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable operator.
SHALL AND WILL: Are mandatory; may is permissive.
SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the system who lawfully receives communications
and other services therefrom with the grantee's express permission. (Ord. 96-1,
2-5-1996)
7-4-3: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
Subject to Federal and State Law, no cable system shall be allowed to occupy or
use any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the
City, or be allowed to operate without a franchise granted in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-4: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose the Chapter is to specify requirements for the
establishment, construction, operation, and maintenance of cable television in
the City pursuant to chapter 364, Code of Iowa and applicable Federal law. If a
new applicant submits a proposal acceptable to the City Council, meets the
requirements of this Chapter and those of the FCC, and receives a majority of
the votes cast in a franchise election, the City may then proceed to enter into
a nonexclusive franchise agreement with such prospective grantee, subject to
the provisions of this Chapter. If the incumbent operator submits a proposal
acceptable under the terms of the Cable Act of 1992 as amended, and meets the
requirements of the FCC, the City shall proceed to fulfill its obligations
under section 626 of the Cable Act of 1992.
   B.   Length Of Franchise: The term of a franchise and all rights,
privileges, obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be
determined by Council from the effective date of such franchise or the
effective date of any transfer or assignment thereof in accordance with
subsection 7-4-7E of this Chapter. The term of agreement will be specified in
the franchise agreement. Such term shall not exceed fifteen (15) years. The
City shall award a nonexclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate, and
maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys,
public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions
thereof and additions thereto in the City, poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the
operation and maintenance in the City of a cable system, and to furnish and to
sell service from such system to the inhabitants of the City pursuant to the
terms of this Chapter.
   C.   Significance Of Franchise:
      1.   Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted hereunder by the City
shall not be exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a similar
franchise to any person at any time.
      2.   Franchise Amendable: The scope of any franchise granted hereunder
shall be deemed amendable from time to time to allow the grantee to innovate
and implement new services and developments by mutual agreement.
      3.   Privileges Must Be Specified: No privilege of exemption shall be
inferred from the granting of any franchise, unless it is specifically
prescribed.
      4.   Authority Granted: Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the
grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain, in, upon, along, above, over and under streets, as defined in Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open
to public use in the City, towers, antennas, poles, cables, electronic
equipment, and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of a
cable television system in the City, subject to the requirements of this
Chapter.
      5.   Subject To Other Regulatory Agencies Rules And Regulations: The
grantee shall at all times, during the life of any franchise granted hereunder,
be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the City and other
duly authorized regulatory State and Federal bodies and shall comply with any
and all ordinances which the City has adopted or shall adopt applying to the
public in general.
      6.   Pole Use Agreements Required: Any franchise granted hereunder shall
not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole or
conduit-use agreements from the gas, electric and the telephone companies or
others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of the City, whenever the
grantee finds it necessary to make use of said poles or conduits.
   D.   Rights Reserved To City:
      1.   Ordinance Revisions: Any franchise granted under this Chapter, is
hereby made subject to any revisions of this Chapter and the general ordinances
of the City; provided, that such revisions do not materially alter or impair
the obligations of the grantee set forth in any franchise agreement.
      2.   No Impairment Of City's Rights: Nothing herein shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect in any way to any extent the right of the City to
acquire the property of the grantee through the exercise of the right of
eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount
for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted and
nothing shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for
a term or in perpetuity, the City's right to eminent domain.
      3.   Grantee Agrees To City's Rights: The City reserves every right and
power which is required to be reserved or provided by an ordinance of the City,
and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby
and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of
such rights or powers which have been or will be enacted or established,
subject to provisions of subsection D1 above.
      4.   Powers Of City: Neither the granting of any franchise nor any
provision governing the franchise shall constitute a waiver or bar to the
exercise of any governmental right or power of the City.
      5.   City's Transfer Of Functions: Any administrative right or power in
or administrative duty imposed upon any elected official, officer, employee,
department or board of the City shall be subject to delegation by the City to
any other elected official, officer, employee or department.
      6.   City's Right Of Inspection: The City reserves the right, during the
life of any franchise granted hereunder, to inspect all construction or
installation work performed, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and to
perform network measurements to ensure compliance with the terms of this
Chapter.
      7.   City's Right Of Network Installation: The City reserves the right
during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to install and maintain for
a reasonable charge upon or in the poles and conduits of the grantee any wire
and pole fixtures necessary for Municipal networks on the condition that such
installation and maintenance thereof does not interfere with the operation of
the grantee. Provided, however, that grantee agrees that such compensation or
charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the
applicable pole attachment agreement or other authorization relating to the
service area.
   E.   Application For Franchise: No franchise may be granted unless the
applicant has successfully completed the application procedure in accordance
with filing instructions promulgated by the City:
      1.   Filing Fee: Payment of a nonrefundable filing fee to the City of one
hundred dollars ($100.00), which sum shall be due and payable at the time with
the submission of the application.
      2.   Content: All applicants must complete an application which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
         a.   Name And Address Of Applicant: The name and business address of
the applicant, date of application, and signature of applicant or appropriate
corporate officers.
         b.   Description Of Proposed Operation: A general description of the
applicant's proposed operation, including but not limited to, business hours,
operating staff, maintenance procedures beyond those required in this Chapter,
and management and marketing staff complement and procedures.
         c.   Signal Carriage: A statement of the television and radio services
to be provided, including both off-the-air and locally originated signals.
         d.   Special Services: A statement setting forth a description of the
automated services proposed as well as a description of the production
facilities to be made available by the grantee for the governmental and
educational channels required to be made available by the provisions of this
Chapter.
         e.   Corporate Organization: A statement detailing the corporation
organization of the applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its
officers and directors and the number of shares held by each officer and
director.
         f.   Stockholders: A statement identifying the number of authorized
outstanding shares of applicant's stock including a current list of the names
and current addresses of its shareholders holding five percent (5%) or more of
the applicant's outstanding stock.
         g.   Intra-Company Relationships: A statement describing all intra-
company relationships of the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or
affiliated companies.
         h.   Agreements And Understandings: A statement setting forth all
agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the
applicant and any other person with respect to any franchise awarded hereunder
and the conduct of the operation thereof existing at the time of proposal
submittal.
         i.   Financial Statement: A copy of the financial statements for the
two (2) previous fiscal years.
         j.   Financial Projection: A five (5) year operations pro forma which
shall include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and
loss statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets, and
annual levels of subscriber penetration. Costs and revenues anticipated for
voluntary services shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as
required in this Chapter, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma.
         k.   Financial Support: Suitable written evidence from a recognized
financing institution, addressed to both applicant's financial ability and
planned operation have been analyzed by the institution and that the financing
institution is prepared to make the required funds available to applicant if it
is awarded a franchise. If the planned operation is to be internally financed,
a board resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment and expenditure
of such funds as are required to construct, install and operate the cable
television system contemplated hereunder.
         l.   Construction Timetable: A description of system construction,
including the timetable for provision and extension of service to different
parts of the City.
         m.   Technical Description: A technical description of the type of
system proposed by the applicant, including but not limited to, system
configuration, (i.e. hub, dual cable), system capacity, two-way capability,
etc.
         n.   Existing Franchises: A statement of existing franchises held by
the applicant indicating when the franchises were issued and when the systems
were constructed and the present state of the system in each respective
governmental unit, together with the name and address and phone number of a
responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant.
         o.   Convictions: A statement as to whether the applicant or any of it
officers or directors or holders of five percent (5%) or more of its voting
stock has in the past ten (10) years been convicted of or has any charges
pending for any crime other than a routine traffic offense and the disposition
of each such case.
         p.   Operating Experience: A statement detailing the prior cable
television experience of the applicant, including that of the applicant's
officers, management and staff to be associated, where known, with the proposed
franchise.
         q.   Supplementation To Applications: The City reserves the right to
require such supplementary, additional or other information that the City deems
reasonably necessary for its determinations. Such modifications, deletions,
additions or amendments to the application shall be considered only if
specifically requested by the City.
   F.   Acceptance And Effective Date Of Franchise:
      1.   Franchise Acceptance; Procedures: Any franchise awarded hereunder
and the rights, privileges and authority granted thereby shall take effect and
be in force from and after the award thereof; provided, that the grantee shall
file with the City the following:
         a.   A statement by the grantee of the unconditional acceptance of the
franchise.
         b.   A certificate of insurance as set forth in Section
7-4-9 of this Chapter.
         c.   Reimbursement to the City for the costs of publication of the
franchise ordinance and the holding of the election connected therewith, if
necessary.
      2.   Grantee To Have No Recourse: The grantee shall have no monetary
recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense, or damage
arising out of any provision or requirement of this Chapter or its regulation
or from the City's exercise of its authority to grant additional franchises
hereunder. This shall not include negligent acts of the City, it agents or
employees, which are performed outside the regulatory or franchise awarding
authority hereunder.
      3.   Acceptance Of Power And Authority Of City: The grantee expressly
acknowledges that in accepting any franchise awarded hereunder, it has relied
upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the
City to grant this franchise.
      4.   Inducements Not Offered: The grantee, by acceptance of any franchise
awarded hereunder, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into this
franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or
written, by or in behalf of the City concerning any term or condition of this
franchise that is not included in this Chapter. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
      5.   Grantee Accepts Terms Of Franchise: The grantee acknowledges by the
acceptance of the franchise and the terms herein and in this Chapter that it
has carefully read said terms and conditions and it is willing to and does
accept all other obligations of such terms and conditions and further agrees
that it will not claim that any provision of this Chapter as adopted, or any
franchise granted hereunder, is unreasonable or arbitrary. (Ord. 96-3, 5-6-
1996)
      6.   Incorporation Of Proposals: The grantee, by the acceptance of any
franchise awarded hereunder, agrees that the matters contained in the grantee's
application for franchise and as stated in oral presentations, except as
inconsistent with the FCC rules and regulations, laws or ordinances, shall be
incorporated into the franchise as though set out verbatim.
      7.   Franchise Renewal: When the grantor approves a franchise renewal,
the grantee shall accept the renewal franchise under the procedures set out in
this subsection F. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-5: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
   A.   Geographical Coverage; Service Area: The grantee shall provide a cable
communication system in such manner as to pass and provide adequate tap-off
facilities for every single-family dwelling unit, multiple dwelling unit or
other residential unit, and schools and government buildings within the service
area as of the date of the franchise acceptance. Extensions of service are
subject to the provisions of subsection H below.
   B.   Conditions Of Street Occupancy; Excavations; Permit Required: All
transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment
installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be
located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public
ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own
property that adjoins any of such public ways. A grantee shall not commence
construction on, open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway
or public place for any purpose without having first obtained a permit from the
City to do so in the manner provided by ordinance. All excavation shall be
coordinated with other utility excavation or construction so as to minimize
disruption to the public.
   C.   Restoration Of Public Ways: If during the course of the grantee's
construction, operation, or maintenance of the system there occurs a
disturbance of any public way by the grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace
and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the
condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance and
in compliance with the City's Street Replacement Policy.
   D.   Relocation At Request Of Franchising Authority: Upon receipt of
reasonable advance notice, not to be less than ten (10) business days, the
grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the
grantee when lawfully required by the franchising authority by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by
the franchising authority; but, the grantee shall in all cases have the right
of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any person
using such street, easement, or right of way for the purpose of defraying the
cost of any of the foregoing, the franchising authority shall make application
for such funds on behalf of the grantee.
   E.   Safety Requirements: Construction, installation, and maintenance of the
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work
shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other
Federal, State, and local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code.
The system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of
persons or property in the service area.
   F.   Underground And Overground Installation Requirements:
      1.   Pole Agreements: The grantee may lease, rent, or in any other manner
by mutual agreement obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables, and other
equipment and facilities from utility companies operating within the City, and
use towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities for the
system. When and where practicable, the poles used by the grantee's
distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by such utility
companies operating within the City, provided mutually satisfactory rental
agreements can be reached. It is the City's desire that all holders of public
franchise in the City cooperate with the grantee and allow the grantee the use
of their poles and pole line facilities whenever possible so that the number of
new or additional poles installed in the City may be minimized.
      2.   Grantee's Poles: The grantee shall have the right to erect, install,
and maintain its own towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, and
manholes as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the
antenna site, headend, and distribution system; providing, that the grantee has
at the worksite the necessary City permits, or copy thereof, for scheduled
work, obtained in advance from the appropriate City department.
      3.   Rent Of Grantee's Poles: The grantee shall have the right to
establish terms, conditions, and specifications governing the form, type, size,
quantity, and location of equipment of others on its poles, and shall have the
further right to charge a fair rental for attachment space or spaces occupied
by the said equipment and plant of others, except that no rent shall be paid by
the City for its attachment to the grantee's poles. The City shall pay any
costs incurred by the grantee in providing space for the City's attachments,
including any necessary rearrangements of grantee's equipment and plant to
provide room for City attachments. Upon expiration, termination, or revocation
of a franchise, or should a grantee wish to dispose of any of its poles,
conduit or manholes being used by the City, the City shall have the option to
purchase them in place for their fair value.
      4.   Underground Facilities: In those areas of the City where
transmission or distribution facilities of the electric power utility are
underground or hereafter may be placed underground, the grantee shall likewise
construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution
facilities underground to the maximum extent the then existing technology
permits, in accordance with the most recent National Electrical Code, and its
successor documents, as well as in conformance with all applicable State and
Municipal ordinances and codes. If and when necessary, amplifiers and/or
transformers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines shall be in
appropriate housing on the surface of the ground. Such housings and the
location and construction of all work required or pursuant to this subsection
shall be approved in advance through the permit process as required by
subsection B above. Even when not required, underground installation is
preferred to the placing of additional poles.
      5.   Compliance To Codes:
         a.   All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and
equipment erected by the grantee in the City shall be located so as not to
endanger or interfere with the normal use of streets, alleys, or other public
ways and places so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of the general public and adjoining property owners and
so as not to interfere with existing public utility installations and so as to
comply with the most recent National Electrical Code, and its successor
documents, as well as in conformance with all applicable State and Municipal
ordinances and codes. Upon request, the grantee shall make available to the
City, strand maps, plats, and records of locations and character of all
facilities for inspection.
         b.   In the case of any disturbance by the grantee or its equipment of
pavement, sidewalks, driveway, lawn, or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at
its expense and in the manner required by the City, promptly replace and
restore all such surfacing to as near as reasonably possible its prior or
better condition and in compliance with the City's Street Replacement Policy.
         c.   The construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and/or
removal of the cable communications system shall meet all of the following
safety, construction, and technical specifications and codes and standards:
            (1)   Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations
(OSHA).
            (2)   National Electric Code.
            (3)   National Electrical Safety Code (NESC).
            (4)   All Federal, State and Municipal construction requirements,
including FCC rules and regulations.
            (5)   Utility construction requirements.
            (6)   All building and zoning codes, and all land use restrictions
as the same exist or may be amended hereafter.
      6.   Interference With Other Utilities: The grantee shall not place
poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below ground where the same shall
interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrant, or other
utilities, and all such poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below
ground shall be so placed as to comply with all the requirements of the City.
      7.   Moving Permits: The grantee shall, on request of any persons holding
a moving permit issued by the City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal shall be
paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be
given not less than ten (10) working days advance notice to arrange for such
temporary changes.
      8.   Authority To Trim Trees: The grantee shall have the authority, under
the supervision and direction of the City, to trim trees or other natural
growth overhanging any of its cable system in the street or alley right of way
so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the grantee's wires,
cables, or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the
franchising authority or property owner for any damages caused by such
trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion, and at its own cost and expense,
reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction
of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any
and all obligations grantee may have to the franchising authority pursuant to
the terms of this subsection.
      9.   Underground Construction: Grantee shall participate in and use Iowa
One Call and ensure that cable is buried pursuant to standards established by
Iowa One Call.
   G.   Extension Of Service: The grantee shall, at its expense, and subject to
subsection H below, promptly extend its system to have service available to all
residents of:
      1.   Newly annexed areas to the City not then served by a system where
the average density is at least twenty (20) dwelling units per lineal mile of
proposed trunk and feeder cable route.
      2.   New housing areas developed within the City limits.
      3.   Any new single-family dwelling unit, multiple dwelling unit or other
residential unit or commercial establishment in the City shall be extended
cable simultaneously with electric power and telephone utilities.
   H.   Subscriber Charges For Extensions Of Service: No subscriber shall be
refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as the
existence of more than one hundred fifty feet (150') of distance from
distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of
less than twenty (20) potential subscribers per lineal mile of trunk or
distribution cable, service may be made available on the basis of a capital
contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor, and
easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in
aid on construction to be borne by the grantee and subscribers in the areas in
which service may be expanded, the grantee will contribute an amount equal to
the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose
numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per lineal mile of
its trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals twenty (20)
potential subscribers. Subscribers who request service hereunder will bear the
remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The grantee
may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction
borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
   I.   Service To Public Building:
      1.   The grantee shall upon request, provide without charge, one outlet
of basic service and expanded basic service or its equivalent in the future to
those public buildings which shall include, but not limited to, the following
locations:
         a.   City Hall or Municipal building.
         b.   Police station.
         c.   Fire station.
         d.   Public library
         e.   Knoxville Water Works office.
         f.   Public Works building.
         g.   Community center.
         h.   Knoxville Community School District schools and administrative
offices.
         i.   Marion County courthouse.
      2.   The outlets shall not be used to distribute or sell services in or
throughout such buildings. Users of such outlets shall hold the grantee
harmless from any and all liability but not limited to those arising from
copyright liability. If additional outlets are provided to such buildings, the
building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith,
including, but not limited to, labor and materials.
      3.   The grantee may require a capital contribution for unusual
circumstances, such as the existence of more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
of distance from distribution cable to connection of service, or a density of
less than twenty (20) potential subscribers per lineal mile of trunk or
distribution cable to extend service.
   J.   Customer Service Standard:
      1.   System Office Hours and Telephone Availability:
         a.   The grantee will maintain a local, toll free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to subscribers twenty four (24)
hours a day, seven (7) days a week, including holidays.
         b.   Trained representatives of the grantee will be available to
respond to subscriber inquiries during "normal business hours", as defined in
Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter.
         c.   After normal business hours, an access line will be available to
be answered by a service or an automated response system, including a phone
answering service. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be
responded to by a trained representative of the grantee on the next business
day.
         d.   Under "normal operating conditions", as defined in Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter, telephone answer time by a customer representative,
including wait time, will not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is
made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed thirty
(30) seconds. These standards will be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of
the time under normal operating conditions, as measured by the grantee on a
quarterly basis.
         e.   The grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth
above unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to
comply with such standards.
         f.   Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
         g.   Customer billing payment location will be open at least during
normal business hours and will be conveniently located in Knoxville, Iowa.
         h.   Customer service drop will be located within the City limits for
the payment of monthly bills.
      2.   Installation, Outages And Service Calls: Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met no less than
ninety five percent (95%) of the time, as measured by the grantee on a
quarterly basis:
         a.   Standard installation will be performed within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that
are located up to one hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing distribution
system.
         b.   Excluding normal operating conditions beyond its control, the
grantee will begin working on "service interruptions", as defined in Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter, promptly and in no event later than twenty four (24)
hours after the interruption becomes known. The grantee will begin actions to
correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the
service problem.
         c.   The grantee will provide "appointment window" alternatives for
installation, service calls, and other installation activities, which will be
either a specific time or, at a maximum, a four-hour long time block during
normal business hours.
         d.   The grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a subscriber
after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
         e.   If a representative of the grantee is running late for an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment in
Knoxville as scheduled, the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will
be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the subscriber.
      3.   Communications Between Grantee And Subscribers:
         a.   Notifications To Subscribers:
            (1)   The grantee shall provide written notification on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
               (A)   Products and services offered;
               (B)   Prices and options for services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
               (C)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
               (D)   Instructions on how to use the service;
               (E)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and
               (F)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the local franchising authority's cable office.
            (2)   Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible and in writing.
Notice will be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of
such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition,
the grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any
significant changes in other information required by the preceding subsection.
         b.   Billing:
            (1)   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills will
be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.
            (2)   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee will respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days from receipt of the
complaint.
            (3)   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
               (A)   The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution
of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
               (B)   The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if
service is terminated.
            (4)   Credits for service will be issued no later than the
subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
   K.   Service Location: A service location, conveniently located within the
City, shall be open during normal business hours, and adequately staffed to
accept subscriber payments.
   L.   Deposits: Any deposit required by grantee shall bear interest at the
current lending rate if required by law.
   M.   Subscriber's Antennas: The grantee shall not require the removal, or
offer to remove or provide any inducements for removal of any potential or
existing subscriber's antenna as a condition of provision of service.
   N.   Disconnection: If any subscriber fails to pay a fee or charge, the
grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service. Such disconnection shall not
be effected until the subscriber has been given seven (7) days' advance written
notice of the intention to disconnect.
   O.   Reconnections: Grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous
obligations owed.
   P.   Downgrades:
      1.   Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected
or downgraded in accordance with FCC rules.
      2.   The billing for such service will be effective the next business day
and such disconnection or downgrade shall be made as soon as practicable. A
refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within forty
five (45) days from the date of termination of service.
   Q.   Termination Of Service: Within thirty (30) days of termination of
service to any subscriber for any reason, the grantee shall upon the
subscriber's written request, promptly remove all its overhead facilities and
equipment from the subscriber's premises without charge.
   R.   Notification To City Of Service Interruptions: The grantee shall
promptly notify the City Clerk, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral
communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the system.
For the purposes of this section, a "significant interruption in the operation
of the system" shall mean any interruption of sound or picture on one or more
channels a duration of at least one hour to at least five percent (5%) of the
subscribers, or an interruption of sound or picture on at least one or more
channels initiated by the grantee of at least four (4) hours to any single
subscriber.
   S.   Subscriber Credit For Service Interruption: Upon service interruption
of subscriber's cable service, the following shall apply:
      1.   For service interruptions of over four (4) hours and up to seven (7)
days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a credit of one-
thirtieth (1/30) of one month's fees; for affected services for each twenty
four (24) hour period service is interrupted for four (4) or more hours for all
affected subscribers.
      2.   For interruptions of seven (7) days or more in one month, the
grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a full month's credit for
affected services for all affected subscribers.
   T.   Service Repair Standards: The grantee shall render efficient service,
make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. Scheduled service interruptions, insofar as possible,
shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of
the system. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and
capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service
interruptions and requests for cable service as required by this Chapter.
   U.   Refund To Subscribers:
      1.   If the grantee fails to provide any material service requested by a
subscriber in accordance with the current FCC standards, the grantee shall,
after adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity to provide the
service promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in
question by the subscriber.
      2.   If any subscriber terminates for any other reason, the grantee shall
refund the unused portion of any prepaid subscriber service fees on a daily pro
rata basis.
      3.   Any disputes arising under this subsection shall be finally resolved
in accordance with subsection 7-4-8E of this Chapter.
   V.   Channel Guide: The grantee shall prepare and make available at no
charge to the subscribers, an accurate and up-to-date channel guide listing the
cable channels of all television signals, and service available over the cable
system. The channel guide shall be distributed to every subscriber, at least
one each year, and within thirty (30) days after a change or addition in
channels or frequency uses or services offered affecting three (3) or more
channels.
   W.   Customer Handbook: Grantee shall provide written customer policies or a
handbook to all new subscribers and, thereafter, upon request. Grantee's
written customer policies or handbook shall, at a minimum, comply with all
notice requirements in this Chapter and those promulgated by the FCC. If
grantee's operating rules are changed, subscribers shall be notified in a
timely manner. Rate and consumer complaint information will be distributed
annually to subscribers.
   X.   Subscriber Privacy:
      1.   The grantee shall be constantly alert to possible abuses of the
right of privacy or other legal rights of any subscriber, programmer, or
general citizen resulting from any device or signal associated with the cable
system. The possibility of such abuse may be discussed at any review session.
      2.   The grantee shall abide by current Federal law and FCC regulations
and section 631 of the Cable Act regarding protection of subscriber privacy.
      3.   No cable, line, amplifier, or other piece of equipment owned by the
grantee shall be installed by the grantee within private easements without
first securing the written permission of the owner, of any property involved.
   Y.   Discriminatory Or Preferential Practices: The grantee shall not, in
making available the services or facilities of its system, or in its rules or
regulations, or in any other manner, make or grant preferences or advantages to
any subscriber or potential subscriber, or to any user or potential user, and
shall not subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, based on their
race color, national origin or gender. This provision shall not prohibit
promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the system or other
legitimate uses thereof, nor the establishment of a graduated scale of charges
and classified rate schedules to which any subscriber coming within such
classification shall be entitled. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-6: SYSTEM DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   System Design:
      1.   The grantee shall construct, install, and maintain a stand-alone
headend. Upon completion of the stand-alone headend, the grantee will make
available a minimum of thirty (30) channels of programming.
      2.   The system will be designed so as to be two-way capable, and will be
constructed in a manner that will meet or exceed FCC specifications.
   B.   All Channels Emergency Alert: The grantee shall, by July 1, 1997, in
the case of any emergency or disaster, make its entire system available without
charge to the City or to any other governmental or civil defense agency that
the City shall designate. The system shall be engineered to provide an audio
alert system to allow authorized officials to automatically override the audio
signal on all channels and transmit and report emergency information. The
franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its agents, employees, officers,
and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency
use of its facilities by the franchising authority, including, but not limited
to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
   C.   Back-Up Generator: Within two (2) years after the effective date of the
franchise, the grantee will install a back-up generator at its headend that
will provide the needed power to generate the headend in the event of a power
outage.
   D.   Switching Device: The grantee, upon request from any subscriber, shall
install, for a charge, a switching device to permit a subscriber to continue to
utilize the subscriber's television antenna. The grantee shall not require the
removal, or offer to remove, any subscriber's antenna lead-in wire.
   E.   Parental Control Devices: Grantee shall provide to subscribers, upon
request and for a charge, parental control devices that allow any channel or
channels to be locked out. Such devices shall block both the video and the
audio portion of such channels to the extent that both are unintelligible. The
lockout device described herein shall be made available to all subscribers
requesting it within one hundred twenty (120) days from request.
   F.   Educational And Governmental Access:
      1.   The grantee shall provide at least one dedicated channel for
educational and governmental use.
      2.   Whenever the channel as required by this subsection is in use for
more than fifty percent (50%) of prime time, (as defined in section 76.5(n) of
the FCC rules and regulations) and more than fifty percent (50%) outside of
prime time over a three (3) month period, with at least fifty percent (50%) of
the programming being original and not duplicated, and there is demand for use
of additional channels for the same purpose, the grantee shall have six (6)
months to make an additional channel available for the same purpose; provided
however, that the cable system has been rebuilt/upgraded to a capacity of
seventy (70) channels and that said access channel does not interfere with
existing use of the channel capacity on the cable system. In no event shall the
grantee be required to provide more than two (2) access channels.
      3.   If requested by the franchising authority, grantee will provide one
channel to be used for educational and governmental access. The grantee will
activate this channel from the City Hall in Knoxville and purchase the
necessary equipment and modulators to activate the return.
   G.   Access Equipment And Facilities Fee: During the term of a franchise,
and if authorized by the City Council, grantee shall, not earlier than sixty
(60) days after the final adoption of an ordinance granting a franchise to the
cable operator by the City Council, provide ongoing capital support for public,
educational, and governmental access equipment and facilities in the amount not
to exceed fifty cents ($0.50) per subscriber per month for the entire term of
the franchise payable in the same manner as the franchise fee payment pursuant
to subsection 7-4-7A of this Chapter. The City acknowledges that this amount
shall not be considered gross revenues subject to the payment of franchise fees
pursuant to subsection 7-4-7A of this Chapter. Furthermore, payments of this
ongoing capital support shall not be deemed to be "franchise fees" within the
meaning of section 622 of the Cable Act and such payment shall not be deemed to
be "payments-in-kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against the
compensation to be paid to the City by grantee pursuant to subsection 7-4-7A of
this Chapter, or part of the compensation to be paid to the City by grantee
pursuant to subsection 7-4-7A of this Chapter. Grantee may increase each
subscriber's bill by an amount not to exceed fifty cents ($0.50) per month per
subscriber for recovery of the capital contribution. The capital contribution
will be payable by the grantee to the franchising authority after:
      1.   The approval of the franchising authority to the inclusion of the
capital contribution on subscriber's bills, including any required approval
pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933;
      2.   Notice to grantee's subscribers of the inclusion; and
      3.   The commencement of collection of the capital contribution by
grantee from its subscribers. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
   H.   Television Broadcast Signals: The grantee system shall be designed,
engineered, and maintained so as not to interfere with the television and radio
reception of residents of the City who are not subscribers to the system. (Ord.
96-3, 5-6-1996)
   I.   Leased Access Channels: The grantee shall make a portion of the
remaining unused channels available for lease to any organization, group, or
individual on a first-come, first-served basis as provided in this Chapter. The
grantee cannot exercise program controls over leased channels, but may adopt
rules governing the leasing of channel space which: 1) provides for access on a
first-come, non-discriminatory basis; 2) prohibits the presentation of lottery
information and obscene or indecent matter; 3) requires sponsorship
identification; 4) specifies a reasonable rate schedule; and 5) permits public
inspection of the record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups
requesting time, which record shall be retained for a period of at least two
(2) years. Such channels shall be made available as defined by section 612 of
the Cable Act of 1992.
   J.   Additional Services: The grantee is encouraged to make available such
additional video, audio, radio, digital, point-to- point service, and other
services as are requested by subscribers and programmers who are willing to pay
for such services; provided, that such services are technologically and
economically feasible. If no applicable rate exists when such a service is
requested, the rate change procedures established in this Chapter shall apply.
The grantee shall undertake to apply for a certificate of compliance or waiver
necessary to permit the provision of a specific additional service. Should a
dispute arise over any matter regarding additional services, the dispute may be
resolved in accordance with the provisions of the Section relating to methods
of resolving disputes. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the offering
of such new service on a temporary or experimental basis.
   K.   Technical Standards:
      1.   Methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable
television system shall comply with the most recent National Electrical Code to
the extent that such Code is consistent with local law affecting the
construction, installation, maintenance of electric supply and communications
lines. To the extent that such Code is inconsistent with other provisions of
this Chapter or with local law, the latter shall govern. The grantee must
obtain all necessary construction or excavation permits in advance from the
City.
      2.   Installation and physical dimensions of any tower constructed for
use in the cable television system shall comply with all appropriate Federal
Aviation Agency regulations.
      3.   Any antenna structure used in the cable television system shall
comply with all appropriate local, State and Federal regulations.
      4.   All working facilities and conditions used during construction,
installation, and maintenance of the cable television system shall comply with
the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
      5.   Whenever a pattern of similar complaints emerges, or where there
exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of the City, casts doubt on the
reliability or quality of cable service, the City shall have the right and
authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance
of the system. The City's right under this provision shall be limited to
requiring tests, analysis, and reports covering specific subjects and
characteristics based on said complaints or other evidence when and under such
circumstances as the City has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints
or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against
substandard cable services. Should such tests find that the cable service is
operating within the requirements of the FCC, the cost of said tests will be
paid by the City.
      6.   Any special performance tests or measurements required by the City
to be taken pursuant to subsection K5 above shall be reported to the City
within thirty (30) days after such tests or measurements are performed. Such
report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaint
which precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested, the
equipment used, and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such
tests; and the method in which such complaints were resolved. Any other
information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded.
      7.   Should any of the following occur, the grantee must notify the
franchising authority within thirty (30) days prior to any change within the
grantee's control regarding:
         a.   Addition to, deletion of, or change in received channel, if
within the control of the grantee.
         b.   Addition to, deletion of, or change in distributed channel or in
channel conversion, if within the control of the grantee.
         c.   Change in location of headend or antenna sites.
      8.   The cable communication system permitted to be operated hereunder
shall be maintained and operated in conformance with FCC rules and regulations.
Any FCC technical standards or guidelines related to the cable communications
system and facilities shall be deemed to be regulations under this Chapter.
   L.   Filing Of Maps: Upon request of the City, the grantee shall file with
the City strand maps. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-7: REGULATION BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Franchise Fee:
      1.   Payment: A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the City an
annual amount equal to five percent (5%) of the grantee's "gross revenues", as
defined in Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, all subscriber
payments, installation fees, converter boxes, local advertising, leased access
channels, pay-per-view and cable service exchanged in barter agreements. This
amount shall not include any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly
or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency
which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or
agency.
      2.   Quarterly Payments: Payment due to the City under this provision
shall be made quarterly at the City Clerk's office not later than forty five
(45) days following March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year. Any fee not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate of one and one-
half percent (11/2%) per month from the date due. Each payment shall be
accompanied with a detailed report showing the basis for the computation,
specific income categories, and such other relevant facts as may be required by
the City. The acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact, the correct amount; nor shall such acceptance
of payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for
additional sums payable by the grantee. All amounts paid shall be subject to
audit and recomputation by the City.
      3.   Limitation Of Franchise Fee Actions: The period of limitation for
recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be ten (10) years from
the date on which payment by the grantee is due.
      4.   Audit: The grantee will fully cooperate with a franchise fee audit
performed by a professional firm that is chosen by the City. The costs
associated with the audit will be paid for by the City; provided, that the
grantee shall pay for the costs if the audit shows an underpayment of franchise
fees in excess of five percent (5%) or more. In addition, the City and grantee
will design a mutually agreeable form to be used by the grantee that reflects a
breakout of the items used to calculate the franchise fees paid to the City.
      5.   Increases: The City may request an increase in franchise fees at any
time during the term of the franchise, equal to the maximum allowed by federal
law. However, such request shall be made in writing and the grantee will not be
liable for said increase until proper notice, as defined by Federal law, is
given to its subscriber. Such changes in the franchise fee shall be implemented
within ninety (90) days of notice from the City. Additionally, such increases
shall not be implemented until grantee has had an opportunity to address said
increase at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
   B.   Rates And Charges:
      1.   The franchising authority may regulate rates for the provision of
basic cable and equipment as expressly permitted by section 623 of the Cable
Act of 1992, as amended, and applicable law.
      2.   Any rate adjustments shall be filed with the City Clerk not later
than thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of the adjustment.
   C.   Renewal Of Franchise: The franchising authority and the grantee agree
that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the
grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of
section 626 in the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and substantive
protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by
the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State law.
   D.   Condition Of Sale:
      1.   If a renewal or extension of the grantee's franchise is denied or
the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either
lawfully acquires ownership of the system or by its actions lawfully effects a
transfer of ownership of the system to another party, any such acquisition or
transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth
in section 627 of the Cable Act of 1992.
      2.   In the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the
franchise, at the grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole
discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a
transfer of its system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority
further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the
grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise.
However, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater
than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end
of that time, the grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee
or assignee of its system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising
authority, the grantee and the franchising authority may avail themselves of
any rights they may have pursuant to Federal or State law. The grantee's
continued operation of its system during the six (6) month period shall not be
deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the
franchising authority or the grantee.
   E.   Transfer Of Franchise:
      1.   The grantee's right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not
be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an
entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee,
without the prior consent of the franchising authority. Such consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any
rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the franchise or system in order
to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for
transfer, the franchising authority shall, in accordance with FCC rules and
regulations, notify the grantee in writing of the information it requires to
determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee.
If the franchising authority has not taken action on the grantee's request for
transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request,
consent by the franchising authority shall be deemed given.
      2.   Prior approval of the City Council shall be required for the sale,
transfer, or other disposition of interest in or right of control over the
grantee or its assets whenever such sale, transfer, or disposition in itself or
in an accumulated total of related transactions changes the interest in or
control of the grantee by forty percent (40%) or more.
      3.   When the Grantor approves a transfer under this subsection, the new
grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in subsection
7-4-4F of this Chapter.
      4.   It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any individual or group
of individuals acting in concert to formally or informally authorize any other
individual or group of individuals to act as their nominee or to mislead the
Council in any way in regard to the sale, transfer, or disposition of interest
in or control of the grantee.
      5.   The restrictions of this subsection shall be effective immediately
upon execution of a franchise agreement.
   F.   Right Of Inspection Of Construction: The City shall have the right to
inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the permit and to make such inspections as it shall find
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this permit and other
pertinent provision of law.
   G.   New Developments: The grantee is encouraged to upgrade its facilities,
equipment, and service so that its system is as advanced as the current state
of production technology will allow. Such new developments may be a topic of
discussion at any review sessions and shall be a factor to be considered in
connection with requests for rate adjustments. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-8: COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING:
   A.   Testing For Compliance: The franchising authority may perform technical
tests of the system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not
unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the grantee of
the system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance
with the terms hereof and applicable State or Federal laws. Except in emergency
circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee
reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days, and
providing a representative of the grantee an opportunity to be present during
such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the grantee has
substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the
reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. In the event that
such testing demonstrates that the grantee has substantially complied with such
material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the
franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising
authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than once a
year, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the grantee.
   B.   Books And Records: The franchising authority or its certified public
accountant upon reasonable notice to the grantee, may review such of its books
and records at the grantee's business office, during normal business hours and
on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with
the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any
public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, the grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature under State and
Federal rules of evidence. The franchising authority agrees to treat any
information disclosed by the grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to
employees, representatives, and agent thereof that have a need to know, or in
order to enforce the provisions hereof. The grantee shall not be required to
provide subscriber information in violation of section 631 of the Cable Act.
   C.   Communications With Regulatory Agencies: Copies of all petitions,
applications, communications, reports, and all other documents submitted by the
grantee to the FCC, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or
agency shall be made available to the City upon written request to the grantee.
   D.   Complaint Records: The grantee shall maintain detailed logs setting
forth and date the substance of each complaint received by phone, mail or other
means during the preceding calendar month, if any, the name and address of each
complaining party, and the date and nature of action taken by the grantee to
respond to such complaints, or, if still pending, the status thereof. Such logs
shall be available to the City for review for one year thereafter. Name and
address of complaining party shall not be provided unless prior consent is
obtained from said party.
   E.   City Role In Complaints: Unresolved complaints concerning the system or
its operation or maintenance shall be directed to the City Manager. The City
Manager shall forward the complaint to the grantee or shall take the question
up by correspondence with the grantee. Within thirty (30) days the grantee
shall resolve the complaint or advise the City of its refusal or inability to
do so. When the grantee resolves the complaint, it shall so notify the City. If
a complaint has not been resolved, the complainant may petition the City to
take any appropriate action authorized by this Chapter.
   F.   Performance Testing: Grantee shall perform all system tests and
maintenance procedures as required by the FCC and this Chapter and in
accordance with grantee's standards of good operating practice.
   G.   Review Sessions:
      1.   In recognition of the fact that a great many technical, financial,
marketing and legal uncertainties are associated with all aspects of cable
communications at the present time, it is the intent of the City to provide for
a maximum feasible degree of flexibility in this franchise throughout its term
to achieve an advanced and modern system for the City. The principal means for
accomplishing this flexibility will be the review sessions provided for in this
Chapter. It is intended that such review sessions will serve as a means of
cooperatively working out solutions to problems that develop. Furthermore, such
review sessions shall be two-way processes. For example, if either party has
perceived that some major problem has developed, the session shall be devoted
primarily to working out solutions acceptable to both parties.
      2.   The City and the grantee may hold scheduled review sessions no later
than April 30, of the calendar year 1997, and every third year thereafter for
the duration of the franchise. All such review sessions shall be open to the
public and notice thereof shall be published once, not less than four (4) days
or more than twenty (20) days before each review session, as provided by law.
The published notice shall specify the topics to be discussed. The review
sessions may be canceled by mutual agreement of the City and grantee.
      3.   The following topics may be discussed at every scheduled review
session:
         a.   Recent and developing judicial and Federal communications
rulings.
         b.   Service rate structures.
         c.   Free and discounted services.
         d.   Application of new technology or new developments.
         e.   System performance.
         f.   System extension policy.
         g.   Services provided.
         h.   Programming offered.
         i.   Customer complaints review.
         j.   Privacy and human rights amendments to permit insurance coverage.
         k.   Community development and education.
         l.   Interconnection.
         m.   New services.
         n.   Franchise fees.
      4.   Other topics, in addition to those listed, may be added by either
party. Members of the general public may also request additional topics.
      5.   The City may utilize the services of a consultant to gain additional
information for use during the review sessions, renewal process and/or rate
hearings, mediation, and arbitration sessions. The costs of such consultant
shall be paid by the City.
   H.   Annual Report: No later than ninety (90) days after the close of the
grantee's fiscal year, the grantee shall submit a detailed written informative
report to the City, if requested, including the following information
pertaining only to the Knoxville franchise:
      1.   A summary of the previous year's activities in development of the
system, including, but not limited to, services begun or dropped and
subscribers gained or lost.
      2.   A detailed revenue statement, including a breakdown of all revenue
sources upon which the City can verify franchise fee accuracy. The list of
revenues shall include but not be limited to, a specific breakdown of the
following items: basic tier service charges, expanded basic service charges,
installation charges, reconnection fees, advertising revenues, premium channel
revenues, shopping service revenue, revenue from other sources such as
contracted or subleased video, audio and data transmission services, pay per
view, and miscellaneous revenue.
      3.   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and specific nature
of complaints and their disposition.
      4.   A list of key management for the Knoxville, Iowa franchise along
with their addresses and job titles.
      5.   The annual report of the parent company, if a public corporation.
      6.   A summary of types of communication signals and services provided
without charge or provided under a barter arrangement along with their dollar
equivalent.
   I.   Cost Of Reports: One copy of all reports and records required under
this or any other Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the
grantee. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-9: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Indemnification: The grantee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold
harmless the City from and against any and all liability, losses, and damage to
property or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made under
workmens' compensation laws, which may arise out of or be caused by the
erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance, or operation of
grantee's cable television system and caused by any act or failure to act on
the part of the grantee, its agents, officers, servants, or employees.
   B.   Insurance:
      1.   The grantee shall maintain insurance in such amounts and kinds of
coverage's as may be specified by the City. The grantee shall maintain such
insurance with insurance underwriters authorized to do business in the State.
All policies shall name the City, its employees, servants, agents, and officers
as additional insured parties. A certificate of insurance shall be filed
annually with the City Clerk. Each policy shall provide that it may not be
canceled nor the amount of coverage altered until thirty (30) days after
receipt of the City Clerk of a registered mail notice of such intent to cancel
or alter coverage.
      2.   The grantee shall maintain and provide to the City Clerk proof of
public liability insurance for not less than the following amounts:
         a.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00), any one occurrence, bodily
injury or property damage.
         b.   Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) products/completed operations
annual aggregate liability.
         c.   Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate.
   C.   Insurance For Contractors And Subcontractors: Grantee shall provide
coverage for any contractor or subcontractor involved in the construction,
installation, maintenance or operation of its cable communications system by
either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance policies or
requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate insurance
coverage consistent with this Section and appropriate to the extent of its
involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of
grantee's cable communication system.
   D.   Foreclosure: A foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or part of the
system shall be treated as a change in control of the grantee and the provision
of subsection 7-4-10H of this Chapter shall apply.
   E.   Receivership: The City shall have the right to cancel the franchise one
hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee, to
take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceedings, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of
said one hundred twenty (120) days, or less:
      1.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after being elected or
appointed, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all
provisions of this Chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      2.   Shall have executed an agreement, approved by the court having
jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee agrees to be bound by this
Chapter and the franchise granted to the grantee.
   F.   Publication Of Notice: Whenever the provisions of this Chapter require
that notice be published, such notice shall be prepared and published by the
City. The cost of publication will be borne by the grantee.
   G.   Cost Of Publication: The grantee shall assume the costs of publication
of this Chapter, the costs of any other legal publication for amendments to
this Chapter prior to franchise award, the costs of publication or any other
ordinances or legal documents prior to franchise award, and the costs of the
special election, if required by Iowa law.
   H.   Taxes: Subject to Federal and State law, the grantee shall pay all real
estate taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes, license fees,
permit fees and other charges of a like nature which may be taxed, charged,
assessed, levied, or imposed upon the property of the grantee and upon and
services rendered by the grantee. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-10: ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: In the event that the franchising authority
believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it
shall notify the grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged
noncompliance.
   B.   Grantee's Right To Cure Or Respond: The grantee shall have thirty (30)
days from receipt of the notice described in subsection A above:
      1.   To respond to the franchising authority, contesting the assertion of
noncompliance; or
      2.   To cure such default; or
      3.   In the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be
cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy
such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and
the projected date that they will be completed.
   C.   Public Hearing: In the event that the grantee fails to respond to the
notice described in subsection A above pursuant to the procedures set forth in
subsection B above, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied
within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to subsection B3 above,
the franchising authority shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the
default. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee in writing of the
time and place of such meeting no less than five (5) business days in advance
and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
   D.   Enforcement:
      1.   In the event the franchising authority, after such public hearing,
determines that the grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise,
the franchising authority, subject to applicable Federal law, may:
         a.   Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably
lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;
         b.   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief; or
         c.   In the case of the substantial default of a material provision of
the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in accordance with
the procedures outlined in this Section.
      2.   The franchising authority shall give written notice to the grantee
of its intent to revoke the franchise on the basis of noncompliance by the
grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a
material provision of the franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact
nature of the noncompliance. The grantee shall have forty five (45) days from
such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection.
In the event the franchising authority has not received a response satisfactory
from the grantee, it may then seek termination of the franchise at a public
meeting. The franchising authority shall cause to be served upon the grantee,
at least five (5) business days prior to such public meeting, a written notice
specifying the time and place of such meeting and stating its intent to request
such termination.
      3.   At the designated meeting, the franchising authority shall give the
grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it
shall determine whether of not the franchise shall be revoked. The grantee may
appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power
to review the decision of the franchising authority "de novo" and to modify or
reverse such decision as justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate
court must be taken within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the determination
of the franchising authority.
      4.   The franchising authority may, at its sole discretion, take any
lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the franchising authority's
rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise.
   E.   Closing Of Streets: The grantee shall not be entitled to damages from
the City sustained by the virtue of the closing, vacation, or relocation of any
streets or alleys.
   F.   Reservation Of Rights: The grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with this Chapter by reason of the City's failure to
enforce prompt compliance.
   G.   Impossibility Of Performance: The grantee shall not be held in default
or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged
defaults are caused by the following circumstances if reasonably beyond its
control:
      1.   Governmental or regulatory restrictions;
      2.   War;
      3.   National emergencies;
      4.   Fire;
      5.   Acts of God.
   H.   Termination Of Franchise:
      1.   Grounds For Revocation: The City reserves the right to revoke any
franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise
in the following circumstances:
         a.   If the grantee should default in the performance of a material
obligation under this Chapter or the franchise, and fails to cure the default
subject to the provisions of this Section.
         b.   If a petition is filed by or against the grantee under the
Bankruptcy Act or any other insolvency or creditors' rights laws, (State or
Federal), and the grantee shall fail to have it dismissed.
         c.   If a receiver, trustee or liquidator of the grantee is applied
for or appointed for all or part of its assets, subject to the provisions of
subsection 7-4-9E of this Chapter.
         d.   If the grantee should violate any orders or ruling of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee, unless the grantee is
lawfully contesting the legality or applicability of such order or ruling.
         e.   If the grantee makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors.
         f.   If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC or any State
regulatory body, by rules, decision or other action, determines that any
material provisions of the franchise documents, including this Chapter, are
invalid or unenforceable. If a provision is found to be invalid or
unenforceable, the grantor will notify the grantee and allow thirty (30) days
to renegotiate the provision prior to revocation proceedings.
         g.   If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force
and effect liability and indemnification coverages as required in subsection 7-
4-9B of this Chapter.
      2.   Restoration Of Property: In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill at its own expense any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment
and appliances, without affecting the electric or telephone cables, wires or
attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal.
Liability insurance indemnity provided in subsection 7-4-9B of this Chapter
shall continue in full force and effect during the removal period.
   I.   Violations And Penalties: The imposition of penalties pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the City from exercising the other enforcement
provisions of this Chapter, including revocation, or other statutory or
judicially imposed penalties. Penalties pursuant to this subsection may be
imposed as follows:
      1.   For failure to complete construction or extend service in accordance
with franchise, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the
violation continues;
      2.   For failure to comply with requirements for public, educational and
government access, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the
violation continues;
      3.   For failure to submit reports, maintain records, provide documents
or information, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the
violation continues;
      4.   For violation of customer service standards required by the
franchise agreement, and this Chapter, or by FCC regulation, one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per day per standard violated;
      5.   For violation of the books and financial records provisions of the
franchise agreement and this Chapter, up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per day for each day the violation continues;
      6.   For violations of other material provisions of the franchising
agreement or this Chapter, up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each
day the violation continues. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
7-4-11: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Actions Of Parties: In any action by the franchising authority of the
grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall
act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any
instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such
approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   B.   Equal Protection: In the event the franchising authority enters into a
franchise, permit, license, authorization, or other agreement of any kind with
any other person or entity other than the grantee to enter into the franchising
authority's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or
operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service
area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those
contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair
competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection
under the law.
   C.   Notice: Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every
notice or response required by the franchise to be served upon the franchising
authority or the grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been
duly given to the required party five (5) business days after having been
posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand
delivered or sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid.
   D.   Descriptive Headings: The captions to sections contained herein are
intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not
affect the meaning of interpretation of the text herein.
   E.   Severability: If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision
hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, by any court
of competent jurisdiction or by any State or Federal regulatory authority
having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the
validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term of provision hereof,
all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the
franchise, or any renewal or renewals thereof. Provided, however, that in the
event that the Federal Communications Commission declared any section invalid,
then such section or sections will be renegotiated by the City Council and the
grantee. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
CHAPTER 5
HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
7-5-1: Numbers Required
7-5-2: Base Lines
7-5-3: Odd And Even Numbers
7-5-4: Numbering Plan
7-5-5: Number Requirements
7-5-6: Clerk To Assign Numbers
7-5-7: Time Limit
7-5-1: NUMBERS REQUIRED:
The owners of all houses and places of business shall cause the same to be
numbered by placing a number at, near or over the main entrance thereto in the
manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
7-5-2: BASE LINES:
A line along Main Street and extended therefrom is hereby fixed as the base
line for the numbering of buildings on all streets running north and south, and
First Street is hereby fixed as the base line for all streets running east and
west. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
7-5-3: ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS:
Even numbers shall be assigned to the west side of north and south streets and
to the south side of east and west streets and odd numbers to the sides
opposite. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
7-5-4: NUMBERING PLAN:
The plan of numbering commonly known as the Philadelphia Plan shall be followed
in numbering buildings, and each block shall be so divided in numbering that
one number shall so far as practicable be assigned to each twenty feet (20')
except that where there is more than one entrance in any twenty feet (20') a
number shall be assigned for each entrance. Where real estate has been lotted
but not divided into blocks the numbers shall be assigned as though the same
were platted in blocks the size of those platted in the original plat of the
City. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
7-5-5: NUMBER REQUIREMENTS:
The figures of every number shall be not less than two and one- half inches
(21/2") in height and shall be visible from the street. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909;
1996 Code)
7-5-6: CLERK TO ASSIGN NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the owners of all buildings the numbering of which is
required hereby to apply to the Clerk who shall compute and ascertain the
number required for said buildings according to the description furnished by
said owner and give a certificate setting forth said number and the said owners
shall cause the same to be affixed to said buildings within thirty (30) days
from the passage of this Chapter. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
7-5-7: TIME LIMIT:
The owners of all buildings hereafter erected shall obtain a certificate from
the Clerk assigning them a number for said building and place the same thereon
within ten (10) days after the completion thereof. (Ord. 200, 8-4-1909)
CHAPTER 6
TREE PLANTING AND TRIMMING
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purpose
7-6-2: Authority
7-6-3: Tree Planting Permits
7-6-4: Definitions
7-6-5: Street Tree Categories
7-6-6: Prohibited Species
7-6-7: Tree Planting Regulations In Parking Areas
7-6-8: Maintenance Of Street Trees
7-6-9: Nuisance; Abatement
7-6-10: Appeals To City Council
7-6-11: Tree Trimming Specifications
7-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish and maintain a healthy urban forest
within the city. Rules for planting or removal, care and maintenance of trees
are included to ensure proper treatment and to avoid interference with
infrastructure on parking areas in Knoxville. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-2: AUTHORITY:
The zoning and building administrator will have the authority to issue permits
for planting of trees and other plantings on parking areas. The director of
public works will have responsibility for removal of trees and plantings on
parking areas. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-3: TREE PLANTING PERMITS:
Before planting trees or shrubs on parking areas, a permit must be received by
the zoning and building administrator for review. The applicant shall
demonstrate that all plantings will be done in accordance with all the rules
and regulations as set out in this chapter. The cost of a tree planting permit
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the revenue collected from this
permit fee shall be held in a perpetual care fund for the care and maintenance
of the trees in the parking areas. These funds shall not be used to replace
trees removed by the city or the property owner. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions are adopted:
PARKING AREAS: Those parts of the street right of way not covered by sidewalk
and lying between the lot line and the curb line.
STREET TREES: All trees, bushes and shrubs located between the street and the
sidewalk. For those lots that do not have a sidewalk, it shall be the area
between the lot line and the curb line. (Ord. 15-07, 5-4-2015)
7-6-5: STREET TREE CATEGORIES:
The following is a list of street trees by category which may be planted in
street parking areas. Street trees not listed must receive prior planting
approval from the public works director:
   "A" CATEGORY1 (PARKING 10 FEET TO 14 FEET)
      Common Name      Minimum        Height Spread
                            Spacing (Feet) (Feet) (Feet)
Amur maple (tree form only) 25             20     20
Eastern redbud              25             25     20
Flowering crabapples:
Adams                       25             20     20
Centurian                   25             15     5
Donald Wyman                25             15     15
Indian summer               25             20     20
Pink spire                  25             25     15
Prairie fire                25             20     20
Professor Sprenger          25             15     15
Snowdrift                   25             20     20
Sparkler                    25             15     25
Spring snow (fruitless)     25             20     20
Zumi 'bobwhite'             25             20     15
Zumi 'catocarpa' redbud     25             20     20
Japanese tree lilac         25             15     10
Pagoda dogwood              25             20     15
Washington hawthorn2        25             20     15
White fringe tree           25             15     15
 
Notes:
1.   Where utility wires are conflicting, only trees in category "A" may be
planted.
2.   Washington hawthorn trees should be used with caution. This beautiful tree
has wicked thorns, which potentially could harm pedestrians if the tree's
canopy is not raised to a proper level.   
   "B" CATEGORY (PARKING 12 FEET TO 14 FEET)
      Common Name         Minimum        Height Spread
                               Spacing (Feet) (Feet) (Feet)
Columnar sugar maple           35             35     10
Greenspire linden              35             50     35
Littleleaf European linden     35             50     35
Pyramidal American linden      35             50     35
River birch (single stem only) 35             50     35
Shubert chokecherry            35             35     30
 
   "C" CATEGORY (PARKING 14 FEET AND OVER)
      Common Name         Minimum        Height Spread
                               Spacing (Feet) (Feet) (Feet)
Maples:
Black maple                    55             75     50
Fassems black                  55             50     40
Red maple                      35             60     40
Schwedler maple                55             50     30
Sugar maple                    55             75     50
Oaks:
Bur oak                        55             70     50
Red oak                        55             75     50
White swamp oak                55             75     50
Others:
Hackberry                      55             50     40
Kentucky coffee tree           55             60     50
Linden                         55             50     40
London plane tree              55             60     50
Maidenhair tree (ginkgo, male) 55             50     40
Sycamore                       55             75     50
Tulip                          55             55     50
 
The above listed trees are recommended or highly recommended by the Iowa State
University's horticulture publication, "Landscape Plants For Iowa". The
flowering crabapples are listed as disease free or very disease resistant.
Red maples have several cultivars, which are tall growing trees (60 to 70 feet
in height), not the previously listed thirty five feet (35'). Therefore, red
maple trees were moved to category "C".
Norway maples (columnar or other) are considered nuisance trees that cast dense
shade (little or no grass growth beneath the tree) and have shallow roots that
can wreak havoc on concrete sidewalks and driveways.
Elm trees are not recommended because of Dutch elm disease and other
infestations. Ash trees are not recommended or not available because of the
emerald ash borer, which is approaching Iowa and has afflicted ash trees in
states to the east and northeast. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-6: PROHIBITED SPECIES:
It shall be unlawful to plant any of the following described species of street
trees upon any street parking areas in the city along with any new species and
varieties that are known to be, or which may become a public nuisance. This
list includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   All species of shrubbery and bushes
   Birch
   Black locust
   Box elder
   Carolina poplar
   Catalpa
   Common fruit trees
   Conifers (evergreens)
   Cottonwood
   Elm (Chinese)
   Ginkgo (female only)
   Mountain ash
   Mulberry, common
   Poplar
   Russian olive
   Soft or silver maple
   Sumac
   Trees bearing large nuts, i.e., walnut, hickory, butternut
   Willow
   (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-7: TREE PLANTING REGULATIONS IN PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Spacing:
      1.   Trees should be spaced so that there will be little or no
interference with their full development. The minimum spacing from center of
tree to center of tree shall be twenty five feet (25') for category "A", thirty
five feet (35') for category "B" and fifty five feet (55') for category "C".
      2.   Trees shall not be planted closer than one-half (1/2) of the minimum
spacing requirement per category to the neighboring property owner's side or
rear lot line extended, i.e., category "A" = 12.5 feet; category "B" = 17.5
feet; category "C" = 27.5 feet.
   B.   Impervious Materials: No impervious material shall be placed nearer
than twenty four inches (24") to the trunk of the tree in categories "A" and
"B" and thirty six inches (36") in category "C".
   C.   Curb, Sidewalk Line: No street tree shall be planted nearer than three
feet (3') from the curb or the inside existing or potential sidewalk line and
centered in the parking area if possible. Plantings in parking areas over
eleven feet (11') in width shall be planted four feet (4') from the edge of the
sidewalk.
   D.   Intersections: At street intersections, trees shall not be located
within seventy feet (70') of the intersection of curb lines along arterial
streets, within fifty feet (50') along collector streets, or within thirty feet
(30') of the intersection of curb lines along local streets. In cases where two
(2) different types of streets intersect, the location of the tree shall be
determined by the type of street adjacent to the proposed tree.
   E.   Driveway, Fire Hydrant: No tree shall be planted within ten feet (10')
of a driveway or fire hydrant.
   F.   Standards And Poles: The minimum spacing from a light standard or
transmission pole shall be ten feet (10') for category "A"; twenty feet (20')
for category "B"; and thirty feet (30') for category "C" measured from center
of street tree to standard or pole.
   G.   Sewer And Water Lines: The city shall not allow the planting of street
trees in the city parking area within five (5) horizontal feet of the exterior
dimension of any sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water lines; and it may only be
the type listed in this chapter under category "A".
   H.   Under Power Lines: Street trees planted under power lines may only be
the type listed in this chapter under category "A".
   I.   Underground Utilities: The city reserves the right to restrict the
planting of trees if there are too many other underground utilities in the
parking such as gas, phone, etc.
   J.   Categories: Category "A" and "B" trees may be used in category "C"
plantings as well as category "A" trees may be planted in category "B".
   K.   Species List: As new tree species are introduced, they will be added to
these lists.
   L.   Enforcement: A variety of street trees planted along city blocks shall
be encouraged and enforced by the public works director.
   M.   Nursery Stock: All street trees shall be of nursery stock unless
previously approved by the public works director. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-8: MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES:
   A.   Property Owner, Duty To Remove Overhanging Limbs: It shall be the duty
of all private property owners having "street trees", as defined herein,
located in the "parking areas", as defined herein, or abutting or overhanging
any public property, street parkings, public alleyways, public sidewalks and
other private property: (Ord. 15-07, 5-4-2015)
      1.   To keep all trees pruned so that the lower branches are not less
than eight feet (8') in height above public sidewalks, sixteen feet (16') above
the traveled portion of all public streets, public alleys and primary highways.
      2.   To remove all damaged and broken limbs; all limbs which are or may
become dangerous to travel upon the public way and all limbs that obstruct the
natural flow of any meandering public streams within the city limits.
      3.   To remove or prune all limbs of street trees that are or may become
damaging, dangerous, or a potential nuisance to abutting real and personal
property.
      4.   To maintain all street trees in such a manner so as not to interfere
with the vision of drivers or vehicles approaching any intersection, street, or
alley.
      5.   To keep all street trees trimmed so as not to unduly obstruct
streetlights or traffic signs and signals. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
   B.   Removal Of Trees By City: City crews will remove dead or diseased
trees, located in the parking area as defined in this chapter, as determined by
the county extension office. (Ord. 15-07, 5-4-2015)
7-6-9: NUISANCE; ABATEMENT:
All street trees which are planted in violation of, or not maintained in strict
compliance with, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to
constitute a public nuisance. The public works director shall cause written
notice to be served on the property owner requiring such nuisance to be
corrected within a specified period, or the public works director shall cause
such nuisance to be abated, and the costs thereof assessed against the owner of
the property in the manner as ordinary taxes. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-10: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Whenever, because of unusual circumstances, there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the city council may
grant a specific exemption for individual situations; provided, they shall
first find that special and unusual individual circumstances make the strict
application of this chapter impractical and that the exemption granted with
appropriate safeguards is in conformity with the intent and purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
7-6-11: TREE TRIMMING SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to set guidelines for the
trimming of trees in the city.
   B.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "trees" shall include not
only trees, but also bushes and other plants to be trimmed.
   C.   Specifications:
      1.   Any person trimming trees or causing trees, bushes and other plants
to be trimmed under the authority of this section shall:
         a.   Determine if the property upon which the tree is located is
publicly or privately owned; if privately owned, the entity wishing to trim (if
not itself the owner) shall cause written notice to be given to the owner,
occupant or person in control of the property at least fifteen (15) days prior
to any trimming; provided, however, notice shall not be required if trimming is
necessary to restore electrical service or relieve a public emergency resulting
from storm, accident, similar casualty, or other cause which immediately
threatens electrical service or public safety. The notice shall inform the
person of the nature of the trimming to be performed, the person's right to
trim the tree, bush or other plant, the date when such trimming must be
completed if done by owner and whether an assessment or charge will be imposed
for trimming the tree, bush or other plant.
         b.   Trim trees, bushes and plants to the extent necessary to remove
obstruction to protect lives and property.
         c.   Employ persons skilled in tree trimming so that the life and
general aesthetic qualities of the tree are preserved.
      2.   The owner of any tree, shrub or plant protruding into or overhanging
a street or sidewalk shall trim the branches thereof to remove any obstruction
of the view of any streetlamp, street sign, traffic control device or street
intersection. A clear space of eight feet (8') above the surface of a sidewalk
and sixteen feet (16') above the street must be maintained. All trimming shall
conform to the specifications in subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   The city manager or his/her designee may order the removal of any
tree, shrub or plant or any part thereof which does not conform to the
specification of subsection C2 of this section. Notice shall be given to the
owner of the property as set forth in subsection C1 of this section. If the
owner, occupant or person in control fails to comply with the notice, the city
manager or his/her designee shall cause the obstructing branches or foliage to
be removed and shall submit the costs incident to the service of notice and
removal to the city council, which shall certify the same to the county auditor
for collection with and in the same manner as general property taxes. Provided,
however, that in the event the city manager or his/her designee determines that
a hazardous condition exists which constitutes an immediate danger to public
safety because of the extensive nature or location of an obstruction caused by
any tree, shrub, plant or any part thereof, the city manager or his/her
designee may cause the removal thereof forthwith without notice and in such
event, costs may be assessed in the same manner as provided above, after notice
to the property owner and opportunity for hearing before the city council is
given.
      4.   Except as provided by subsection C3 of this section, no tree, bush
or shrub shall be removed without the written consent of the owner of the
property upon which the tree, bush or shrub is located. (Ord. 08-07, 7-21-2008)
CHAPTER 7
TRAINS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Speed Of Trains
7-7-1: SPEED OF TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any railroad train through any street crossing
within the platted area of the City at a speed greater than twenty five (25)
miles per hour. (Ord., 7-3-1972)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Fire Limits
8-1-2: Fire Zones
8-1-1: FIRE LIMITS:
The fire limits of the City are hereby established as that territory included
in blocks one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7),
eight (8), seventeen (17), eighteen (18) and the south half (1/2) of blocks
thirteen (13), fourteen (14), fifteen (15) and sixteen (16), all of said blocks
being in the original plat of the City. (Ord. 443, 4-5-1954)
8-1-2: FIRE ZONES:
All areas of the City zoned M-2 on the Official Zoning Map are hereby
classified Fire Zone 1. All areas of the City zoned C-4 on the Official Zoning
Map are classified Fire Zone 2. All other areas are classified Fire Zone 3.
(Ord. 77-2, 2-21-1977)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Adoption Of Code
8-2-2: Enforcement
8-2-3: Definition
8-2-4: Amendments, Modification, Additions, And Deletions
8-2-5: Appeals
8-2-6: Penalties
8-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The Code known as the 2009 International Fire Code and all amendments thereto
is repealed and the 2018 International Fire Code as published by the
International Code Council including appendices B, C, and D and all amendments
thereto is hereby adopted. (Ord. 15-01, 1-19-2015; amd. Ord. 21-15, 1-15-2021)
8-2-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department.
(Ord. 9-1967)
8-2-3: DEFINITION:
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the code hereby adopted, it shall
be held to mean the city of Knoxville, Iowa. (Ord. 9-1967)
8-2-4: AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATION, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS:
The following amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to the 2018
International Fire Code, are hereby made:
   (1)   Section 101.1 is revised to read:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the
City of Knoxville, Iowa, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   (2)   Section 105.1.2 is revised to read:
      Section 105.1.2 Types of Permits. There shall be three (3) types of
permits as follows:
      1.   Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to
conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section
105.6 of the IFC for either:
         1.1   A prescribed period.
         1.2   Until renewed or revoked.
      2.   Construction permit - A construction permit allows the applicant to
install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
Section 105.7 of the IFC.
      3.   Fire Safety Operational Permit - A fire safety operational permit
(FSOP) allows the applicant to conduct business within the City of Knoxville
and requires the applicant to provide requested business information bi-
annually as required by the fire code official. The permit (FSOP) is valid for
two years from the date of issuance.
      Permit Exception: The following occupancies are not required to obtain a
fire safety operational permit (FSOP):
      1.   Home based businesses.
      2.   Entities subject to state or federal fire safety inspections, such
as schools, licensed daycares and preschools, hospitals, etc. Entity must
provide proof of a valid fire safety inspection to the fire code official upon
request.
   (3)   Section 105.2 is revised to add a sentence at the end of section to
read: Section 105.2 Application for a permit shall be submitted to the fire
department with all required information not less than 14 days, or as stated on
permit application, prior to the event requiring a permit.
   (4)   Section 105.4 is revised to add a sentence at the end of section to
read: Section 105.4 The fire code official at their discretion may send
construction plans to an outside agency for review, the fire code official
shall choose the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees
associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency. A certificate
of occupancy shall not be issued until the review fees have been paid.
   (5)   Section 107.2.3 is revised to add a new section to read:
      Section 107.2.3 Opening, expansion, or relocation inspections - A
satisfactory fire inspection is required before any new business can open for
business or any existing business can open at or in a new location, expanded or
enlarged location.
   (6)   Section 110.4 is revised to read:
      Section 1 10.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $855.00 dollars or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (7)   Section 112.4 is revised to read:
      Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be liable to a fine of not less than $105.00 or more than $855.00.
   (8)   Section 1013.7 is revised to add a new section to read:
      Section 1013.7 Additional Exit Signs: Exit signs may be required at the
discretion of the fire code official to clarify an exit or exit access.
   (9)   Any further amendments, modifications, additions, and deletions to the
International Fire Code may be made by City Council resolution. (Ord. 9-1967;
amd. Ord. 21-15, 1-15-2021)
8-2-5: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within thirty (30)
days from the date of the decision appealed. (Ord. 9-1967)
8-2-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not less than three (3) days nor more
than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Removal Of Prohibited Conditions: The application of the above penalty
shall not be held to prevent enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord.
9-1967)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Adoption Of Building Code
8-3-2: General Inspector
8-3-3: Amendments To The Building Code
8-3-4: Mobile Homes
8-3-5: Modular Or Sectional Homes
8-3-6: Conflict With State Laws
8-3-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of the state code, the International Building Code,
2018 edition, the International Residential Code, 2018 edition and the
International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition, and all amendments thereto
as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference
by the city as its building code, except for such portions as may hereinafter
be deleted, modified or amended. A copy of the building code is on file in the
office of the city clerk. ( Ord. 20-10, 8-3-2020)
8-3-2: GENERAL INSPECTOR:
The city manager shall appoint a general inspector for the city who shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-01, 3-3-2014)
8-3-3: AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE:
The International Building Code, 2018 edition (hereinafter known as the IBC),
and the International Residential Code, 2018 edition (hereinafter known as the
IRC); and the International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition (hereinafter
known as the IEBC) are amended as hereinafter set out in Section
8-3-3:
   A.   Building permit fees shall be established by city council resolution.
   B.   Section R311.7.5.1, Riser height, of the IRC, is hereby amended by
adding the following exceptions:
   Section R311.7.5.1 Riser height exception 3 The maximum riser height shall
be 7 ¾ inches. The riser height shall be measured vertically between leading
edges of the adjacent treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of
stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch , except at the top
or bottom riser of any interior stair where this dimension may deviate by a
maximum of 1 inch. In no case shall the risers exceed the maximum height of 7 ¾
inches.
   C.   Section R311.7.8.2, Continuity, of the IRC, is hereby amended by adding
the following exception:
   Section R311.7.8.2 Continuity exception 3 Handrails within a dwelling unit
or serving an individual dwelling unit shall be permitted to be interrupted at
one location in a straight stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge
and is offset and immediately continues.
   D.   Section R310.2.2 of the IRC, is hereby amended by adding the following
exception:
   Section R310.2.2 exception A landing may be provided to meet the maximum
sill height of forty-four (44) inches above the floor or landing provided. The
landing shall be not less than thirty-six (36) inches wide, not less than
twelve (12) inches out from the exterior wall, and not more than twenty-four
(24) inches in height. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the floor
below or the wall under the window it serves
   E.   Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler system, of the IRC,
is hereby amended by adding the following exceptions:
      1.   Existing exception 1 remains unchanged.
      2.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required
where additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have
an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
      3.   Townhouse structures that contain eight (8) or less dwelling units.
      2.   Townhouse structures less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square
feet floor space, exclusive of any garages
   F.   Section R313.2 One-and two-family automatic fire sprinkler systems, of
the IRC, is hereby amended by adding the following exception:
      2.   Dwelling units in which the gross square footage of the dwelling
space(s), including all floor levels whether finished or unfinished and all
basement areas whether finished or unfinished (exclusive of attached garage
area), does not exceed 8,000 square feet. (amd. Ord. 20-10, 8-3-2020)
8-3-4: MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Compliance With State Standards; Permit Fee: No mobile home, except
those already located within the corporate limits, shall hereafter be used for
dwelling purposes within this city which does not meet the standards
established by the state of Iowa, and the building official shall require
certifications as necessary to prove compliance therewith and such
specification plats attached to the mobile home as required by said mobile home
standards. The permit fee for a mobile home shall be the same as that set out
in the amended international building code, less any fee paid to a state
approved inspector as provided in the state building code.
   B.   Installation Requirements: The building official shall ensure that the
following installation requirements are enforced:
      1.   Tie Downs Required: All mobile homes shall be enclosed and tied down
in a manner at least equivalent to the following:
         a.   Mobile homes up to thirty foot (30') length must have two (2)
frame ties per side.
         b.   Mobile homes thirty foot to fifty foot (30' to 50') length must
have three (3) frame ties per side.
         c.   Mobile homes fifty foot to seventy foot (50' to 70') length must
have four (4) frame ties per side.
         d.   Mobile homes over seventy foot (70') length must have five (5)
frame ties per side.
         e.   In addition, over the home ties must be as close to each end as
possible, with straps at stud and rafter locations.
      2.   Anchor Requirements: Owner will provide soil tests made to assure
that the following anchors will withstand three thousand seven hundred fifty
(3,750) pounds of pull per ten feet (10') of mobile home.
         a.   Auger or deadman, six inches (6") in diameter; arrowhead, eight
inches (8").
         b.   Auger or arrowhead depth of four feet (4'); deadman, five feet
(5'). All augers must be screwed into the earth the full four feet (4') depth.
         c.   Anchor rod five-eighths inch (5/8") diameter with welded eye at
top must be hooked into concrete when used in deadman anchors.
         d.   Anchors to slabs must equal the above in pull resistance.
      3.   Connectors Required:
         a.   Galvanized or stainless steel cable; three-eighths inch (3/8") (7
x 7 - 7 wires each), or
         b.   Galvanized aircraft cable; one-fourth inch (1/4) (7 x 19 - 7
strands of 19 wires each), or
         c.   Steel strap; one and one-fourth inch by thirty five thousandths
inch (11/4" x 0.035") galvanized, with tensioning device.
         d.   Cable ends secured by two (2) 4-bolt clamps.
         e.   Steel rods; five-eighths inch (5/8") with ends welded closed to
form an eye.
         f.   Turnbuckles five-eighths inch (5/8") drop forged; closed eyes.
Other tensioning devices of similar strength approved.
      4.   Piers And Footing Required:
         a.   Space at ten foot (10') intervals on both frame rails with end
ones no further than five feet (5') from end of mobile home.
         b.   Footings of solid concrete sixteen inches by sixteen inches by
four inches (16" x 16" x 4"), or
         c.   Piers of standard eight inch by sixteen inch (8" x 16") solid
concrete block.
         d.   Wood blocks used for leveling shall not exceed maximum thickness
of four inches (4"). Such blocks must be of nominal eight inch by sixteen inch
(8" x 16") dimensions.
         e.   Other equivalent piers accepted. An adjustable screw anchor type
column fastened to both frame rail and to a concrete pad or four foot (4')
thickness extending the length and width of the mobile home is especially
recommended.
      5.   Patio Awnings And Cabana Roofs:
         a.   Two (2) rows of vertical support bars; spacing twelve feet (12').
Second row to be down middle or at mobile home edge, anchored to concrete floor
or equivalent footing.
         b.   Other structures on lot must be secured.
         c.   Tip out rooms to be held by over the home tie at outer edge.
         d.   Clerestory roof requires over the home tie at end of each raised
selection. (Ord. 14-01, 3-3-2014)
8-3-5: MODULAR OR SECTIONAL HOMES:
Modular or sectional homes shall not be deemed mobile homes, but must comply
with the International Residential Code. (Ord. 20-10, 8-3-2020)
8-3-6: CONFLICT WITH STATE LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter or in the International Building Code, the
International Residential Code, and the International Existing Building Code,
as adopted, shall be construed to be in conflict with state laws or the state
housing code. In the event of such conflict, the state law shall prevail. (Ord.
20-10, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Adoption Of State Plumbing Code And Mechanical Code
8-4-2: References In The Code
8-4-3: General Inspector
8-4-4: Permit Required
8-4-5: Application
8-4-6: Permits Not Required
8-4-7: Issuance Of Permits
8-4-8: Supervision By General Inspector
8-4-9: Work Started
8-4-10: Additional Fixtures
8-4-11: Inspection
8-4-12: Tests
8-4-13: Notice Of Acceptance
8-4-14: Final Acceptance
8-4-15: Repairs
8-4-16: City To Install
8-4-17: Remedy Defects
8-4-18: Access To Buildings
8-4-19: Notify General Inspector
8-4-20: Plumbing And Mechanical Code Permit Fees
8-4-21: Plumbing And Mechanical Contractor Licenses
8-4-22: Master, Journeyman And Apprentice License Required
8-4-1: ADOPTION OF STATE PLUMBING CODE AND MECHANICAL CODE:
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and shall be the plumbing
and mechanical code for the city:
   A.   The State Plumbing Code, which consists of Sections 101 and 102 and
Chapters 2 to 17 of the 2021 edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, published by
the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 4755 E.
Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761, with amendments, as provided in 641
Iowa Administrative code, Chapter 25, and the 2018 edition of the National Fuel
Gas Code (“NFPA 54") published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471, and the 2017 edition of the Liquefied
Petroleum Gas Code (“NFPA 58") published by the National Fire Protection
Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471, as provided in 661
Iowa Administrative Code, Chapter 226, are adopted and incorporated by this
reference in their entirety as though set forth in this article, except as
otherwise indicated in this article. This adoption of the State Plumbing Code
is pursuant to Iowa Code Section 105.4.
   B.   The State Mechanical Code which, consists of the 2021 edition of the
International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council,
4051 West Flosmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478 (“IMC”), with amendments,
as provided in 641 Iowa Administrative Code 61.2(105), is adopted and
incorporated by this reference in its entirety, as though set forth in this
article, except as otherwise indicated in this article. This adoption of the
State Mechanical Code is pursuant to Iowa Code Section 105.4. (Ord. 20-11, 8-3-
2020; amd. Ord. 23-05, 6-5-2023)
8-4-2: REFERENCES IN THE CODE:
Reference to "city" shall mean the city of Knoxville. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-3: GENERAL INSPECTOR:
The city manager shall appoint a general inspector for the city who shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Obtaining And Posting Permit: No person shall begin work on the
construction or alteration of any plumbing or mechanical system in any building
in the city (except as provided in section
8-4-6 of this chapter), without first having obtained a plumbing permit for the
same from the general inspector; and the said permit must at all times during
the construction of said work, and until the completion thereof, be posted in
some accessible place in the building wherein such work is being done.
   B.   Homeowner’s Permit: A plumbing and/or mechanical permit shall be issued
only to such persons holding a valid plumbing or mechanical license issued by
the state of Iowa except that a bona fide owner living in his/her own home may
be issued a plumbing or mechanical permit to do plumbing work in his/her own
house. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-5: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring such permit must file with the general inspector of said
city, an application in writing for such permit, stating therein the street and
house number, with the owner’s name, the name of the plumbing or mechanical
contractor, a copy of a plumbing or mechanical license issued by the state of
Iowa, and that such work is to be done in accordance with the provisions of
this code and the rules and regulations of the local and state board of health.
(Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-6: PERMITS NOT REQUIRED:
Permits shall not be required for the removal of stoppage in soil or waste
pipes. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
Upon approval of the application for permit provided for in section
8-4-5 of this chapter, the general inspector shall issue a permit in duplicate
to the person applying therefor, stating the name of the owner of the property,
the name of the plumbing contractor, the street and house number and specifying
the work authorized to be done thereunder. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-
11, 8- 3-2020)
8-4-8: SUPERVISION BY GENERAL INSPECTOR:
When a permit has been issued for plumbing and/or mechanical work, the
construction of such plumbing and mechanical systems shall be under the
supervision of the general inspector at all times until its completion, and
said general inspector may revoke said permit at any time when such work is not
being done in accordance with this chapter; and it shall be unlawful for any
person to proceed further with said work without the written consent of the
general inspector. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-9: WORK STARTED:
Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or
if the work authorized by such permit is suspended, or abandoned at any time
after work is commenced for a period of sixty (60) days. Before such work can
be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained to do so. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-10: ADDITIONAL FIXTURES:
When a permit has been issued for specified plumbing or mechanical work, no
additional work shall be put in or additional fixtures or equipment set,
without the approval of the general inspector, and a new permit shall be taken
out for all such additional work equipment or fixtures. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014;
amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-11: INSPECTION:
   A.   Testing Before Inspection: When roughing in work has been completed,
and before any such work has been covered, or in any way concealed from view,
or any fixtures set, the said work shall be subjected to a test, as hereinafter
specified in section
8-4-12 of this chapter. When work has been tested and found perfectly tight,
the general inspector shall be notified that such work is ready for inspection
and all work shall be left open and convenient for inspection two (2) full
working days after such notification unless such inspection is sooner made.
   B.   Time Limit To Inspect: The general inspector shall inspect work within
two (2) working days after having been notified that such work is ready for
inspection. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-12: TESTS:
   A.   All plumbing work shall be subjected to either of the following tests,
subject to the approval of the general inspector: by plugging all openings and
fillings with water to the highest point, or by a pressure of air or smoke, of
not less than five (5) pounds to the square inch; such tests to be made by the
plumber in charge in the presence of the general inspector, and it shall
include all soil, waste and vent pipes, brass ferrules and soldering nipples in
connection with the same, to the finished line or face of the floors or
sidewalks.
   B.   Natural gas piping natural gas piping test pressures shall be tested at
a minimum of 10 pounds per square inch (psi) for threaded piping and corrugated
stainless steel tubing (CSST) piping. Welded gas piping shall be tested at 60
psi. The test duration for a 10 psi test shall be no less than 15 minutes and
the test duration for 60 psi shall be no less than 30 minutes. (Ord. 14-02, 3-
3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-13: NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE:
At the time of the acceptance of any roughing in work, the general inspector
shall stick, paste or tie upon the soil or waste pipe, in the basement, if
there is a basement, and if none, on the plumbing in some conspicuous place, a
notice in printing or writing, stating the date of acceptance of such roughing
in work, the name of such inspector and his/her title, also the name of the
person having such contract. All such notices shall be of uniform size and
make, and shall be furnished by the city. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-14: FINAL ACCEPTANCE:
When the work covered by the permit is completed the general inspector shall be
notified that the work is ready for final inspection and the general inspector
shall require a final test of smoke or air, and no plumbing or mechanical work
shall be used or water meter set for domestic use until this inspection has
been made and a certificate of final approval has been attached to such
plumbing work. Such certificate shall be in the form required for acceptance of
roughing in work. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-15: REPAIRS:
Any leaks that may develop in service pipes between the meter and the main in
the water system shall be at once repaired by the user and/or owner of the
property on whose premises they appear. If such user and/or owner of the
property fails to repair such leak after twenty four (24) hours' notice, either
written or verbal, the city may repair the same and recover the cost of such
repair from the user and/or owner of the property on whose premises the same
were made. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-16: CITY TO INSTALL:
No water meters or connections to the city mains shall be installed by anyone
except the city or under city supervision. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014)
8-4-17: REMEDY DEFECTS:
All persons notified to remedy defects or reconstruct defective work in the
plumbing shall immediately comply with any order of the general inspector made
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A failure to so obey such
orders shall subject the delinquent to the penalties provided in this code. The
person in whose property the defective or erroneous plumbing exists and the
plumber who did the work shall be equally chargeable with the duty of remedying
the same and shall both be subject to the penalties of this code in the event
of failure to comply with any order of the general inspector. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-
2014)
8-4-18: ACCESS TO BUILDINGS:
The general inspector and all assistant inspectors shall have access to all
buildings for the purpose of examining and carrying into effect all provisions
of this code relating to safety, health and sanitation. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014;
amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-19: NOTIFY GENERAL INSPECTOR:
Any person doing plumbing or mechanical work in the city shall, when work has
been prepared for inspection, as provided in sections
8-4-12 and
8-4-14 of this chapter, notify the general inspector by notices provided for
that purpose, that inspection is required, giving location of premises and
times that work will be ready for inspection, and if, upon inspection, the
general inspector finds the work not in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, he/she shall notify the person doing the work and also the owner of
the premises by posting notice upon the premises and such posted notice shall
be all the notice required to be given of the defects in the work found upon
such inspection. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-20: PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CODE PERMIT FEES:
There shall be charged for the issuance and administration of permits, and
inspection of all plumbing and mechanical work subject to this chapter such
permit fees and charges as shall be established by city council resolution. All
such fees and charges shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall issue a
receipt therefor and such receipt shall be presented to the general inspector
before any permits are issued to the applicant. (Ord. 14-02, 3-3-2014; amd.
Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-21: PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSES:
Only those individuals or business entities holding a mechanical or plumbing
contractor license issued by the Iowa Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Licensing
Board may apply for and obtain permits to conduct mechanical and plumbing work
in the City of Knoxville. (Ord. 20-11, 8-3-2020)
8-4-22: MASTER, JOURNEYMAN AND APPRENTICE LICENSE REQUIRE:
A person shall not install or repair plumbing, HVAC, refrigeration, or hydronic
systems without first obtaining a license issued by the State of Iowa for the
applicable trade or discipline, or install or repair mechanical gas piping
systems without first obtaining a valid certificate approved by the Iowa
Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Examining Board. Those persons working in the
mechanical and plumbing trades or disciplines who have been issued a license by
the Iowa Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Examining Board pursuant to Iowa Code
Chapter 105, shall be recognized as licensed and eligible to work in the city
without the scope of activities authorized by such licenses. (Ord. 20-11, 8-3-
2020)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Adoption Of Electrical Code
8-5-2: Applications Of The Code
8-5-3: Exemptions
8-5-4: Amendments To Electrical Code (Rep. by Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-5-5: General Inspector
8-5-6: Administration And Enforcement
8-5-7: Permit Required
8-5-8: Permit, To Whom Issued
8-5-9: Application For Permit
8-5-10: Plans And Specifications
8-5-11: Emergency Work
8-5-12: Electrical Code Permit Fees
8-5-13: Inspections
8-5-14: Right Of Entry
8-5-15: Shutting Off Supply
8-5-16: Approval Of Materials
8-5-17: Electrical Appeal Board
8-5-18: Appeal
8-5-19: Electrical Power Supply
8-5-20: Conflict With State Laws
8-5-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
The State Electrical Code which, consists of the 2020 edition of the National
Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471 ("NEC"), with amendments, as provided
in 661 Iowa Administrative Code 504.1(103), is adopted and incorporated by this
reference in its entirety, as though set forth in this article, except as
otherwise indicated in this article. This adoption of the State Electrical Code
is pursuant to Iowa Code Section 103.6. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009; amd. Ord. 20-
12, 8-3-2020; Ord. 23-06, 6-5-2023)
8-5-2: APPLICATIONS OF THE CODE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern the supply of
electricity and all sales, rentals, leases, uses, installations, alterations,
replacements, disturbances, connections and disconnections of all electrical
equipment. For purposes of this chapter the term "electrical equipment" means
all materials, wiring conductors, fillings, devices, appliances, fixtures,
signs, and apparatus or parts thereof. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986)
8-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Any work in connection with electrical equipment used for radio and
television, but not including supply wire to such equipment.
   B.   Any work involved in the manufacturing or testing of electrical
equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring or equipment.
   C.   Any work associated with:
      1.   The repair of plug connected electrical appliances or devices.
      2.   Permanently connected electrical appliances or devices that have
been electrically and mechanically disconnected and separated from all sources
of electrical supply. The opening of switches or the blowing or removal of
fuses shall not be considered an electrical or mechanical disconnection or
separation.
   D.   The installation or replacement of approved fuses.
   E.   The installation or replacement of pin type lamps, screw base lamps or
plug connected portable appliances.
   F.   Work done by a homeowner in the dwelling which he/she occupies which
does not involve addition of any circuits. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-
1986)
8-5-4: AMENDMENTS TO ELECTRICAL CODE:
(Rep. by Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-5-5: GENERAL INSPECTOR:
The city manager shall appoint a general inspector who shall inspect all work
done or authorized to be done under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 85-8,
12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986; amd. 1996 Code)
8-5-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the general inspector to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986; amd. 1996
Code)
8-5-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No electrical work as defined in this chapter shall commence unless and until a
permit authorizing the work has been issued by the general inspector. A permit
shall be issued if the electrical work as proposed in the application for
permit meets all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-
1-1986; amd. 1996 Code)
8-5-8: PERMIT, TO WHOM ISSUED:
Permits shall be issued only to electrical contractors who have obtained an
electrical license and contractor's license from the state of Iowa. (Ord. 09-
08, 4-20-2009)
8-5-9: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for permits shall be made to the general inspector on forms
provided by the city clerk prior to beginning the particular work, except for
emergency work. The application shall include the name and business address of
the person that is to do the work, a description of the property where the work
is to be done, the name of the owner of the property, the name of the occupant
and a general description of the materials to be used, and shall specify the
particular part or parts of the work that must be inspected as required by this
chapter. The application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the
schedule of fees set out in section
8-5-12 of this chapter. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or
if the work authorized by such permit is suspended, or abandoned at any time
after work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. Before
such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained to do so. (Ord.
85-8, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986; amd. Ord. 95-9, 12-18-1995; 1996 Code; amd.
Ord. 20-12, 8-3-2020)
8-5-10: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary detail
shall be submitted if requested by the general inspector. If a permit is
denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without
payment of any additional fee. If, in the course of the work it is found
necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a
permit was issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted. Fees in
the amount of half the fees originally required shall be paid. A supplementary
permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to the original permit, shall
be issued to cover the charge. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; amd. 1996 Code)
8-5-11: EMERGENCY WORK:
In emergency situations work can be initiated and completed by qualified
electricians without first obtaining a permit. However, a permit must be
obtained within a reasonable time after the passage of the critical period.
With this exception all emergency work must be done in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and shall be inspected by the general inspector for
full compliance. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; amd. 1996 Code)
8-5-12: ELECTRICAL CODE PERMIT FEES:
There shall be charged for the issuance and administration of permits, and
inspection of all electrical work subject to this chapter such permit fees and
charges as shall be established by city council resolution. All such fees and
charges shall be paid to the City Clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor and
such receipt shall be presented to the General Inspector before any permits are
issued to the applicant. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
8-5-13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Notify Inspector: Upon the completion of electrical work that has been
done under a permit other than an annual permit the person doing the work shall
notify the General Inspector. The General Inspector shall inspect the work
within twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
after receipt of notice or as soon thereafter as practicable.
   B.   Certificate Of Approval:
      1.   If the General Inspector finds the work to be in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter, he/she shall issue to the person that has done the
work a certificate of approval. The General Inspector shall deliver a duplicate
copy of the certificate of approval to the owner of the premises where the work
was done. This certificate shall authorize the use of the work and its
connection to the supply of electricity.
      2.   A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection
and use of a temporary installation. Such certificate shall be issued to expire
at a stated time and may be revoked by the General Inspector for any violation
of this Chapter.
   C.   Inspection Before Concealing: If any electrical equipment is to be
hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of a building, structure
or grounds, the person installing the equipment shall notify the General
Inspector. Such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected
and approved by the General Inspector or until twenty four (24) hours,
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed after the
receipt of such notification by the General Inspector. On installations where
the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the
equipment shall give the General Inspector due notice and inspections shall be
made periodically during the progress of the work.
   D.   Inspection At Regular Intervals: At regular intervals the General
Inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done under annual permits.
He/she shall inspect all electrical work done since the date of his/her last
inspection and shall issue a certificate of approval for work found to be in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter after the licensee has paid the
fees provided in Section
8-5-12 for each individual project performed under the subsections of said
Section. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code; amd. Ord. 20-12, 8-3-2020)
8-5-14: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Consent Of Occupant: The General Inspector shall have the right, upon
consent of the occupant, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of
his/her official duties to make any inspection, reinspection or test of
electrical equipment that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
   B.   Unoccupied Building; Hazardous Situation: Where the building or
premises is unoccupied, the consent of the owner shall be obtained. If the
General Inspector has reasonable cause to believe that electrical installation
or equipment within the building or premises constitute an extreme hazard to
persons or property, he/she shall have the right to immediately enter and
inspect such installations or equipment, and may use any reasonable means
required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property
be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been
obtained. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
8-5-15: SHUTTING OFF SUPPLY:
If the General Inspector finds that any electrical equipment or installation is
defective or that it has been installed in conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter, he/she shall notify the person responsible for the electrical
equipment or installation by certified mail of his/her findings and orders. If
the necessary changes or repairs are not completed within fifteen (15) days (or
longer period as specified in the notice), the General Inspector shall have the
authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to
the equipment or installation in question. No disconnection shall be made
during the pendency of an appeal to the Electrical Appeal Board. In cases where
maintenance of electrical service to electrical equipment or installations
constitutes an extreme hazard to persons or property, the General Inspector
shall have authority to cause immediate discontinuance of such service. If
fires have damaged the wiring of any building or structure, reconnection to
electrical supply shall not be made until authorized in writing by the General
Inspector. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
8-5-16: APPROVAL OF MATERIALS:
The General Inspector may approve in advance electrical materials inspected and
approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and other materials of equal
or higher quality. The General Inspector shall keep on file a list of such
approved materials; this list shall be accessible for public reference during
regular office hours. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
8-5-17: ELECTRICAL APPEAL BOARD:
The City Council shall serve as the Electrical Appeal Board. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-
1977)
8-5-18: APPEAL:
   A.   Right To Appeal; Notice: Any person aggrieved by any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the General Inspector shall have the right to appeal
to the Electrical Appeal Board by filing a written notice of such appeal with
the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the ruling, decision,
interpretation or order. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
   B.   Filing Notice; Date For Hearing: If such notice is filed, the Appeal
Board shall set a time and place for a hearing and notify the party that has
filed the appeal. The date of the hearing shall be not more than fifteen (15)
days after the date the notice of appeal was filed. The notice of the hearing
shall be sent by certified mail. The hearing shall be open to the public; all
interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-
1977)
   C.   Decision Of Appeal Board: The Electrical Appeal Board by majority vote
shall affirm, modify or reverse any appealed ruling, decision, interpretation
or order of the General Inspector. The Electrical Appeal Board may permit
variance from the strict terms and provisions of this Chapter if such variance
can be made without increasing the hazards to health or safety of persons or
property and when the granting of such variance will not violate the intent and
purposes of this Chapter. Mere inconvenience to the appellant shall not be
grounds for the granting of such variance. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977; 1996 Code)
8-5-19: ELECTRICAL POWER SUPPLY:
Except where work is done under an annual permit, it shall be unlawful for any
person to make connection from a supply of electricity or to supply electricity
to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required
unless such connection has been authorized by the General Inspector. It shall
be unlawful to make connections to equipment that has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the General Inspector. (Ord. 77-3, 2-21-1977;
1996 Code)
8-5-20: CONFLICT WITH STATE LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter of the National Electrical Code, as adopted, shall be
construed to be in conflict with state laws or the state electrical code. In
the event of such conflict, the state law shall prevail. (Ord. 20-12, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 6
AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Short Title
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Airport Zones And Airspace Height Limitations
8-6-4: Use Restrictions
8-6-5: Lighting
8-6-6: Variances
8-6-7: Board Of Adjustment
8-6-8: Judicial Review
8-6-9: Administrative Agency
8-6-10: Penalties
8-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as THE KNOXVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
HEIGHT ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: The Knoxville Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be
nine hundred thirty two feet (932').
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the
Federal obstruction standards as contained in fourteen (14) Code of Federal
Regulations, sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25 as revised March 4, 1972, and
which obstruct the airspace required for the flight of aircraft and landing or
takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off
of aircraft.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. The width prescribed in
part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach
existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway center line.
AIRSPACE HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this Chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
CONTROL ZONE: Airspace extending upward from the surface of the earth which may
include one or more airports and is normally a circular area of five (5)
statute miles in radius, with extensions where necessary to include instrument
approach and departure paths.
INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment, for
which an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
MINIMUM DESCENT ALTITUDE: The lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea
level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-
land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure,
where no electronic glide slope is provided.
MINIMUM ENROUTE ALTITUDE: The altitude in effect between radio fixes which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance
requirements between those fixes.
MINIMUM OBSTRUCTION CLEARANCE ALTITUDE: The specified altitude in effect
between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airway routes, or route segments which
meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within twenty two (22)
miles of a VOR.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan,
a military services approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning
document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979;
amd. Ord. 80-16, 12-1-1980)
8-6-3: AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Zones Established: In order to carry out the provisions of this
Section, there are hereby created and established certain zones which are
depicted on the Knoxville Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map. A structure
located in more than one zone of the following zones is considered to be only
in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
   B.   Airport Height Zones: The various zones are hereby established and
defined as follows:
      1.   Horizontal Zone: The land lying under a horizontal plane one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of
which is constructed by:
         a.   Swinging arcs of five thousand feet (5,000') radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of runway(s) 15, 33, 5 and 23, and
connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
No structure shall exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established
airport elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the Knoxville
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
      2.   Conical Zone: The land lying under a surface extending outward and
upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one
(20 to 1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). No
structure shall penetrate the conical surface in the conical zone, as depicted
on the Knoxville Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
      3.   Approach Zone: The land lying under a surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and upward
from each end of the primary surface. (Note: An approach surface is applied to
each end of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned
for that runway end.)
         a.   The inner edge of the approach surface is five hundred feet
(500') wide for runway(s) 15 and 33 and two hundred fifty feet (250') for
runway(s) 5 and 23.
         b.   The outer edge of the approach zone is two thousand feet (2,000')
for runway(s) 15 and 33 and one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') for
runway(s) 5 and 23.
         c.   The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') at a slope of twenty to one (20 to 1) for runway(s) 15,
33, 5 and 23.
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on
the Knoxville Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
      4.   Transitional Zone: The land lying under those surfaces extending
outward and upward at right angles to the runway center line and the runway
center line extended at a slope of seven to one (7 to 1) from the sides of the
primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces.
No structure shall exceed the transitional surface, as depicted on the
Knoxville Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
      5.   No structure shall be erected in Marion County that raises the
published minimum descent altitude for an instrument approach to any runway,
nor shall any structure be erected that causes the minimum obstruction
clearance altitude or minimum enroute altitude to be increased on any Federal
airway in Marion County. (Ord. 80-16, 12-1-1980)
8-6-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of Section
8-6-3 of this Chapter, no use may be made of land or water within the City or
Marion County in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of any
airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use:
   A.   Lights: All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street,
parking, signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in
such manner that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from
the Knoxville Municipal Airport or in the vicinity thereof.
   B.   Smoke And Glare: No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare
or other visual hazards within three (3) statute miles of any usable runway of
the Knoxville Municipal Airport.
   C.   Electronic Interference: No operations from any use in the City or
Marion County shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-5: LIGHTING:
   A.   Installation Required: Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
8-6-4 of this Chapter, the owner of any structure over two hundred feet (200')
above ground level must install on the structure lighting in accordance with
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-1D and
amendments. Additionally, any structure constructed after the effective date
hereof and exceeding nine hundred forty nine feet (949') above ground level
must install on that structure high intensity white obstruction lights in
accordance with chapter 6 of FAA Advisory Circular 7460-1D and amendments.
   B.   Condition Of Permit Or Variance: Any permit or variance granted may be
so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or growth in question
to permit the City and Marion County at its own expense to install, operate and
maintain thereto such markers or lights as may be necessary to indicate to
pilots the presence of an airspace hazard. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-6: VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to
permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his/her property in violation
of any section of this Chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for
variance from such regulations. No application for variance to the requirements
of this Chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been submitted to the Knoxville Municipal Airport Manager
for his/her opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance. If the
Knoxville Municipal Airport Manager does not respond to the Board of Adjustment
within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the copy of the application, the Board
may make its decision to grant or deny the variance. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-7: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Board Created; Powers: There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to
have and exercise the following powers:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the (Airport Zoning Board/Administrative Agency) in the
enforcement of this Chapter;
      2.   To hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of this Chapter
upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be required to
pass; and
      3.   To hear and decide specific variances.
   B.   Membership: The Board of Adjustment shall consist of two (2) members
from the City Council, two (2) members from Marion County appointed by the
Board of Supervisors and one additional member to act as chairman and to be
selected by a majority vote of the four (4) appointed members and each shall
serve for a term of five (5) years and until his successor is duly appointed
and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a
term of five (5) years, one for a term of four (4) years, one for a term of
three (3) years, one for a term of two (2) years, and one for a term of one
year. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon
written charges, after a public hearing.
   C.   Rules; Meetings: The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its
governance and in harmony with the provisions of this Chapter. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the
Board of Adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence
the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.
The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, and other official
actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the Zoning
Officer, and on due cause shown.
   D.   Powers Established By Statute: The Board of Adjustment shall have the
powers established in Iowa Statutes, section 414.12.
   E.   Vote Of Membership: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
Chapter, or to effect variations of this Chapter. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-8: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment, may appeal to the Court of Record as provided in Iowa Statutes,
section 414.15. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
8-6-9: ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY:
It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or his or her designee, to administer
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the City, upon a form furnished by the City Clerk's office.
Applications required by this Chapter to be submitted to the administrative
agency shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for
action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the City
Manager, or his or her designee. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979; 1996 Code)
8-6-10: PENALTIES:
Each violation of this Chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and be punishable
by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for
not more than thirty (30) days; and each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 79-2, 2-19-1979)
CHAPTER 7
STORM WATER RUNOFF
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Application
8-7-4: Regulations
8-7-5: Administration
8-7-6: General Requirements
8-7-7: Miscellaneous Storm Water Storage Areas
8-7-8: Control In Excess Of Requirements
8-7-9: Emergency
8-7-10: Administrative Review
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish maximum rates
for the discharge of storm waters into the various watercourses of the City for
the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the
population by minimizing or eliminating dangers of flooding to life and
property.
   B.   Intent: It is further the intent of this Chapter that runoff control
devices be provided as areas of land are developed or redeveloped for urban
use. It is not the intent of this Chapter to utilize areas for the sole purpose
of storing or detaining excess storm water, but to permit such areas to be used
for other compatible urban uses as well. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The City of Knoxville, Marion County, Iowa.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A facility constructed to regulate the volume of storm water
runoff that is conveyed during a specific length of time.
DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: A facility that is designed to be normally
dry and which accumulates excess storm water only during periods when the
restricted storm water runoff release rate is less than the storm water inflow
rate.
EXCESS STORM WATER: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
EXCESS STORM WATER PASSAGE: A channel formed in the ground surface to carry
storm water runoff through a specific area.
LOW FLOW: The transport or flow of a normal or usual volume of storm water as
opposed to a high or peak volume which would utilize overflow facilities.
MANAGER: The Knoxville City Manager or his/her designate.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Water which flows by gravity in channels formed by the
surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by the efforts of
persons.
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area in a
manner that will ensure complete removal of all surface water by means of
natural gravity.
SAFE STORM WATER DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The quantity of storm water runoff that can
be transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct, or combination
thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise
sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to cause
damage to structures or facilities located thereon.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed
by soil or plant material.
STORMWATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which stormwater runoff is released
from dominant to servient land.
STORMWATER STORAGE AREA: An area designated to temporarily accumulate excess
stormwater.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: The entire catchment area that contributes stormwater
runoff to a given point.
WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA: A facility that contains a body of water
and which accumulates excess stormwater during period when the restricted
stormwater runoff release rate is less than the stormwater inflow rate. (Ord.
79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-3: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall apply to any single-family or two-family residential
development comprising a gross aggregate area of six (6) acres or more or to
any multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental, utility or other development or redevelopment comprising a gross
aggregate area of two (2) acres or more. The gross aggregate shall include
streets and other dedicated lands. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-4: REGULATIONS:
The City Manager of the City shall develop and establish written policies,
procedures, criteria and regulations concerning the inspection, determination
and approval of the standards for the construction and/or development of
stormwater management structures with the Soil Conservation District acting as
technical advisor. The City Manager shall, after consulting with the Soil
Conservation District Officer, determine in what areas of the City this chapter
shall apply. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Documents Submitted For Approval: In areas of the City where this
chapter applies, immediately after preliminary plat approval, rezoning to R-
4 or C-3, or building permit application, whichever comes first, and in all
cases before site work begins, the developer shall submit the following
documents to the City Manager for approval: (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979; amd. Ord.
19-08, 7-1-2019)
      1.   Plans and proposed methods for the prevention and control of soil
erosion for the entire development.
      2.   Plans, specifications, and all calculations for the control of
stormwater runoff as required by this chapter and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the Manager.
   B.   Erosion Control Responsibility: The original developer shall be
responsible for the implementation and performance of erosion control measures
from the time span from the start of preliminary grading until sale of lots or
land to a purchaser. After commencement of lot or land sales, the actual owner
of any lot or land within a development shall be responsible for the prevention
and control of soil erosion for that parcel of land.
   C.   Compliance With Chapter; Building Permit Issuance: No building permits
for habitable structures shall be issued for any development or redevelopment
not complying with this chapter. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-6: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excess Stormwater Passage:
      1.   An excess stormwater passage shall be provided for all stormwater
storage areas. Such passage shall have capacity to convey through the proposed
development the excess stormwater from the tributary watershed. The capacity of
such excess stormwater passage shall be constructed in such a manner as to
transport the peak rate of runoff from a 100-year return frequency storm
assuming all storm sewers are inoperative, all upstream areas are fully
developed in accordance with the City's current land use plan, and that
antecedent rainfall has saturated the tributary watershed.
      2.   No buildings or structures shall be constructed within such passage,
or within one hundred feet (100') of the channel of any stream; however,
streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas, pedestrian walkways, utility
easements and other open space uses shall be considered compatible uses. In the
event such area is reshaped or its capacity to transport stormwater otherwise
restricted, the Manager shall notify the agency, party or parties causing said
restriction to remove the same, and set a reasonable time for its removal. If
said persons refuse to or are unable to comply with said order, the Manager
shall cause said restrictions to be removed at the expense of said persons.
      3.   Where a proposed development contains existing natural drainage,
appropriate land planning shall be undertaken to preserve said natural drainage
as part of the excess storm water passage.
   B.   Easements: Easements which cover excess storm water passages, storm
water storage areas and other control structures shall be granted to the City
for the purpose of repair, alteration or to ensure their proper operation;
however, the City shall reserve the right not to accept such easement or any
portion thereof.
   C.   Determination Of Storage Capacity: The volume of required storm water
storage shall be the total runoff from a 10-year return frequency storm from
the area as proposed for development less one and five-tenths (1.5) inches.
(Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-7: MISCELLANEOUS STORM WATER STORAGE AREAS:
   A.   Paved Surfaces: Paved surfaces, including automobile parking lots in
proposed storm water storage areas shall have minimum grades of one percent
(1%) (100 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical) and shall be limited to storage
depths of one and one- half feet (11/2') maximum. Pavement base design and
construction shall be accomplished in such a manner as to prevent damage from
flooding. Control structures in paved areas shall be accessible for maintenance
and cleaning. The use of vortex control facilities at inlets to ensure that the
maximum allowable release rates are being developed shall be required as
necessary.
Where parking areas are used to store storm water, the areas of greatest depth
shall be restricted to the more remote, least used areas of the parking
facility.
   B.   Rooftop Surfaces: Rooftop storage of excess storm water shall be
designed with permanent type control inlets and parapet walls to contain excess
storm water. Adequate structural roof design shall be provided to ensure that
roof deflection does not occur which could cause roof failure. Over flow areas
shall be provided to ensure that the weight of stored storm water will never
exceed the structural capacity of the roof.
   C.   Underground Storage: Underground storm water storage facilities shall
be designed for easy access to accommodate the removal of accumulated sediment.
Such facilities shall be provided with positive gravity outlets. (Ord. 79-18,
11-5-1979)
8-7-8: CONTROL IN EXCESS OF REQUIREMENTS:
In the event storm water runoff control can be provided in excess of the
requirements of this Chapter and the benefit of such additional control would
accrue to the City at large, the City may provide public participation in the
increased cost of the control of storm water runoff in proportion to the
additional benefits received. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-9: EMERGENCY:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, whenever in the judgment
of the Manager a condition occurs in a storm water storage area that created a
dangerous and imminent health and safety hazard, the Manager shall order such
action as shall be effective immediately or in the time and manner prescribed
in the order itself. (Ord. 79-18, 11-5-1979)
8-7-10: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Petition For Hearing: Any person affected by any decision of the
Manager which has been given in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of this Chapter may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the
matter before the City Council; provided, that such person shall file in the
office of the Manager a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Manager shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such decision should be modified or
withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) days after
the date on which the petition was filed.
   B.   Council Decision: After such hearing, the City Council shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the decision of the Manager, depending upon its findings.
Following the decision of the City Council, all parties shall be notified of
the decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of the State. An appeal pursuant to this Section shall not stay the effect
of the Manager's order unless so ordered by the City Council. (Ord. 79-18, 11-
5-1979)
CHAPTER 8
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Enforcement Officer
8-8-2: General Definition Of Unsafe
8-8-3: Unsafe Building
8-8-4: Notice To Owner
8-8-5: Conduct Of Hearing
8-8-6: Posting Of Signs
8-8-7: Right To Demolish
8-8-8: Costs
8-8-9: Penalty
8-8-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The City Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-2: GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE:
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or, abandonment, as specified in this Chapter or
any other ordinance, are, for the purpose of this Chapter, unsafe buildings.
All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with
the procedure specified in this Chapter. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-3: UNSAFE BUILDING:
"Unsafe building" shall mean any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of
the following criteria:
   A.   Collapse Of Member: Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse
and thereby injure persons or damage property.
   B.   Wind Resistance: Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square
foot.
   C.   Material Deterioration: Whenever any portion thereof has cracked,
warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural
portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
   D.   Various Inadequacies: Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of: 1) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 2)
faulty construction; 3) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of
the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 4) the
deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 5) any other cause, is
likely to partially or completely collapse.
   E.   Manifestly Unsafe: Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   F.   Exterior Walls: Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third
(1/3) of the base.
   G.   Deterioration: Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of
its supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or
deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or
coverings.
   H.   Damaged Structurally: Whenever the building or structure has been so
damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become: 1) an attractive nuisance to children; 2) a harbor
for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 3) enable persons to
resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
   I.   Inadequate Maintenance: Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by any health
office to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that
is likely to cause sickness or disease.
   J.   Fire Hazard: Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   K.   Public Nuisance: Whenever any building or structure is in such a
condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in
equity jurisprudence.
   L.   Abandoned: Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
(6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an "unsafe building" as defined in this Chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within forty eight (48) hours or such
reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure
or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within sixty (60)
days from day of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement
officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure,
or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the
enforcement officer. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990; amd. Ord. 99-15, 11-1-1999)
   A.   Notice Served: Such notice shall be served by sending a copy of the
ordinance and notice by certified mail to the owner of record, according to
section 364.12(3)(h) of the 1989 Iowa Code. The notice shall state the
designated period within which said owner or person in charge is required to
comply with the order of the enforcement officer.
   B.   Hearing: Such notice shall also advise the owner that he/she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
within the time provided in the notice. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-5: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   A.   Nature: The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   B.   Owner's Rights: At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   C.   Determination: The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-6: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: "DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. City of Knoxville,
Iowa". Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition,
or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-7: RIGHT TO DEMOLISH:
In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove said building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this Chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
8-8-8: COSTS:
   A.   Special Assessment: Costs incurred under Section
8-8-7 shall be paid out of the City Treasury. Such costs shall be charged to
the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against
the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Auditor for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
   B.   Demolition Costs: In the event the City is required to prosecute this
matter through the District Court in order to demolish said building, in
addition to the costs incurred under Section
8-8-7, the owner of the premises shall be charged with the costs of prosecution
of said action which shall include but not be limited to court costs, attorney
fees, publication costs and engineering fees. Such costs shall also be charged
to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment
against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection in the manner provided for other
taxes. (Ord. 95-6, 10-16-1995)
8-8-9: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
be subject to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days or a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day that said person
or corporation is in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 90-7, 6-18-1990)
CHAPTER 9
FIREWORKS SALE AND DISCHARGE
SECTION:
8-9-1: Purpose And Intent
8-9-2: Definition
8-9-3: Fireworks Discharging Regulations
8-9-4: Fireworks Sales Permit Required
8-9-5: Fireworks Sales Permit Issuance
8-9-6: Fireworks Sales Safety And Operational Standards
8-9-7: Display Fireworks Regulations
8-9-8: Violations
8-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
To allow for the sale of fireworks as permitted under State law and to prohibit
the use of fireworks within the Knoxville City limits. (Ord. 17-04, 6-29-2017)
8-9-2: DEFINITION:
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: As defined in Iowa Code section 727.2(1b) is hereby adopted.
FIREWORKS: Any explosive composition, or combination of explosive substances,
or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, or other
fireworks of like construction and fireworks containing any explosive or
flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. The
term "fireworks" does not include goldstar-producing sparklers on wires which
contain no magnesium or chlorate or perchlorate, flitter sparklers in paper
tubes that do not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in diameter, toy snakes
which contain no mercury, or caps used in cap pistols.
Examples of fireworks covered by this chapter include:
Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes.
Chasers.
Cone fountains.
Cylindrical fountains.
Firecrackers.
Flitter sparklers.
Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple tube ground and
hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance with APA 87-1,
section 3.5. (APA 87-1 means the American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-
1, as published in December 2001.)
Ground spinners.
Helicopter and aerial spinners.
Illuminating torches.
Mine and shell devices.
Missile-type rockets.
Multiple tube devices.
Roman candles.
Sky rockets and bottle rockets.
Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA 87-1,
section 3.2.
Wheels.
Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA
87-1, section 3.2. (Ord. 17-04, 6-29-2017)
8-9-3: FIREWORKS DISCHARGING REGULATIONS:
Commercial firework displays shall not be discharged within the city of
Knoxville unless a permit from the city has been issued. Consumer fireworks may
be discharged only on July 3rd (9 am to 10 pm), July 4th (9 am to 11 pm), and
December 31st (9 am to 11:59 pm). At all other times of the year, consumer
fireworks are prohibited from being discharged. Sky lanterns, open flame
devices, are not permitted within the city limits except if tethered by a
retrievable rope, so long as the person maintains control over the sky lantern.
Commercial fireworks and Consumer fireworks shall carry the same meaning as
defined in Iowa Code Section 727.2. (Ord. 17-04, 6-29-2017; amd. Ord. 25-11, 6-
16-2025)
8-9-4: FIREWORKS SALES PERMIT REQUIRED:
There shall be no sale of fireworks within the corporate City limits without a
permit having been issued by a representative of the Fire Department. (Ord. 17-
04, 6-29-2017)
8-9-5: FIREWORKS SALES PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Fireworks sales permits shall be issued in accordance with the following.
   A.   Application: The following items shall be submitted along with any
application for a fireworks sales permit:
      1.   Proof of valid permit issued from the State Fire Marshal.
      2.   Proof of liability insurance separate from the building property
insurance specifically showing coverage of fireworks sales for an aggregate
amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
      3.   Fees in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.
   B.   Inspections: Any property, building, or premises whether it be
permanent or temporary, intended for fireworks sales shall have an initial fire
inspection completed by the Fire Chief prior to engaging in fireworks sales.
The Fire Chief or their designee shall cause an annual inspection to occur
meeting the requirements of the National Fire Protection Code 1124 (2006
edition) and the current Fire Code adopted by the City of Knoxville. (Ord. 17-
04, 6-29-2017)
8-9-6: FIREWORKS SALES SAFETY AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
All fireworks sale permit holders shall comply with the following safety and
operational standards at all times.
   A.   Allowable Times For The Sales Of Fireworks: Fireworks sales shall only
be conducted in accordance with dates designated by Iowa Code during the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
   B.   Allowable Locations For The Sales Of Fireworks:
      1.   Any permanent structure used primarily for the purpose of fireworks
sales shall be located thirty five feet (35') from a property line, public
roadway, alley, or highway; and seventy feet (70') from an inhabited building
in a location zoned for commercial sales.
      2.   Not more than one hundred (100) pounds of total aggregate weight of
DOT 1.4 class fireworks shall be located inside a commercial business with
other mercantile products for sale.
      3.   Not more than five hundred (500) pounds of total aggregate weight of
DOT 1.4 class fireworks shall be located inside a building where fireworks are
the primary business.
   C.   Safety Requirements:
      1.   Smoking And Open Flame: Smoking, open flame source, or matches shall
not be located within fifty feet (50') where fireworks are sold.
         a.   Except that lighters and matches may be sold as part of a retail
business in commercial structures who engage in other merchandise sales where
fireworks is not the primary business.
         b.   Locations who engage in fireworks sales as a primary source of
revenue may sell extended lighters so long as lighters are located in a sealed
package and not removed within the store premises.
      2.   Electrical Wiring: All electrical wiring shall meet NFPA 70 National
Electrical Code. Permanent structures or buildings used primarily for fireworks
sales shall meet wiring requirements for a hazardous location, including
covered light fixtures to avoid sparks upon failure or damage to lights.
      3.   Aisles: All fireworks sales locations of any type shall maintain
forty eight inch (48") clear aisles between fireworks display shelves.
      4.   Exits: Any location where fireworks are sold shall maintain two (2)
approved exits for egress during an emergency. All approved exits shall be
clearly marked with signage; except that, exit signs in a permanent structure
shall be illuminated.
      5.   Building Or Structure: Fireworks sales shall only be permitted in a
single story at grade building or structure to facilitate easy exiting during
an emergency.
      6.   Fire Extinguishers:
         a.   One fire extinguisher per every fifty feet (50') of walking
distances shall be provided, with a minimum of two (2) extinguishers per
location.
         b.   The minimum weight for each fire extinguisher must be ten (10)
pounds - ABC type extinguisher.
         c.   Each fire extinguisher must have certification that it has been
recharged within the preceding twelve (12) months.
         d.   All fire extinguishers must be mounted four feet (4') off the
ground and clearly visible.
      7.   Doors: All doors used as service doors outside the view of a clerk
shall be locked to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the building
unnoticed. If doors are approved exit doors as part of the two (2) approved
exits needed, they shall be operable without special tools, keys, or knowledge.
Delayed or alarmed egress doors are permitted so long as release is activated
within eight (8) seconds.
      8.   Containers: No more than one conex container or approved explosive
magazine shall be located on site for short term storage of extra product. All
containers shall be properly placarded and equipped with tamper proof locking
devices. It is permitted to place containers in a security fenced area.
      9.   Individual Devices: Individual fireworks devices or opened fireworks
packages shall not be permitted to be displayed. No open fuses shall be exposed
during storage inside a sales location.
   D.   General Requirements:
      1.   One or more signs reading "Fireworks-No Smoking" shall be displayed
at all places where fireworks are stored or sold in letters not less than four
inches (4") in height.
      2.   No persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or narcotics,
shall be allowed to remain in the business where fireworks are sold as a
primary business.
      3.   Signs shall be posted at all points of ingress and egress to and
from the fireworks stand stating no sales will be made to anyone under the age
of eighteen (18).
      4.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) may sell fireworks.
      5.   A sign bearing the allowable dates and times for legal discharge of
consumer fireworks within the city limits shall not count towards the limits of
allowable signage provided for by this Code.
      6.   A seller of fireworks shall distribute to each purchaser of
fireworks a flyer of at least twenty four (24) square inches containing the
legal discharge dates and times. Violators of any proceeding regulations may be
punished by a fine up to $500.00."
      7.   Flashing lights of any type are prohibited. All lighting shall be
non- intermittent.
      8.   All signage must comply with this Code.
      9.   No motor vehicle parking shall be within ten feet (10') of firework
stands or tents.
      10.   All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the
location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty feet (20')
surrounding the stand.
      11.   All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the
location by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. two (2) days after the end of sales of
fireworks.
      12.   All temporary structures shall be removed from the temporary
location by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the 7th day after the end of sales
of fireworks, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from said location
by the said time and date. (Ord. 17-04, 6-29-2017; amd. Ord. 21-14, 10-18-2021;
Ord. 25-11, 6-16-2025)
8-9-7: DISPLAY FIREWORKS REGULATIONS:
The City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the use of
"display fireworks", as defined in this chapter, by a City agency and other
organization and groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such
"display fireworks" will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be
granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with
the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
   A.   Personal injury: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
person/one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
   B.   Property damage: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). (Ord. 17-
04, 6-29-2017)
8-9-8: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a simple misdemeanor
or Municipal infraction as provided in section
1-4-5 of this Code.
   B.   If in the judgment of the Fire Chief or building inspector, the
construction of a permanent structure or the conduct of the operations therein
do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, such officers or either of
them may order the stand immediately closed, and the permit to operate such
stand shall then be suspended and/or revoked. (Ord. 17-04, 6-29-2017)
CHAPTER 10
RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
8-10-1: Title For Citation
8-10-2: Purpose Of Provisions
8-10-3: Definitions
8-10-4: Registration Requirements
8-10-5: Rental Inspection
8-10-6: Rental Compliance Certificates
8-10-7: Fees
8-10-8: Contact Information
8-10-9: Violations
8-10-10 Appeals Process
8-10-1: TITLE FOR CITATION:
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Knoxville, Iowa, Rental Housing
Inspection Program,” and shall be cited as such, and will be referred to herein
as “this chapter”. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-2: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the inspection of residential
rental properties within the corporate limits of the City of Knoxville, Iowa,
in order to ensure that such properties conform to minimum standards deemed
necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the occupants thereof
and the occupants of surrounding properties, and to inhibit the spread of urban
blight. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined. Words
used in the present tense shall include the nature; the singular shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; and the word “shall” is mandatory, the
word “may” is permissive.
DWELLING UNIT:           One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a
                         separate living quarter.
                         Any structure that includes a dwelling unit that is being held out or
                         offered for rent or is currently being let for rent and occupied by any
                         person who is not the owner of the premises, except that the following
                         properties shall not be regarded as rental properties under this chapter:
RENTAL PROPERTY:         a.   Dwellings owned by the local, state, or federal governments.
                         b.   Hotels, as defined by Chapter 137 of the Iowa Code.
                         c.   Dormitory rooms of higher education institutions.
                         d.   Nursing homes, long-terra care, and medical care facilities.
                         e.   Church parsonages, and other similar facilities owned by religious
                         institutions, that provide housing for their clergy or other similar staff.
                         One dwelling unit within a rental property. If a common area and facilities
RENTAL UNIT:             are provided in a dwelling for the use of the occupants of units therein,
                         such common area and facilities shall constitute a part of each rental unit
                         for the purpose of inspection and compliance with this chapter.
                         Any form of payment, including but not limited to cash, services, or other
RENT:                    valuable considerations, provided as a condition of occupying a dwelling not
                         owned by the occupant.
OWNER:                   Person(s) listed as the deed holder as recorded at the Marion County
                         Assessor’s Office.
                         A person who is appointed by a rental property owner to provide access to
                         the Inspector to the owner’s rental property. The representative must have
OWNER’S REPRESENTATIVE keys for all portions of the rental property, must be authorized to act on
                         behalf of the owner concerning compliance with the requirements of this
                         chapter, and must be at least 18 years of age.
                         The person(s) designated by the City of Knoxville to conduct the inspections
INSPECTOR:               of rental properties and units for this program. The City of Knoxville may
                         contract with an outside entity to conduct these inspection services.
                         Person(s) or family occupying a dwelling unit for rent. Not more than one
TENANT:                  family or four unrelated persons may occupy a dwelling unit. (Ord. 20-05, 7-
                         6-2020)
 
8-10-4: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT:
   A.   All rental properties and rental units within the corporate limits of
the City of Knoxville shall be registered with the City by the owner or the
owner’s representative. The owner or owner’s representative shall file a
completed registration form (as provided by the City) with the Planning 8c
Zoning Department within thirty days of the property becoming a rental
property, and subsequently at the time the rental inspection is due.
Registration shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of
council and in accordance with the Rental Housing Inspection Administrative
Policy.
   B.   By registering rental properties and/or renlal units, the property
owner consents to the City of Knoxville inspector entering and conducting an
inspection, as described in
8-10-5. The registration process shall be conducted in accordance with the City
of Knoxville’s Rental Housing Inspection Program Administrative Policy. (Ord.
20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-5: RENTAL INSPECTION:
Each rental property and rental unit shall be inspected by the designated
inspector at a frequency stated in the Rental Housing Inspection Program
Administrative Policy. The inspections will be conducted to confirm compliance
with regulations set forth in Knoxville Municipal Code, Titles 4, 8, and 9.
Inspections will be conducted in accordance with the City of Knoxville’s Rental
Housing Inspection Program Administrative Policy and in accordance with all
state and federal laws pertaining to tenant rights and notification
requirements. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-6: RENTAL COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATES:
Each rental property shall obtain a Rental Compliance Certificate from the
Planning & Zoning Department. Rental Compliance Certificate shall be issued in
accordance with the Rental Housing Inspection Program Administrative Policy.
Rental properties without a Rental Compliance Certificate shall be pursued in
accordance with
8-10-9-Violations. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-7: FEES:
All fees associated with this Rental Housing Inspection program shall be
established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-8: CONTACT INFORMATION:
All rental properties shall have the name and contact information of the
property owner and/or the property owner’s representative clearly and visibly
posted for tenants. (Ord. 20-05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-9: VIOLATIONS:
Rental properties and/or rental units that fail to comply with this chapter,
shall be referred to the city building official and attorney for prosecution as
a municipal infraction. Failure to comply with this chapter, including but not
limited to failure to register a property, may result in the revocation of a
certificate of occupancy and/or a requirement to vacate the property. (Ord. 20-
05, 7-6-2020)
8-10-10: APPEALS PROCESS:
The Board of Adjustment, as defined in the Knoxville City Code, shall serve as
the Appeals Board for disputes regarding violations issued during a rental
inspection and for interpretation of applicable codes. Appeals shall be filed
in accordance with the Rental Housing Inspection Administrative Policy. (Ord.
20-05, 7-6-2020; amd. Ord. 21-17, 11-1-2021)
CHAPTER 11
VACANT BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION
SECTION:
8-11-1: Title For Citation
8-11-2: Purpose
8-11-3: Definitions
8-11-4: Applicability
8-11-5: Vacant Building Permit Requirements
8-11-6: Issuance Of Vacant Building Permit
8-11-7: Vacant Building Permit Conditions
8-11-8: Enforcement
8-11-9: Process And Timeline
8-11-10: Fees And Penalties
8-11-1: TITLE FOR CITATION:
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Knoxville, Iowa, Vacant Building
and Inspection," and shall be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as
"this chapter". (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a requirement that owners register
vacant buildings within the City of Knoxville, Iowa in order to help identify
potential nuisance properties and enhance communication between the City and
property owners. (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
A residential, commercial or industrial building or structure shall be deemed
to be vacant if it is unoccupied and/or no person or persons currently reside
in the residential structure or operate a lawful business in the commercial/
industrial building that is open regularly for business with the exception of
holidays and seasonal businesses and meets one of more of the following:
ACCESSORY   A detached building or structure on the same lot, with and of a nature
BUILDING/   customarily incidental and subordinate to the principle building or structure or
STRUCTURE:  use of the land, i.e., a garden house, greenhouse, garage, carport, shed, fence,
            or retaining wall.
BUILDING:   Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
DANGEROUS   Any building or structure which meets the definitions of this term specified in
BUILDINGS:  Title 8, Chapter 8 of the Code of Ordinances.
IMMINENT    A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any
HAZARD:     time.
MIXED       Occupancy of a structure in part for residential use and in part for some other
OCCUPANCY:  use not accessory thereto.
OCCUPANT:   An occupant is any person who leases or lawfully resides in a building or
            premises, or a portion of a building or premises.
PARTIALLY   A multi-storied building or structure that has one (1) or more stories vacant,
VACANT:     including the ground level store front. For the purpose of this chapter the
            ground floor store front must be vacant to be deemed partially vacant.
RESPONSIBLE A natural person who is the owner, operator or manager of any building,
PERSON:     structure, or premises and is responsible for the property's maintenance and
            management.
            Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall
            include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible
RUBBISH:    materials, papers, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree
            branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and
            dust and other similar materials.
STRUCTURE:  Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or
            attached to something having location on the ground.
            A commercial or industrial building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if
            it is unoccupied and/or no person or persons currently operate a lawful business
            open regularly for business with the exception of holidays and seasonal
            businesses, and meets one or more of the following:
            A.   Unsecured or secured by means other than those used in the design of the
            building, or in the manner that is unsafe, ineffective in keeping unauthorized
            persons from gaining entry;
VACANT:     B.   Declared a "dangerous building" as defined in this section, and/or having
            had a fire or other such catastrophe that requires rehabilitation before
            occupancy is allowed;
            C.   Unfit for occupancy as determined by the Building Inspector;
            D.   Non-compliant with the current International Property Maintenance Code or
            other City and State building Codes as adopted by the City;
            E.   Existence of housing, building, fire, health or zoning code violations;
            F.   Not receiving service by public utilities.
WASTE:      Garbage, ashes, rubbish or trash.
WEEDS:      Unattended vines, brush and scrub bushes, grass and other similar vegetation.
            (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 22-08, 11-21-2022)
 
8-11-4: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   General: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all
manufacturing, commercial, industrial, and mixed occupancy buildings vacant for
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and shall manufacturing, commercial,
industrial and mixed occupancy buildings, which have been partially vacant for
one hundred eighty (180) days, in any commercial or industrial zoned district.
   B.   Conflict: In any case where a provision of this Chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of the Zoning Code or any other provisions of the
General City Code, the provisions which established the higher standard for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail.
   C.   Application Of Other Ordinances: Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to authorize the use of a structure or premises contrary to any other
provision of the City Code. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of State law,
and applicable chapters in this City Code. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provisions of the City Zoning or
Building Code.
   D.   Existing Remedies: The provisions of this Chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City, or its officers
or agencies, under State law or this Code of Ordinances, including the Zoning
Code, related to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous,
unsafe, and unsanitary, or the abatement of public nuisances.
   E.   Historic Buildings: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
structures designated by the Federal Government, State or City as historic
buildings. Any work to said structures shall also comply with current
International Building Code as adopted by the City. (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-5: VACANT BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A permit may only be issued or renewed if the building or structure which is
subject to the application satisfies the following requirements:
   A.   Code Compliant: All buildings or structures subject to the application
shall comply with all building, fire, property maintenance, zoning and other
applicable sections of the City Code, and shall apply for all necessary
building, fire prevention, and zoning permits, if any are required to bring the
building into compliance, upon application for a Vacant Building Permit.
   B.   Vacant Building Maintenance Standards: All buildings or structures
subject to the application shall adequately protect the building from intrusion
by trespassers and pests, and from deterioration by the weather. The buildings
must also comply with the following Vacant Building Maintenance Standards:
      1.   Building Openings. Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings
shall be weathertight and secure against entry by birds, vermin, trespassers.
Missing or broken glass in doors, windows and other such openings shall be
repaired/replaced with glass. No building opening shall be boarded. All first
floor or ground level windows, doors and openings shall be free of any posters,
paper or fabric coverings.
      2.   Waste Removal. All waste, debris, rubbish, and garbage shall be
removed from the interior of the building or structure and surrounding
premises.
      3.   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects which might admit moisture, rain, or roof draining
and shall allow for sufficient drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the interior of the building.
      4.   Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and
installed in an approved manner, and allow discharge in an approved manner.
      5.   Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and structurally sound. The building shall be maintained in a sanitary manner
and in a manner that does not pose a threat to the public health, safety and
welfare.
      6.   Structural Members. The structural members shall be free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      7.   Foundation Walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained
structurally and sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat
to the public health, safety and welfare, shall be capable of supporting the
load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be free from
open cracks and breaks, free from leaks, and be animal and rat-proof.
      8.   Exterior Walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks
and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatments.
      9.   Decorative Features. The cornice, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be safe, anchored and
in good repair. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatments.
      10.   Overhanging Extensions. Al balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar
features shall be in good repair, anchored safe and sound. Exposed metal, wood,
or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic applications of weather-coating material such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
      11.   Appurtenance. Any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof shall be of sufficient
strength or stability, and anchored so as to be capable of resisting wind
pressures of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings.
      12.   Chimney and Towers. Chimney, cooling towers, smokestacks and
similar appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed
metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
      13.   Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe
for pedestrian travel, and shall be free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal
shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours of a snowfall.
      14.   Accessory Building/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures such
as garages, sheds and fences shall be free from safety, health and fire
hazards; and, shall comply with these Vacant Building Maintenance Standards.
      15.   Exterior Premises. The surrounding premises upon which the
structure or building is located shall be clean, safe, sanitary, free from
waste, rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, shall not be used for exterior
storage, and shall not pose a threat to public health, welfare or safety. (Ord.
21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-6: ISSUANCE OF VACANT BUILDING PERMIT:
The Building Inspector shall issue or renew a Vacant Building Permit upon being
satisfied that the building has been inspected and is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Code and the Vacant Building Maintenance
Standards set forth in this Chapter, and is adequately protected from intrusion
by trespassers and from deterioration by weather. This Permit shall be
effective for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of
issuance or renewal.
   A.   Vacant Building Permit. The owner of any vacant building or structure
to which this Chapter applies shall obtain a Vacant Building Permit within
thirty (30) days of becoming vacant as defined in this chapter. Upon enactment
of this Chapter of the City Code, any building vacant must apply for a Vacant
Building Permit no later than January 31, 2022. The owner must maintain a valid
Vacant Building Permit for any building or structure to which this Chapter
applies and must continue to renew the permit as long as the building or
structure remains vacant. Failure to register a vacant building or providing
false information to the city shall be a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Vacant Building Registration Form. Applications for a Vacant Building
Permit shall be made by completing this form and submitted to the Building
Inspector.
   C.   Vacant Building Permit Process. When completing the Vacant Building
Registration Form, applicants shall disclose all measures to be taken to ensure
that the building will be kept weathertight, secure from trespassers, and safe
for entry by police officers and firefighters in times of exigent circumstances
or emergency. The application shall include, but not limited to the following:
      1.   A description of the premises, including address;
      2.   The names and addresses and current phone numbers of the owner(s);
      3.   The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building;
      4.   The name of the agent designated to act on the behalf of an out-of-
town property owner to accept legal processes and notices, and to authorize
repairs as required; and
      5.   The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant and/or
a plan and timetable to comply within applicable city codes.
      6.   An acknowledgment by the applicant that the owner is aware of and
understands the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards in this Chapter.
   D.   Vacant Building Permit Renewal. Any applicant seeking to renew a permit
must submit an updated Vacant Building Registration Form and shall pay the
required fee as established by City Council. (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-7: VACANT BUILDING PERMIT CONDITIONS:
All permits issued are subject to all other applicable conditions of the City
Code and the following additional conditions:
   A.   Consent to Entry. All applicants and owners holding a permit consent to
the entry of duly authorized officials of the City at all reasonable hours and
upon reasonable notice for the purpose of inspection. Refusal to consent to
entry shall be a violation of this Chapter. In addition to issuing a municipal
infraction citation in the event of refusal, the City may file a compliant
under oath to any Court of competent jurisdiction and said Court shall
thereupon issue its Order authorizing the appropriate person to enter such
establishment to inspect.
   B.   Consent to Emergency Inspections/Emergency Repairs. All applicants and
owners holding a permit consent to the entry of duly authorized officials of
the City if such official has reason to believe than an emergency situation
exists with respect to the building or structure that tends to create an
imminent hazard to health, welfare or safety of the general public, in the
discretion of such official, then such official may enter the building to
inspect the premises without notifying the responsible party or obtaining a
warrant. If such official finds an emergency situation exists in fact, which
presents imminent hazard to health, welfare or safety of the general public,
then such official may cause any reasonable action, including the employment of
necessary labor and materials, to perform emergency repairs to alleviate the
hazard. City employees will confer with legal counsel prior to entering or
causing entry to be made to premises and/or performing any emergency repairs
without prior owner notification and consent. Costs incurred in the performance
of emergency repairs may be paid by the City and if so paid, the City may levy
a special assessment against the property to recover the costs.
   C.   Cooperation by Owner or Responsible Person. All owners holding a permit
or responsible persons identified in a permit application shall cooperate with
an facilitate inspections of the premises at reasonable times pursuant to
reasonable notice to determine compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter. Obstructing a duly authorized inspection, including refusing entry or
access to portions of the building subject to the permit, shall be a violation
of this Chapter. The owner shall notify the Building Inspector within thirty
(30) business days of any changes to the contact information of the owner or
responsible party.
   D.   Continued Compliance: For the Vacant Building Permit to remain valid,
the building or structure subject to the permit shall continue to comply with
all the requirements of the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards. (Ord. 21-11,
11-15- 2021)
8-11-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Authorized Officials: The Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector
shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to
exercise the powers and duties specified in this Chapter and may delegate their
authority to appropriate City personnel as his/her designee.
   B.   Right Of Entry: An authorized official has the right to enter
buildings, structures, or premises subject to this Chapter at a reasonable
time, with the express or implied consent of the owner, responsible person, or
occupant, to inspect in accordance with the City's policy and procedures for
entering on to private property to conduct administrative interior and exterior
inspections for Code administration and enforcement. If entry is refused, it
shall be a violation of this ordinance for which a municipal infraction
citation may be issued.
   C.   Inspections: An authorized official may inspect the premises and
structures to determine compliance with this Chapter at their discretion. All
reports of such inspections shall be in writing, signed or initialed and dated.
An authorized official may engage any expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise in the course of their duties,
in accordance with City policy. An authorized official, or his/her designee(s),
may conduct inspections made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in
conjunction with other inspector of the Department, police officers,
firefighters, or inspectors from other governmental bodies.
   D.   Issuance Of Orders To Repair: Upon inspection, an authorized official
or his/her designee, shall issue orders to repair for work needed:
      1.   To adequately protect the building from intrusion by trespassers and
from deterioration by the weather;
      2.   To comply with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards set forth
in this Chapter;
      3.   To ensure that allowing the building to remain will not be
detrimental to public health, safety and welfare, will not unreasonably
interfere with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises
within the neighborhood; or
      4.   To eliminate any hazards to police officers or firefighters that may
enter the premises in times of emergency.
When issuing Orders to Repair, the authorized official shall specify the
deadline for completion of the repair required and shall mail the notice to the
owner or responsible person identified in the permit. All work done pursuant to
this Chapter shall be done in compliance with any applicable Building, Fire,
Property Maintenance and Zoning Codes and Ordinances.
   E.   Reinspection: Reinspection may be conducted after the deadline for
repairs as stated in the Order. Reinspection is subject to applicable
reinspection fees.
   F.   Notice And Orders: An authorized official may issue notices and orders
to owners, responsible persons, operators, or occupants to obtain compliance
with this Chapter.
   G.   Revocation, Reinstatement Measures: If a vacant building permit is
revoked by the Building Inspector for noncompliance with any provisions of this
code, the owner of the building shall be given thirty (30) days to comply with
the provisions of this code. Extensions of such thirty (30) day period may be
granted at the discretion of the Building Inspector. Upon expiration of the
thirty (30) day period, or any extension thereof, if the building continues to
be noncompliant, a municipal infraction will be issued. (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-
2021)
8-11-9: PROCESS AND TIMELINE:
No later than January 31, 2022, following passage of this ordinance, and
subsequently within thirty (30) days of a manufacturing, commercial,
industrial, or mixed occupancy building becoming vacant as defined herein, a
building owner must complete a Vacant Building Registration Form, which serves
as an application for a Vacant Building Permit.
   A.   There is no charge for the initial application as long as the building
is in compliance with all applicable building codes.
   B.   If the building remains vacant for one hundred eighty (180)-days
necessitating the one hundred eighty (180)-day inspection, the building owner
or representative shall pay the permit/inspection fee.
   C.   Upon completion of the inspection the building owner or representative
shall remedy as ordered. If no repairs are necessary, the permit is valid for
one year (365 days) from the one hundred eighty (180)-day inspection, at which
time the inspection process begins again with the Vacant Building Permit Fee
being due annually thereafter.
   D.   If the inspection results in necessary repairs being ordered, a
reinspection will be conducted in accord with the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   In the case of a necessary reinspection, the annual permit begins upon
all necessary repairs being made and bringing the building into compliance with
all applicable building codes. (Ord. 21-11, 11-15-2021)
8-11-10: FEES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Vacant Building Permit Fee: The Council shall, establish a fee for the
one hundred eighty (180)-day issuance and renewal of a Vacant Building Permit
Fee.
   B.   Permit Fee Due: The Vacant Building Permit Fee is due upon the one
hundred eighty (180)-day inspection.
   C.   Reinspection Fees:
      1.   To compensate the City for its inspection and administrative costs
reasonably related to the enforcement, an escalating fee established by the
Council through resolution, may be charged for any reinspection following the
initial inspection which resulted in an order for corrective action, and the
first reinspection to determine compliance with an order for corrective action
issued hereunder. There shall be no reinspection fee if the inspection
indicates full compliance, or for a reinspection occurring during the period of
an approved time extension granted for good cause and involving a good faith
effort on the part of the property owner to comply with the order.
      2.   Failure to pay reinspection fees within thirty (30) days of mailing
an invoice to the property owner of record shall constitute a violation of this
chapter for which a municipal infraction citation may be issued.
   D.   Penalties for Municipal Infraction for this Chapter shall be:
      1.   First offense: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      2.   Second offense: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      3.   Third offense: seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   E.   Violations:
      1.   Any violation of a provisions of this Chapter is a municipal
infraction for which a municipal infraction citation may be issued. Each day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation for which a
municipal infraction citation may be issued.
      2.   The issuance of a municipal infraction citation shall not preclude
the City Attorney from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises,
or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or utilization of the structure or
premises. (Ord. 21- 11, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 12
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MINIMUM MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
8-12-1: Purpose
8-12-2: Minimum Requirements
8-12-3: Inspections
8-12-4: Commercial Property Minimum Maintenance Code Violations
8-12-1: PURPOSE:
The City's commercial property minimum maintenance code requirements are
intended to preserve the structural integrity of the building and property
values while assuring a clean and attractive community.
   A.   Administrative Provisions:
      1.   For the purposes of this code section commercial property is defined
as any property not covered by Title 9, pertaining to housing, to include, but
to not be limited to, upper story residential use in first floor commercially
used buildings.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing
commercial property.
      3.   If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
      4.   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are
caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code section shall be
executed and performed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions.
      5.   Continued violations of this code section may result in the issuance
of civil citations and nuisance abatement action by the city with the resulting
costs assessed to the real estate taxes. (Ord. 21-10, 11-15-2021)
8-12-2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner or operator shall improve and maintain all property under their
control to comply with the following minimum requirements:
   A.   Drainage: All courts, yards, or other areas in the premises shall be
properly graded to divert water away from any building or structure.
   B.   Weeds: All exterior property areas shall be kept free from weeds as
required by this Code.
   C.   Debris: All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical
hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces.
   D.   Fences, Walks, And Parking Areas: Fences, other minor construction,
walks, driveways, parking areas, and similar paved areas shall be properly
maintained in a safe, sanitary, and substantial condition. Approved walks shall
provide all-weather access to the buildings or structures.
   E.   Exterior Surfaces: Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective
coating of a non-lead-based paint or other suitable preservative which will
provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive
appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall
be maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other deterioration of the
exterior surface or the surface treatment and to present an attractive
appearance. All paint or other preservative shall be applied in a workmanlike
fashion.
   F.   Yard Areas: Yard areas of real estate shall not be permitted to
deteriorate or remain in a condition that is not in accord with the following:
Yard areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of combustible or non-combustible materials (which are not used as
an integral part of the authorized business carried out on the premises),
debris, or refuse.
   G.   General Requirements: Every foundation, exterior wall, and roof shall
be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in
proper repair and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any hazardous sagging
or bulging shall be properly repaired to a level or plumb position. All
chimneys and breeching shall be so constructed and maintained so as to ensure
that it safely and properly removes the products of combustion from the
building.
   H.   Windows And Doors: Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway
shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodentproof and kept in
proper repair. All door and window hardware shall be installed and maintained
in proper working condition. No building openings, except basement windows, in
a building with any lot frontage on a public street my be boarded or covered in
whole or in part. Doors and windows located on a façade of a building with lot
frontage on a public street must be properly maintained, painted, and trimmed
in the same manner as if the building was occupied. Where permitted by this
Code boarded up windows and doors must be a material that is compatible with
the structure being protected and painted a color that is compatible with the
building.
   I.   Outside Stairs And Porches: Every outside stair, every porch, and every
appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and
shall be kept in proper condition and repair and shall present an attractive
appearance. All exterior stairs and steps and every appurtenance thereto shall
comply with the requirements specified in the International Existing Building
Code as adopted by this Code.
   J.   Signs For Businesses: All signs for business shall adhere to the
guidelines outlined in Title 9 Chapter 17 of the City Code. Every sign for
businesses no longer in operation shall be removed within sixty (60) days after
business use ceases.
   K.   Transfer Of Ownership: Any owner of any property as to which an order
or notice to repair, improve, demolish, or vacate has been issued shall not
sell or enter into any agreement to sell or lease such property unless such
order of the city has been disclosed and displayed to the prospective purchaser
or lease as required. (Ord. 21-10, 11-15-2021)
8-12-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Community Service Officer, or
person designated by the City Council may from time to time inspect property
and take such action as is necessary to enforce compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 21- 10, 11-15-2021)
8-12-4: COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MINIMUM MAINTENANCE CODE VIOLATIONS:
It is hereby declared that any violation of this Commercial Property Minimum
Maintenance Code is a nuisance within the meaning of Chapter 657 of the Code of
Iowa and Title 4 Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Knoxville,
Iowa. (Ord. 21-10, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
8-13-1: Title
8-13-2: Purpose
8-13-3: Definitions
8-13-4: International Property Maintenance Code Adopted
8-13-5: Modifications, Deletions, And Amendments
8-13-6: Interpretation
8-13-7: Inspections
8-13-8: Property Maintenance Code Violations
8-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be referred to as the "Knoxville Property Maintenance Code",
and is herein referred to as "this Code". (Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
esthetics and property values, by establishing minimum standards for
maintenance, appearance, condition, and occupancy, and for essential utilities,
facilities, and other physical components and conditions to make residential
premises fit for human habitation, and to make nonresidential premises fit for
use according to the purpose for which they were developed; by fixing certain
responsibilities and duties upon the owners and managers, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon the occupants; by authorizing and
establishing procedures for inspection of premises, and enforcement of this
Code; establishing and penalties for violations. (Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in this Code shall have the same meaning as that defined by the
Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise defined by this Code.
 
BOARD OF APPEALS:    The City Council.
                     The Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Community
                     Service Officer, or person designated by the City Council
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: may from time to time inspect property and take such
                     action as is necessary to enforce compliance with this
                     chapter. (Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
 
8-13-4: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
The International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2018 edition is adopted;
except as provided in this chapter. Copies of the International Property
Maintenance Code 2018 edition are on file in the office of the City Clerk. Any
modifications, deletions, and amendments shall be set out in this chapter.
(Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-5: MODIFICATIONS, DELETIONS, AND AMENDMENTS:
The following modifications, deletions, and amendments are made to the
International Property Maintenance Code 2018 edition as published by the
International Code Council.
   A.   Section 101.1 TITLE. Insert "the City of Knoxville" in place of "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]."
   B.   Section 102.1 General. Is hereby amended by inserting the following
paragraph at the end of the section:
      Partial Invalidity: In the event that any part or provision of this code
is held to be illegal or void, this shall not cause any other part or provision
of this code to be illegal or void.
   C.   Section 102.3 Application of Other Codes. Is hereby deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following wording in lieu thereof:
      102.3 Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions as prescribed in any of the Knoxville Building Codes
as adopted and amended by the City of Knoxville at the time of inspection as
applicable herein. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify,
or set aside any provision of the Knoxville Code of Ordinances.
   D.   Section 102 Applicability. Is hereby amended by inserting the following
subsection thereto:
      Section 102.11 Permits Required. No building or structure regulated by
this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each
building or structure has been obtained from the Building Inspector or Zoning
Administrator in the manner and according to the applicable conditions
prescribed by the Knoxville Building Codes.
   E.   Section 103.1 General. Is hereby amended by deleting "the department of
property maintenance inspection" and inserting "Building Department," and by
replacing "code official" with "enforcement officer". Throughout this code
wherever these words appear they shall be interpreted as such.
   F.   Section 103.5 Fees. The applicable fees for this code shall be those
established in Title 4 Chapter 7 of the Knoxville Code of Ordinances.
   G.   Section 111 Means of Appeal. Is hereby amended by deleting all
subsections under this section in their entirety and the following subparagraph
is inserted thereto:
      111.1. Application for Appeal. All applications for appeal under this
chapter shall be heard by the City Council.
   H.   Section 302.4 Weeds. Is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following wording in lieu thereof:
      302.4 Weeds. Refer to Title 4 Chapter 7 of the Knoxville Code of
Ordinances.
   I.   Section 303.2 Enclosures. Is amended by replacing 48 inches with 72
inches therein.
      Section 303.2 Enclosures. Is amended by inserting the following sentence
to the exception: "This is at the discretion of the Building Inspector or
Zoning Administrator."
   J.   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert:
      April 15th to October 15th as the applicable dates therein.
   K.   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert:
      September 1st and May 30th as applicable dates therein.
   L.   Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Insert:
      September 1st and May 30th as applicable dates therein.
   M.   Section 604.2 Service. Is hereby amended by adding the following
sentences thereto:
      Single family, Duplex, and Townhomes shall have a minimum of 100 amperes.
      "Exception: For buildings constructed prior to the adoption of this
chapter, services that are below 100 Amps but no less than 60 Amps, and in
good, safe and operational order as required by the building code when the
structure was originally constructed."
   N.   Section 605.2 Receptacles. Is amended by inserting the following
sentence thereto:
      All general-purpose outlets requiring GFCI protection as required by the
National Electric code enforced at the time of inspection shall be in place.
(Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-6: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Code of Iowa. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to
abrogate the Federal or State Constitutions, nor to grant powers to the City
that are otherwise reserved by and for Federal and State Government. (Ord. 23-
07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-7: INSPECTIONS:
The Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Community Service Officer, or
person designated by the City Council may from time to time inspect property
and take such action as is necessary to enforce compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 23-07, 6-5-2023)
8-13-8: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE VIOLATIONS:
It is hereby declared that any violation of this Property Maintenance Code is a
nuisance within the meaning of Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa and Title 4
Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Knoxville, Iowa. (Ord. 23-
07, 6-5-2023)
TITLE 9
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
PREAMBLE; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Preamble
9-1-2: Interpretation Of Standards
9-1-3: Definitions
9-1-1: PREAMBLE:
This Title is hereby declared to contain the Ordinance establishing
comprehensive zoning regulations for the City and providing for the
administration, enforcement and amendment thereof, in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 414, code of Iowa as amended, and for the repeal of all
ordinances in conflict herewith, and as:
   A.   Chapter 414, 1975 Code of Iowa as amended, empower the City to enact a
zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement and
amendment;
   B.   The City Council deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of the City to enact such an
ordinance;
   C.   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 414, 1975 Code
of Iowa as amended, has appointed a Planning and Zoning Commission to recommend
the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to
be enforced therein;
   D.   The Planning and Zoning Commission has divided the City into districts,
and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure
safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the
general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public
requirements;
   E.   The Planning and Zoning Commission has given reasonable considerations,
among other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar
suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of
building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Municipality;
   F.   The Planning and Zoning Commission has made a preliminary report and
held public hearing thereon, and submitted its final report to the City
Council;
   G.   The City Council has given due public notice of hearing related to
zoning districts, regulations and restrictions and has held such public
hearings; and
   H.   All requirements of chapter 414, Code of Iowa as amended, with regard
to the preparation of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
subsequent action of the City Council have been made.
The following provisions in this Title are hereby enacted. (1983 Code § 11-1-1)
9-1-2: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be
held to be minimum requirements. Where this Title imposes a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this Title shall control. (1983
Code § 11-1-2)
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, governmental agency,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an
individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the
plural and the plural number includes the singular.
The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
The word "used or occupied" include words "intended", "designed" or "arranged
to be used or occupied".
The word "lot" includes the words "plot or parcel".
ACCESSORY BUILDING:     Any building, the use of which is incidental to the principal use of another
                        structure on the same premises.
ACCESSORY DWELLING:     A smaller, independent detached dwelling that is located on the same lot as the
                        principal dwelling.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE:    Any structure, the use of which is incidental to the principal use of another
                        structure on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE:          A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises.
                        Any establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade in books,
                        magazine, films, or dancing and other live performances which are distinguished
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT     by an emphasis on matter or actions depicting or describing sex acts or specified
ESTABLISHMENT:          anatomical areas associated with such behavior. Adult entertainment facilities
                        are a use separate from entertainment centers, personal service businesses,
                        private clubs, retail and consumer service establishments, taverns, theaters, or
                        any other similar commercial uses. 
                        The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, aqua-culture,
                        dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, silviculture and
                        animal and poultry husbandry. Included are the necessary accessory uses for
AGRICULTURE:            packing, treating or storing the product; providing, that the operation of such
                        accessory use shall be secondary to that of normal farming activities; but not
                        including the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals, commercial
                        livestock feed lots or confinement stations, poultry farms or commercial grain
                        storage and drying facilities.
AIRPORT:                An area of land or water that is used or intended to be used for landing and
                        takeoff of aircraft, and includes its buildings and facilities, if any.
ALLEY:                  A public way, other than a street, twenty feet (20') or less in width, affording
                        secondary means of access to abutting property.
                        As used herein, the term includes passenger cars, motorcycles, mopeds, vans,
AUTOMOBILE:             pickup trucks, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, trailers, farm equipment
                        including motorized and nonmotorized but not limited to tractors, combines,
                        planters and discs.
                        That portion of a building having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its
BASEMENT:               height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story if the vertical
                        distance from the average adjoining grade to its ceiling is over five feet (5').
                        Any portion of building containing not more than two (2) guestrooms in R-1 and R-
BED AND BREAKFAST INN:  2 zoning districts. In the A-1 zoning district there may be as many as four (4)
                        guestrooms.
BILLBOARD:              See chapter 17 of this chapter for sign regulations.
BOARD:                  The Board of Adjustment of the City of Knoxville, Iowa.
                        A dwelling occupied by one family with three (3) or more boarders, roomers or
                        lodgers in the same building who are lodged with or without meals and in which
BOARDING HOUSE:         there are provided such services as are incidental to its use as a temporary
                        residence for part of the occupants. A rooming house shall be deemed a boarding
                        house.
                        Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or
BUILDING:               protection of persons, animals or property, but not including signs or
                        billboards.
                        The vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building line to the
                        highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof
BUILDING HEIGHT:        or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
                        roofs. On a corner lot, the height is the mean vertical distance from the average
                        natural grade at the building line from the higher of the two (2) grades.
                        A line defining the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements outside of
BUILDING LINES:         which no building or structure may be located, except as otherwise provided
                        herein.
CAMPGROUND:             Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for
                        travelers in recreational vehicles or tents.
CAR WASH:               An area or building with equipment for washing cars, automatic or self-serve.
                        A person or family employed to look after goods or property of a business or
CARETAKER:              large residence. A caretaker does not pay rent, utilities, etc. for their
                        shelter.
                        A portion of a building located partially or wholly underground and having less
CELLAR:                 than three and one-half feet (31/2') of its floor-to-ceiling height above grade.
                        A cellar is not counted as a story for the purpose of height and yard
                        regulations.
CEMETERY:               Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes,
                        including mausoleums.
                        Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of this title and
CERTIFICATE OF          such other ordinances as may be applicable and may be used or occupied. Such a
OCCUPANCY:              certificate is granted upon completion of new construction or for alteration or
                        additions to existing structures.
                        Facility providing care for five (5) or more children under the age of thirteen
CHILDCARE CENTER:       (13), not including children of a family residing on the premises, for any part
                        of a twenty four (24) hour day. Exceptions would include parties, and occasional
                        supervision of children not for pay.
COMMISSION:             The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Knoxville.
                        A building that provides common interior spaces or services for a multi-
COMMON FACILITIES       residential development, and may include: community spaces, maintenance and
BUILDING:               storage areas, or common laundry facilities. The use of all such spaces shall be
                        restricted to the development’s occupants.
                        A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, whether
COMMON LAND:            retained in private ownership for the shared use and enjoyment of the owners and
                        occupants of the individual building units in a planned unit development or
                        dedicated to the general public.
                        Building or structure used for the purpose of storing contracting or construction
CONTRACTOR'S SHOP:      equipment and material or performing shop work or assembly work by any building
                        trade or other contractor.
CONVENIENCE STORE:      A building used for the sale of food, dry goods, and related consumer products
                        with a gross floor area of less than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
CUL-DE-SAC:             A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic and the other end
                        terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
                        The act of changing and the state of a tract of land after its function has been
DEVELOPMENT:            purposefully changed by persons including, but not limited to, structures on the
                        land and alterations to the land.
                        A section or sections of the City within which the regulations governing the use
DISTRICT:               of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings and premises are
                        uniform.
DORMITORY LIVING        A building containing sleeping rooms without separate cooking facilities for a
FACILITY:               number of persons customarily unrelated but associated with an educational,
                        religious, charitable institution.
DRIVING RANGE:          An outdoor facility used to practice long distance golfing swings, which may or
                        may not be associated with a golf course.
                        Any building or portion thereof, used exclusively for human habitation, except
DWELLING:               hotels, motels, tents, trailers, recreational vehicle, or mobile homes. Dwellings
                        may be described as one of the following:
   APARTMENT         A building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families separated into
   DWELLING:         units with common walls and/or floors and attached to one another vertically and/
                        or horizontally.
   ATTACHED          A building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families separated by
   DWELLING:         party walls.
   DETACHED          A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING:
   DUPLEX            A building designed for or occupied by two families separated into units located
   DWELLING:         side by side with party walls or stacked one on top of the other.
DWELLING UNIT:          A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling building forming a habitable
                        unit for one family. Dwelling units may be described as one of the following:
   APARTMENT         A unit contained within an apartment dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT:
   ATTACHED          A unit contained within an attached dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT:
      END UNIT:   An attached dwelling unit that has one common party wall.
      INTERIOR UNIAn attached dwelling unit that has two (2) common party walls.
   DETACHED          The unit contained by a detached dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT:
   DUPLEX            A unit contained within a duplex dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT:
EARLY EDUCATION CENTER: School for children primarily between the ages of three (3) and five (5) years of
                        age.
                        A building that accommodates personal entertainment services such as a video
ENTERTAINMENT CENTER:   arcade, bowling alley, indoor golf practice range, or similar amusement
                        operations.
                        An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group
FAMILY:                 of not more than four (4) persons who need not be related by blood or marriage
                        living together and subsisting in common as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit
                        utilizing only one kitchen.
                        Family home is a community-based residential home or a child foster care facility
                        to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision
FAMILY HOME:            in a family environment exclusively for four (4) to not more than eight (8)
                        developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel as permitted
                        by and as limited by section 412.22, Code of Iowa.
FARM:                   An area comprising ten (10) acres or more which is used for agriculture, and
                        contains no more than one dwelling unit per ten (10) acres.
FENCES, WALLS AND       Decorative and/or enclosing device used along boundary lines of lots. Fences,
HEDGES:                 walls may be constructed up to the lot line in accordance with the height rules
                        set out in this Title.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:  A building that provides personal and commercial banking and financial services.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION,  A physical structure, manned or non-manned (automatic teller machine), that
DRIVE-IN:               provides banking services from within one's vehicle.
                        The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building including
                        basement areas, as measured from the interior perimeter of exterior walls. Such
FLOOR AREA, GROSS:      area shall not include the following: interior loading and parking areas, atriums
                        except the first floor area, rooftop mechanical equipment enclosures, and the
                        enclosed mall areas of shopping centers.
FRONTAGE:               That edge of a lot bordering a street.
FUNERAL HOME:           The use of a building to accommodate the preparation of the dead for burial or
                        cremation and assembly rooms to honor the deceased.
GARDEN STORES AND       The use of a building, structure, or land to provide for the care and sale of
NURSERIES:              plants, landscape features, and related consumer goods and equipment.
                        A structure and/or premises designed or used for the retail sale or supply of
                        fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities or accessories for
                        motor vehicles and including the customary space and facilities for the
GAS STATION:            installation of such commodities or accessories on or in such vehicles, but not
                        including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing,
                        body work or other major servicing of motor vehicles. Inoperable or damaged
                        vehicles may be stored on site for up to seventy two (72) hours.
GOLF COURSE:            An area or course for playing golf, consisting of at least nine (9) holes, except
                        miniature golf, within which the playing area is not artificially illuminated.
                        A commercial recreation facility, resembling golf, containing short "holes", the
GOLF, MINIATURE:        majority of which are under three hundred feet (300') in length, and primarily
                        utilizing putting irons.
GRADE:                  The average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main
                        building.
GROCERY STORE:          The use of a building for the sale of food, dry goods, and related consumer
                        products with a gross floor area greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
HOME OCCUPATION:        An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the making
                        of a product or provision of service for sale.
HOSPITAL:               An institution providing medical and surgical care for humans only, for both in
                        and out patients, including medical service, training, and research facilities.
HOTEL:                  The use of a building to provide lodging for the public usually on a transient
                        basis.
INTERMITTENT LIGHTING:  A method of lighting such as for signs, where artificial or reflected light is
                        not maintained stationary or constant in intensity or color.
                        Any area where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold,
                        exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including house wrecking and
                        structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses
JUNK YARD:              are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including
                        automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking and used parts yards, and the
                        processing of used, discarded or salvaged material as part of manufacturing
                        operations. Further, storage or processing of environmentally hazardous wastes is
                        not allowed.
                        The use of land or buildings for the purpose of selling, breeding, boarding, or
                        training dogs or cats or both, or the keeping of five (5) or more dogs of six (6)
                        months of age, or keeping seven (7) or more cats over six (6) months of age, or
                        the keeping of more than seven (7) dogs and cats. The word "selling" as herein
KENNEL:                 used shall not be construed to include the sale of animals six (6) months of age
                        or younger which are the natural increase of animals kept by persons not
                        operating a "kennel" as herein defined; nor shall selling be determined to
                        include isolated sales of animals over six (6) months old by persons not
                        operating a "kennel" as herein defined.
                        That part of the building which is enclosed and supported upon the main
LIVING SPACE:           foundation system of the structure excluding garages, basements and cellars
                        unless converted to finished living space.
                        A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements
                        for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as
                        are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated public street,
                        or as otherwise allowed in this title. A lot may consist of:
                        A.   A single lot of record;
LOT:                    B.   A portion of a lot of record;
                        C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of record and
                        portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
                        D.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no case of
                        division of combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does
                        not meet the requirements of this chapter.
LOT LINE:               The lines defining the bounds of a lot.
                        A.   DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines as
                        measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot line. In the case of
                        an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, the depth shall be the horizontal
                        distance between the midpoints at the front lot line and rear lot lines.
LOT MEASUREMENT:        B.   WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured
                        perpendicular to the line comprising the lot depth at its point of intersection
                        with the required minimum front yard setback.
                        C.   AREA: The gross area, exclusive of streets or other public rights-of-way,
                        within the boundary lines of a lot. The definition of other public rights-of-way
                        does not include utility easements or easements for trails and sidewalks.
                        A lot which is part of a subdivision, the deed of which is recorded in the Office
LOT OF RECORD:          of the County Recorder of Marion County, or a lot or parcel described by metes
                        and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES:
   CORNER LOT:       A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
   INTERIOR LOT:     A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an
                        alley.
   REVERSED FRONTAGE A corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of
LOT:                    the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
                        A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an
   THROUGH LOT:      alley. Through lots with frontage on two (2) streets may be referred to as
                        "double frontage" lots.
                        A factory built single-family structure, which is manufactured or constructed
                        under the authority of 42 USC section 5403, Federal Manufactured Home
                        Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human
                        habitation, but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device
MANUFACTURED HOME:      allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site,
                        and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or
                        axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to
                        real property and is taxed as a site built dwelling. For the purpose of these
                        regulations, manufactured home shall be considered the same as any site built
                        single-family detached dwelling in accordance with State Statutes.
MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR     The use of a building to accommodate medical, dental, or other related health
HEALTH CLINIC:          services, but does not accommodate overnight patient stays.
                        Any vehicle which at any time was used, maintained or so originally constructed
                        as to permit being used as a conveyance upon highways or public streets, or
                        waterways, and duly licensed as such; so designed and so constructed as to permit
                        occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit or sleeping place for one or more persons
                        whether attached or unattached to a permanent foundation, but shall also include
                        any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A
                        mobile home is factory-built housing on a chassis. A mobile home shall not be
MOBILE HOME:            construed to be a travel trailer or other form of recreational vehicle. A mobile
                        home shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations
                        applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch, or other apprentices of
                        mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided.
                        However, certain mobile homes may be classified as "manufactured homes". Nothing
                        in this Title shall be construed as permitting a mobile home in other than an
                        approved mobile home park, unless such mobile home is classified as a
                        manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME PARK OR     Any lot or portion of a lot upon which one or more mobile homes or trailers
TRAILER PARK:           occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located regardless of whether or
                        not a charge is made for such accommodations.
                        A prefabricated building which arrives at its building site virtually complete,
MODULAR UNIT:           requiring only site preparation and assembly of major components, including
                        installation on a permanent location.
                        A land use or structure which existed lawfully on the date that the Zoning
NONCONFORMING LAND USE  Ordinance or any amendment thereto became effective and which fails to conform to
OR STRUCTURE:           one or more of the applicable regulations in the Zoning Ordinance or amendment
                        thereto, except minimum lot area, yard and setback requirements.
                        A building intended for use as a medical care facility for persons who need
NURSING HOME:           nursing care and medical service, but do not require intensive hospital care and
                        does not include other residential care facilities or residences as specified
                        herein.
OFFICE:                 The use of a building to provide primarily administrative, professional, or
                        clerical operations.
OPEN STORAGE:           Storage of material or goods on the ground outside of a building.
PARKING LOTS AND        The use of an area, building, or structure for parking vehicles.
GARAGES:
                        A permanently surfaced area which includes the parking stall plus necessary
PARKING SPACE:          maneuvering space for parking of a motor vehicle. Space for maneuvering
                        incidental to parking or unparking shall not encroach upon any public right of
                        way.
PARKS, RECREATION       The use of a building, structure, or land to accommodate community, recreational,
AREAS, AND COMMUNITY    or scenic activities.
CENTERS:
PARTY WALL:             A dividing wall that is shared between two properties owned by separate parties.
                        An agreement signed by two (2) or more property owners who share a common wall,
                        recorded as a covenant running with the land, that places restrictions on all
PARTY WALL AGREEMENT:   present and future owners of said property. Its purpose is to outline how owners
                        will handle any repairs, maintenance, or changes to the wall since it could
                        affect both parties. Party wall agreements may also address other related issues
                        such as shared roof or exterior façade.
PERSONAL SERVICE        The use of a building to accommodates the following activities: hair and beauty
BUSINESS:               care; personal relaxation and rejuvenation through massage, aromatherapy and
                        other similar nonmedical therapy; fitness and dance; or other similar operations.
PLACES OF WORSHIP:      Church, synagogue, mosque, or similar places of veneration.
PLAT:                   A subdivision of land legally approved and recorded.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING:     The main use of land, contained within buildings or structures, as distinguished
                        from accessory uses, accessory buildings, or accessory structures.
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED     The main use of land or structures as distinguished from accessory uses.
USES:
PRIVATE CLUB:           The use of a building or land as a center for association which has a selective
                        membership and is generally not open to the public.
PROPERTY LINE:          The legally recorded boundary of a lot, tract or other parcel of land.
PUBLIC AUCTION          The use of a building or space to accommodate a public sale in which goods or
FACILITY:               property are sold to the highest bidder.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS OR     Any building or use of land which accommodates public or quasi-public services
USES:                   including administrative buildings, police or fire stations, public libraries,
                        and community centers.
PUBLIC UTILITY          A public utility facility serving a local area only, such as an electric
FACILITY, LOCAL:        substation or a water or gas pumping or regulating station or a telephone
                        switching center.
                        A vehicle which is:
                        A.   Built on a single chassis;
                        B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE:   horizontal projection;
                        C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
                        and
                        D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary
                        living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
RESIDENCE:              Any building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes,
                        except hotels and motels.
                        The use of a building to accommodate the preparation of food for onsite
RESTAURANT:             consumption or take out. This may include bakeries or other similar food
                        preparation activities.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THRU: The use of a building to accommodate the preparation of food and refreshments
                        sold and served to clients in vehicles for consumption offsite.
RETAIL AND CONSUMER     A use that accommodates the sale, rental, cleaning, or repair of consumer goods.
SERVICE BUSINESS:
ROADWAY:                The entire area within public or private vehicular easement or right-of-way
                        lines, whether improved or unimproved.
ROADWAY RIGHT- OF-WAY   The boundary which divides a lot from a public or private roadway.
LINE:
SALVAGE YARD:           An area for the dismantling, storage, and sale of inoperative, obsolete or
                        wrecked motor vehicles, trailers, farm equipment and their parts.
SCHOOL:                 A place of instruction, private or public, such as elementary, middle, or high
                        schools; business and technical schools; and colleges and universities.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY:  A building consisting of individual self-contained units that are leased or owned
                        for the storage of personal property and/or household goods.
SENIORS HOUSING:        A dwelling or collection of dwellings in which the principal occupants of the
                        units are required to be 55 years of age or older.
SETBACK (BUILDING       The required minimum distance from a road right-of- way or lot line that
LINE):                  establishes the area within which a structure can be erected or placed, except as
                        may be permitted elsewhere in this title.
                        A planned retail and consumer service center which is generally under single
SHOPPING CENTER:        ownership, management, or control; and which is characterized by a concentrated
                        group of stores and compatible uses that utilize common facilities such as
                        circulation and parking areas and amenities.
SIGHT DISTANCE          The triangular area of a corner lot bound by the property lines and a line
TRIANGLE:               connecting the two (2) points on the property lines twenty five feet (25') from
                        the intersection of the property lines.
SIGN:                   See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations.
SPECIAL EVENTS:         All major events as proclaimed by the Mayor and includes, but is not limited to,
                        the Knoxville National Sprint Car Races.
SPECIAL EVENTS          Designated as Highway 14 extending from the intersection with Jackson Street
DISTRICT:               south to its intersection with Pleasant Street and all private property within
                        two hundred feet (200') of said streets and roadways.
                        A detached building accessory to a residential use for the keeping of horses,
STABLE, PRIVATE:        owned by the occupants of the premises and which shall not be used for any
                        commercial purpose including the boarding, hire, sale, or training of horses.
STORAGE YARD, SCREENED- An outdoor space for storage of equipment, vehicles, or other materials typically
IN:                     associated with an individual contractor's business surrounded by a sight-proof
                        fence.
                        That portion of a building included between the surface of the floor and the
STORY:                  surface of the floor next above it or if there be no floor above it, then the
                        space between the floor and the ceiling or roof next above it.
                        A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking
STORY, HALF:            and wall face not more than four feet (4') above the top floor level. A half-
                        story containing independent apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a
                        full story.
STREET:                 A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
                        abutting property.
STREET LINE:            A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
                        Any replacement or changes in the type of construction or in the supporting
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: members of a building, such as load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams
                        or girders, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
                        Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached
STRUCTURE:              to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things,
                        structures include buildings, walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels.
                        A form of parking in which, instead of parking spaces being located side by side
TANDEM PARKING:         on a lot, driveway, or in a garage, they are located front and back to one
                        another. The most common from of tandem parking is a garage with a driveway in
                        front.
TAVERN:                 The use of a building to accommodate the sale and consumption of alcoholic
                        beverages onsite. This may include onsite brewing or vinification facilities.
TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL    The promotion or sale of merchandise on a temporary basis, whether by a
ACTIVITIES:             permanently licensed business or a "peddler", "solicitor", or "transient
                        merchant" as terms are defined in section 3-3-1 of this Code.
THEATER:                A building or space in which a performance may be given before an audience.
VEHICLE:                See definition of automobile. Terms are interchangeable.
VEHICLE SALES AND       The use of a building, structure, or land for the sale, servicing, or storage of
SERVICE CENTER:         automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, agricultural equipment, recreational vehicles,
                        and boats.
VETERINARY CLINIC:      The use of a building or land for the medical treatment of animals.
WAREHOUSE:              A structure for use as a storage place for goods, materials or merchandise.
                        An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and unobstructed by any
                        portion of a structure or parking lot from the ground upward, excepting as
                        otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the
                        depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, or width of a side yard, the
                        least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used, except
YARD:                   that in no case shall any eaves or overhang (or any other projection) extend into
                        the said front, side or rear yard by more than twenty four inches (24"). If eaves
                        or overhangs exceed twenty four inches (24"), then the building shall be set back
                        into the permissible building area as necessary to eliminate any eaves or
                        overhangs from extending more than twenty four inches (24"). Fences and walls are
                        permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
                        A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the front
   YARD, FRONT:      lot line and the front of the building other than the projection of the usual
                        steps or unenclosed porches with customary rails. See definition of "yard" for
                        eaves or overhang limitations.
   YARD, REAR:       A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear
                        lot line and the
                        building other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches with
                       customary rails. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard is the
                        opposite end of the lot from the front yard. See definition of "yard" for eaves
                        or overhang limitations.
                        A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the
   Yard, Side:       side lot lines and the building. See definition of "yard" for eaves or overhang
                        limitations.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:   The Administration Officer designated or appointed by the City to administer and
                        enforce the regulations contained in this title.
                        Written statement issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing buildings,
ZONING CERTIFICATE:     structures or uses consistent with the terms of this title and for the purpose of
                        carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
                        A revision to the City of Knoxville Zoning Map which modifies the zoning district
                        applicable to a specific lot(s), parcel(s) or tract(s). (1983 Code § 11-1-3; amd.
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT:   Ord. 97-9, 5-19-1997; Ord. 09-16, 9-8-2009; Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; Ord. 15-12, 8-
                        17-2015; Ord. 17-01, 3-20-2017; Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017; Ord. 18-13, 9-4-2018;
                        Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019; Ord. 23-02, 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-08, 6-19-2023; Ord. 24-07, 4-
                        15-2024; Ord. 25-06, 4-7- 2025)
 
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
9-2-1: Establishment Of Districts
9-2-2: Boundaries And Official Map
9-2-3: Future Annexation Of Territory
9-2-4: Application Of District Regulations
9-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
For the purpose of this title, the following classes of districts are hereby
established within the City as shown on the official zoning map which, together
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this title:
A-1 Agricultural District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential District
C-1 Residential-Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
C-3 Planned Commercial Development District
C-4 Central Business District
M-1 Service Commercial/Limited Industrial District
M-2 Heavy Industrial District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
 
(1983 Code § 11-1-4; amd. Ord. 02-13, 12-2-2002; Ord. 03-06, 10-6-2003; Ord.
19-08, 7-1-2019)
9-2-2: BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL MAP:
   A.   Districts Indicated On Map: The boundaries of these districts are
indicated upon the official zoning map of the City, which map is made a part of
this title by reference hereto. The official zoning map and all the notations,
references and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this
title as if the notations, references and other matters set forth by said map
were all fully described herein.
   B.   Map Filed In Clerk's Office: The official zoning map shall be on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and shall bear the signature of the Mayor
attested by the City Clerk, under the certification that this is the official
zoning map referred to in this section.
   C.   Boundary Changes: If in accordance with the provisions of this title
changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the
official zoning map, the ordinance number and date of said change shall be
recorded by the City Clerk on the official map.
   D.   Adoption Of New Map: The City Council may from time to time adopt a new
official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map in the
event that the official zoning map becomes damaged or destroyed, or for
purposes of clarity due to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting
errors or omissions; provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have
the effect of amending the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent
amendment thereof.
   E.   Interpretation Of Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following
rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, alleys, or other public rights-of-way shall be construed to
follow such centerlines;
      2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines;
      3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits
shall be construed as following corporate limits;
      4.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines,
quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines shall be construed as
following such lines;
      5.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks;
      6.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, creeks or other waterways shall be construed to follow such
centerlines;
      7.   Boundaries not capable of being determined in the previous
paragraphs shall be dimensioned on the official zoning map or if not
dimensioned shall be determined by the scale shown on the map. (1983 Code § 11-
1-5)
9-2-3: FUTURE ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY:
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be considered as
lying in the A-1 agricultural district until such classification shall have
been changed by amendment in accordance with provisions of this title. (1983
Code § 11-1-6)
9-2-4: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The regulations set by this title within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
lands and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:
   A.   Compliance With District Regulations: No building, structure or land
shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or structurally
altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located.
   B.   Building And Open Space Requirements: No building or other structure
shall hereafter be erected or altered:
      1.   To exceed the height;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this title.
   C.   Yards And Off Street Parking Spaces: No part of a yard or other open
space, or off street parking or loading space required about or in connection
with any building for the purpose of complying with this title shall be
included as part of a yard, open space or off street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building, except as otherwise provided herein.
   D.   Lot And Yard Dimensions: No yard or lot existing at the time of passage
of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after
the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established by this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-7)
CHAPTER 3
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Intent
9-3-2: Use Of Existing Lots Of Record
9-3-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
9-3-4: Nonconforming Use Of Structures
9-3-5: Repairs And Maintenance
9-3-6: Registration Of Nonconforming Uses
9-3-1: INTENT:
   A.   Prior Existence: Within the districts established by this title or
amendments that may later be adopted, there exists lots, structures and uses of
land and structures which were lawful before the ordinance codified herein was
passed or amended both which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under
the terms of this title or future amendment.
   B.   Continuation Of Nonconformity: It is the intent of this title to permit
these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as ground for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. To
avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change
in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of the ordinance codified herein and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. "Actual construction" is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of
an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided,
that such work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
   C.   Legal Nonconformity: To be a legal nonconforming structure, building,
lot, or use, the same must have been lawfully established on or before the
effective date of this title and must have been in active use. The provisions
of this section also shall apply to buildings, structures, uses of buildings or
structures, or uses of land which hereafter become nonconforming due to the
adoption of this title, amendments thereto, or rezonings.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: Landowners shall bear the burden of proof, to the
satisfaction of the city's zoning administrator, to show that a lot, use of
land, structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land that is
nonconforming with the current zoning ordinances in force on the subject land
comes under one or more of the exceptions to the zoning requirements provided
in this section and that such otherwise nonconforming lot, use of land,
structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land was lawfully
established on the subject property. Conformity or nonconformity runs with the
land, not with the owner. (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015)
9-3-2: USE OF EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district where dwellings are permitted, a single- family dwelling may be
located or altered on any legally established lot or plot of official record as
of the effective date of this title which does not meet area and/or width
requirements of this title; provided, that the following conditions are met:
   A.   Side Yard: For lots or plots less than sixty feet (60') in width, each
side yard width shall not be less than five feet (5').
   B.   Rear Yard: The depth of the rear yard of any such lot need not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, but in no case shall be reduced
below twenty feet (20').
   C.   Front Yard: The depth of the front yard shall comply with the zoning
district in which it is located or with chapter 4 of this title.
   D.   Building Width And Area, And Garage Space: All single- family and two-
family dwellings constructed as of the effective date of this title shall
comply with the minimum building width and area requirements as well as the
enclosed parking space requirement as set forth in the zoning district in which
it is located.
   E.   Two Or More Lots: If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots or
parcels with continuous street frontage in single ownership are of record as of
the effective date of this title, or amendments thereto, and if all or part of
the lots or parcels do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as
established by this code, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided, single parcel for the purposes of this title. No division of the
parcel shall be made which leaves remaining any lot or parcel with a width or
area below the requirements of this title. If such lots or parcels are to be
considered an undivided parcel, the owner will be required to either replat the
lots in question or to legally tie the lots together by recording a lot tie
agreement with the county recorder. (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015)
9-3-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified
herein, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the
terms of this title as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, subject
to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged nor extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of the ordinance codified herein.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified herein.
   C.   If any such nonconforming uses of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which
such land is located.
   D.   If any property owner proposes an addition to any structure that does
not meet current setback requirements, but the proposed addition meets all
setback requirements, that proposal shall be permitted pending administrative
review and approval. (1983 Code § 11-1-8C; amd. Ord. 20-15, 10-5-2020; Ord. 20-
16, 10-5-2020)
9-3-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES:
If a lawful use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified
herein that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title,
the lawful use may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlarge Or Extend: No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted
by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   B.   Occupy Land Outside Building: Any nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any of the parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance
codified herein, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside
such building.
   C.   Changed To More Restrictive Classification: If no structural
alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises, may be changed to a more restricted classification.
   D.   Abandoned Or Discontinued Use: If any nonconforming use of a structure,
or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for one
year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
   E.   Partial Removal Or Destruction: Where nonconforming use status applies
to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction in excess of
fifty percent (50%) of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status
of the land. (1983 Code § 11-1-8D)
9-3-5: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Limited Repairs Allowed: On any building devoted in whole or in part to
any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing; provided, that
the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or
amendment of the ordinance codified herein shall not be increased.
   B.   Strengthen To Safe Condition: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or
part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official. (1983 Code § 11-1-8E)
9-3-6: REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
See section
9-12-4 of this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-8F)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Visibility At Intersection
9-4-2: Fences, Walls And Hedges
9-4-3: Street Frontage Required
9-4-4: Accessory Structures
9-4-5: Lot And Yard Requirements
9-4-6: Parabolic Or Dish Type Antennas
9-4-7: Home Occupation
9-4-8: Litter
9-4-9: Signs
9-4-10: Special Events
9-4-11: Storage Containers
9-4-1: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION:
On a corner lot in any Residential, Commercial or Industrial District, except
the C-4 Central Business District nothing shall be erected, placed or allowed
to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two
and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner
lots and a line joining points along said street lines twenty five feet (25')
from the point of intersection of right-of-way lines. (1983 Code § 11-1-9A)
9-4-2: FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES:
   A.   Fences, including chain-link, open wood, solid wood, masonry walls,
vegetation, metal or ornamental iron, forming a physical barrier on private
property, used for any purpose, shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   General Requirements For All Zoning Districts:
         a.   No fence placed on any lot shall extend over the property line.
No fence or obstruction shall be permitted or placed in the public right-of-
way.
         b.   The finished side of any fence shall face toward adjoining
properties and the public right-of-way. The frame of the fence, including
supports, rails and posts shall be placed on the inside of the fence.
         c.   On corner lots, no fence shall obscure a clear view of traffic at
intersections or driveways or create a safety hazard to pedestrians or
vehicular traffic. A sight triangle of twenty five feet (25') from intersecting
property lines is required.
         d.   No fence shall block visibility or access to any fire hydrant
from the street. No fence shall be placed within three feet (3') of any fire
hydrant.
      2.   Residential Districts: In any Residential Zoning District, fences
not exceeding seven feet (7') in height are permitted within the limits of side
and rear yards. Fences are permitted in the front yard with a maximum height of
four feet (4').
      3.   Residential Corner Lots: Any yard abutting a public street shall be
considered a front yard. Residential corner lots contain two (2) front yards,
and any fence extending into either front yard shall be a maximum of four feet
(4') in height and shall be subject to all other requirements for front yard
fences.
      4.   Materials And Maintenance:
         a.   Allowed Materials: Fences are to be constructed of customarily
used materials such as chain-link, wood, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), wrought
iron, ornamental woven wire, welded wire mesh and other similar materials. Wood
fences should be constructed of treated lumber and resistant to decay.
         b.   Prohibited Materials: The use of materials such as sheet metal,
chicken wire, temporary construction fencing, snow fencing and other similar
materials shall not be permitted for permanent fencing. A fence or wall may not
be designed to cause harm to humans or animals. Therefore, the use of spikes,
barbed wire, razor wire, nails or electrical charge shall be prohibited unless
specified otherwise herein.
         c.   Construction And Maintenance: All fences shall be constructed in
a sound and sturdy manner and shall be maintained in a good state of repair,
including the replacement of defective parts, painting and other acts required
for maintenance. (Ord. 19-07, 7-1-2019)
9-4-3: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence
purposes unless such lot abuts for at least forty feet (40') on at least one
street and there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such
frontage. The Board of Adjustment may also allow, at its own discretion, the
construction of a building to be used in whole or part for residence purposes
on a lot which has an exclusive unobstructed private easement of access at
least twenty feet (20') wide to a street, for one single-family dwelling, if
the Board determines that such construction is not in conflict with the intent
of this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-9C)
9-4-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
   A.   Definitions: An "accessory structure", whereas the use of which is
incidental to the principal use of another structure on the same premises. This
definition includes the following accessory structures and other similar
structures and uses normally associated with a residential use of property:
Arbors and covered areas. Permanent, freestanding structures which are covered
and may include walls or latticework. All arbors require a building permit.
Barbecues and outdoor fireplaces (permanent). For purposes of this title,
barbecues and outdoor fireplaces are permanent structures where cooking and
recreation may occur which utilize a heated fire source. A building permit and
all applicable electric, plumbing, and utility permits are required. Building
permits are not required for nonpermanent or movable structures which do not
require connections to utilities.
Carport. An open sided shelter used to cover vehicles, equipment, or other
materials. Carports may be temporary or permanent and must meet similar setback
requirements as garages. The sides may not be fully enclosed. A building permit
is required.
Deck. Any structure that serves as a raised horizontal platform or floor
constructed of wood or other materials and adjoins a house. Decks may or may
not have a roof structure. The minimum front yard setback allowed for front
decks shall be fifteen feet (15') with a maximum size of two hundred fifty
(250) square feet. The maximum extension into the front yard shall be
determined by the front yard setback. If deck is roofed or enclosed, the
setbacks of the primary structure must be met.
Garages. A building or indoor space which is used to park and store vehicles.
Other uses for garages may be, but are not limited to, storage, workshops,
studios or similar building. All garages require a building permit.
Gazebos. A freestanding structure with a roof that is usually open on the
sides. All gazebos require a building permit.
Greenhouse. A structure enclosed by glass, plastic, or other material which is
used for the cultivation or protection of plants. Greenhouses do not require a
building permit but may require other permits such as electrical, plumbing,
etc.
Patio. A recreation area that adjoins a dwelling, is paved or covered with
wood, tile or other material, and is adapted especially to outdoor dining. All
patios require a building permit.
Porch. A covered area adjoining an entrance to a building. Porches may have
attached or separate roofs from the primary structure. Porches require a
building permit.
Storage/utility shed. A structure built, manufactured or formed for storage or
shelter. Any shed which requires a utility connection also requires a building
permit and necessary permits for electric, utility, or other. All sheds require
a building permit.
Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. Any permanent structure which uses water or
steam for recreation purposes and requires a utility connection to water,
electricity, gas, or any other utility. A building permit is required.
Water fountain. For purposes of this title, a water fountain is any permanent,
outdoor structure which requires plumbing and artificially creates a jet or
stream of water, often incorporating figures, basins, etc. A building permit is
required if the fountain is connected to water, gas, electric or other utility
infrastructure.
Workshop. A room, area or small building where manual or light industrial,
hobby or recreational work is done. Workshops require a building permit.
Other similar structures.
The accessory structure definition does not include the following:
Basketball hoops (permanent or movable).
Chimneys.
Mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning units).
Play equipment (permanent or movable). (Ord. 12-11, 11-5-2012; amd. Ord. 16-07,
12-19-2016; Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017; Ord. 21-03, 5-3-2021)
   B.   Requirements For All Accessory Structures:
      1.   Relationship To Primary Use: An accessory use and/or structure shall
be incidental to the primary residential use of the site, and shall not alter
the character of the primary use.
      2.   Appropriate Permits: Property owners must obtain the appropriate
permits as outlined in this title prior to construction or installation of any
accessory structure.
      3.   Timing Of Installation: An accessory structure shall only be
constructed concurrent with or after the construction of the primary structure
on the same site except that construction trailers may be placed on a site only
for the duration of construction.
      4.   Attached To Principal Building: When an accessory structure is
attached to a principal building by a breezeway, roofed passage or similar
structure, or is otherwise located within ten feet (10') or less of the
principal building it must meet the setback requirements of the principal
building. (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015)
      5.   Location On The Site: Except as provided by this title, no accessory
structure shall occupy a required front yard setback, or project beyond the
front building line of the primary structure on the site. Also, no accessory
structure will be located in public right-of-way or within a public easement. A
private street shall be considered the same as a public street for purposes of
this requirement. (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015; amd. Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
   C.   Side And Rear Yard Setbacks: All accessory structures, except for
accessory structures for residential uses, shall meet the side and rear yard
setback requirements of the principal structure. Accessory structures for
residential uses shall be set back from the side and rear property line as
follows:
      1.   If the structure is eighteen inches (18") or less in height, no
setback from the side and rear property line is required;
      2.   If the structure is greater than eighteen inches (18"), a five foot
(5') setback from the side and rear property line is required, however, an
uncovered deck may have a two foot (2') setback from the side and rear property
line; (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015)
      3.   No accessory structure greater than eighteen inches (18") in height
shall have less than a two foot (2') setback from the side or rear property
line. (Ord. 12-11, 11-5-2012; amd. Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
   D.   Lot Coverage: For all single-family and two-family dwellings, the total
sum area of all detached accessory structures that have a roof, including all
detached garages and sheds, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total lot
area. (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
9-4-5: LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Corner Lots: For corner lots, platted or of record after the effective
date of this title, the front yard regulations shall apply to each street side
of the corner lot except where otherwise noted. (1983 Code § 11-1-9E)
   B.   Building Lines On Approved Plats: Whenever the plat of a land
subdivision approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and on record in the
Office of the County Recorder shows a building line along any frontage for the
purpose of creating a front yard or side yard line, the building line thus
shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required
in this title unless specific yard requirements in this title require a greater
setback. (1983 Code § 11-1-9F)
   C.   Double Frontage Lots: Buildings on through lots and extending through
from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
(1983 Code § 11-1-9G)
   D.   Rear Yards Adjacent To Alleys, How Computed: In computing the depth of
a rear yard where rear opens on an alley, the yard is measured from the closest
edge of the alley. (Ord. 16-07, 12-19-2016)
   E.   Other Exceptions To Yard Requirement: Every part of a required yard
shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except as follows:
      1.   Ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and
ornamental features projecting not to exceed twenty four inches (24"), but no
closer than thirty six inches (36") to a property line.
      2.   Ordinary projections of chimneys and flues, not to exceed twenty
four inches (24") in width, projecting not to exceed twenty four inches (24"),
but no closer than thirty six inches (36") to a property line.
      3.   Roof overhangs projecting not to exceed twenty four inches (24"),
except that roof overhangs on the south side of a building may project forty
eight inches (48") into side or rear yard, but in no case closer than thirty
six inches (36") to a property line.
      4.   Slab type porches or paved terraces having a maximum height of not
more than twelve inches (12") above ground elevation at any point may project
into any yard except that the projection into the front yard shall not exceed
ten feet (10').
      5.   In all R residential districts air conditioning units extending into
side or rear yards a maximum of forty eight inches (48"), with air conditioning
units including mounting pedestals not to exceed forty eight inches (48") in
height above ground elevation, within said side or rear yards; but no closer
than sixty inches (60") to a property line.
      6.   Driveways, ramps, sidewalks, and parking lots as otherwise permitted
by this title.
      7.   An open deck shall be allowed in any yard so long as it meets all
setbacks for the specific yard. (Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015)
   F.   Front Yard, Exceptions: In areas where some lots are developed with a
front yard that is less than the minimum required for the district by this
title or where some lots have been developed with a front yard greater than
required by this title, the following rule shall apply. Any new building or
addition in front thereof shall not be closer to the street right-of-way than
the average of the front yards of buildings within two hundred feet (200')
measured from building to building, except as follows:
      1.   Buildings located entirely on the rear half of a lot shall not be
counted.
      2.   No residential dwelling shall be required to have a front yard
greater than seventy five feet (75') nor less than fifteen feet (15').
      3.   No commercial building shall be required to have a front yard
greater than fifty feet (50') nor less than twenty feet (20') except within the
C-4 Central Business District.
      4.   If no building exists on one side of a lot within two hundred feet
(200') of the lot in question, the front yard shall comply with the zoning
regulating the specific site.
   G.   Bulk Regulations For Heritage Buildings: For buildings which are fifty
(50) years or older, the zoning administrator may relax any bulk regulations
necessary to facilitate rehabilitation provided that:
      1.   The proposed work is designed to enhance the original character of
the building.
      2.   The proposed work does not negatively affect the amenity of adjacent
properties and the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 16-07, 12-19-2016; amd. Ord.
25-07, 4-7-2025)
9-4-6: PARABOLIC OR DISH TYPE ANTENNAS:
All parabolic or dish type antennas located outside of a building or structure
shall meet the following requirements: (1983 Code § 11-1-9K)
   A.   Maximum number per residential unit: One (i.e., single- family unit - 1
antenna, two-family unit - 2 antennas, multi- family unit - 1 antenna per
residential unit in the complex, etc.). (Ord. 15-02, 2-2-2015)
   B.   Maximum height: Fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Maximum diameter: Eleven feet (11').
   D.   Minimum setback from all property lines of lot: Ten feet (10').
   E.   No antenna may be located in a front yard. (1983 Code § 11-1-9K)
9-4-7: HOME OCCUPATION:
Home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a
building as a dwelling. Any question of whether a particular use is permitted
as a home occupation, as provided herein, shall be determined by the zoning
administrator pursuant to the following provisions of this title. The
regulations of this section are designed to protect and maintain the
residential character of established neighborhoods while recognizing that
certain professional and limited business activities have traditionally been
carried on in the home. This section recognizes that, when properly limited and
regulated, such activities can take place in a residential neighborhood or the
structure.
   A.   Use Limitations: In addition to all of the use limitations applicable
to the district in which it is located, no home occupation shall be permitted
unless it complies with the following restrictions:
      1.   No more than one full time equivalent employee who is not a resident
on the premises shall be employed.
      2.   No more than twenty five percent (25%) or four hundred (400) square
feet of the floor area of the dwelling unit, whichever is less, shall be
devoted to the home occupation.
      3.   No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made
which changes the character and appearance thereof as a dwelling.
      4.   No stock of goods shall be displayed or sold on the premises in
excess of thirty (30) cubic feet in volume.
      5.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling unit or in a permitted building accessory thereto, and in no event
shall such use be apparent from any public way.
      6.   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in
the home occupation.
      7.   No more than one vehicle used in commerce in connection with any
home occupation shall be parked on the property, said vehicle shall be stored
within a garage when not in use.
      8.   No mechanical, electrical or other equipment which produces noise,
electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare or other nuisance
outside the residential or accessory structure shall be used.
      9.   No home occupation shall be permitted which is noxious, offensive or
hazardous by reason of vehicular traffic, generation or emission of noise,
vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat,
humidity, glare, refuse, radiation or other objectionable emissions. (1983 Code
§ 11-1-9L)
      10.   See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord. 12-12, 11-
5-2012)
   B.   Home Occupations Permitted: Customary home occupations include, but are
not limited to, the following list of occupations; provided, however, that each
such home occupation shall be subject to the use limitations set out in A-1, R-
1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts:
      1.   Providing instruction to not more than four (4) students at a time.
      2.   Office facilities for accountants, architects, brokers, engineers,
lawyers, insurance agents and real estate agents.
      3.   Office facilities for ministers, priests and rabbis.
      4.   Office facilities for salesmen, sales representatives and
manufacturer's representative when no retail or wholesale sales are made or
transacted on the premises.
      5.   Studio of an artist, photographer, craftsman, writer or composer.
      6.   Beauty parlor and barbershop when conducted solely by resident
occupants.
      7.   Homebound employment of a physically, mentally or emotionally
handicapped person who is unable to work away from home by reason of his or her
disability. (1983 Code § 11-1-9L)
9-4-8: LITTER:
In this section the word "litter" means and includes, garbage, trash, refuse,
junk, brush, inoperative machinery or other waste material, the phrase
"otherwise lawful" means in compliance with applicable zoning district
regulations and with all rules, regulations, ordinances, conditions, permits,
and licenses applicable to the property or activity, whether arising from this
title or any other ordinance.
   A.   Except as provided in this section:
      1.   No persons shall throw or deposit litter on any vacant or occupied
property whether owned by such person or not.
      2.   The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all
times, maintain the premises free of litter.
   B.   It shall be lawful:
      1.   To accumulate or store nonputrescible litter in a sightproof
structure or container.
      2.   To accumulate or store litter produced as an incident of the
otherwise lawful use of the same premises where stored, where such storage is
pending removal or disposal and does not exceed seven (7) days, provided the
litter is placed or stored in a container or otherwise screened from the view
of persons upon adjacent property or rights of way.
      3.   To operate an otherwise lawful, sanitary landfill, building
demolition material site, vehicle or machinery repair facility, construction
material stockpile, sewage treatment facility, salvage yard or junkyard.
      4.   To store material to be used in an otherwise lawful agricultural or
nursery operation on the premises devoted to such use. (1983 Code § 11-1-9M)
9-4-9: SIGNS:
See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-4-10: SPECIAL EVENTS:
During special events the following activities are permitted uses in addition
to activities otherwise allowed under the zoning ordinances, subject to the
applicable requirements of this code and the conditions provided in this title:
   A.   Food And Beverage Service Areas: Temporary food and beverage service
areas as defined by section
3-3-1 of this code.
   B.   Racing Souvenirs: Racing related souvenir vendors, subject to the
following conditions and requirements:
      1.   Vendors shall operate only during the special event periods which
shall include one day before, up to and including one day after scheduled
racing events at the Marion County Fairgrounds.
      2.   Vendors shall obtain and display required permits or licenses as
required by this code.
      3.   All merchandise displayed and sold during special events shall be
primarily of a racing souvenir nature.
      4.   Under no circumstances shall a vehicle, van or display trailer be
closer than fifteen feet (15') from any main, private or commercial driveway or
entrance.
      5.   No vendor shall be permitted to have signs otherwise prohibited by
these zoning ordinances, except that signs permanently affixed to or painted on
merchandise, vehicles or trailers are not prohibited.
   C.   Prohibited Acts: The following, however, are prohibited acts during
special events:
      1.   No person, vendor or business shall sell to any person situated in a
motor vehicle upon any public street, alley, driveway access or public way.
      2.   No person shall conduct a transient sale or a temporary commercial
activity with a display height in excess of fifteen feet (15').
      3.   No person, vendor or other business shall display wares or product
in such a manner as to prevent its displacement by weather conditions.
      4.   No private property owner or lessee shall allow, permit or authorize
any person, vendor or business to conduct a temporary commercial activity
without the license required by this code.
      5.   No private property owner or lessee shall allow, permit or authorize
the use of any property within the control of the private property owner or
lessee in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-
9O)
      6.   The setback along Highway 14 shall be at least twenty five feet
(25') from the property lines in those areas designated as being in the
"special events district" as defined herein. All other streets in the special
events district shall have a ten foot (10') setback requirement. The city
manager, zoning administrator, or the city manager's designee shall have the
authority to allow exceptions to the setback requirements when circumstances
make the setback requirements impractical or unreasonable to enforce. (Ord. 99-
07, 4-5-1999)
9-4-11: STORAGE CONTAINERS:
Temporary storage containers, including, but not limited to, storage box
shipping containers, storage moving "pods", or any other similar portable
storage containers, whether with or without wheels, and whether with or without
a chassis, may only be placed upon a residential or commercial property for a
period not to exceed fourteen (14) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month
period. No more than one such temporary container can be placed on a property
during any twelve (12) month period. This section shall not apply to
prefabricated garden sheds or similar structures specifically designed and
intended for use on properties for storage purposes and which comply with all
city ordinances applicable to detached accessory structures.
Temporary storage containers are allowed on industrial properties.
Any temporary storage container existing on any property in the city on January
1, 2017, shall either be removed from such property, or brought into compliance
with the provisions of this section within sixty (60) days of January 1, 2017.
(Ord. 16-07, 12-19-2016)
CHAPTER 5
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-5-1: Intent
9-5-2: Principal Permitted Uses
9-5-3: Special Uses And Development Permits
9-5-4: Permitted Accessory Uses
9-5-5: Bulk Regulations
9-5-1: INTENT:
The A-1 Agricultural District is intended and designed to provide for certain
agricultural and undeveloped areas of the City now utilized primarily for
agricultural purposes and to prevent the establishment of scattered small lot
subdivisions which force uneconomical extension of urban services into areas
more appropriately suited for nonurban development at the present time. (1983
Code § 11-1-10A)
9-5-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Only the uses of structures or land listed in this Chapter shall be permitted
in the A-1 Agricultural District.
Agricultural and usual agricultural buildings and structures; but not including
commercial livestock feed lots, poultry farms, grain storage and drying
facilities.
Bed and breakfast inn.
Cemeteries, including mausoleums.
Churches, chapels and other places of worship.
Customary home occupations.
Electrical and liquefied product transmission and regulation facilities.
Kennels.
Nurseries, greenhouses and truck farms.
One-family dwellings.
Private noncommercial recreation areas and centers including country clubs,
swimming pools, golf courses, and riding stables.
Public and private schools, elementary and secondary and other educational
institutions.
Public water supply and sewage treatment facilities.
Publicly-owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses excluding miniature golf
courses and independent driving ranges and recreation areas.
Roadside stands for the sale of products grown on the premises. (1983 Code §
11-1-10B)
9-5-3: SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Special uses and development permits shall be issued under Chapter 10 of this
Title.
   A.   Airports and landing fields.
   B.   Golf courses that are illuminated and independent driving ranges,
miniature golf courses are excluded.
   C.   Mineral extraction subject to City, State and Federal regulations and
approval.
   D.   Retreats.
   E.   Local public utility facilities; provided, that any installation, other
than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers, shall be:
      1.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls or any
combination thereof; or
      2.   Placed underground; or
      3.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area. (1983 Code § 11-1-10C)
All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board.
   F.   Commercial and private camping areas. Campgrounds shall meet the
following criteria:
      1.   Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date
of this subsection F. shall have a minimum size of 4.5 acres.
      2.   Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a fifty-foot (50') front
yard setback and a twenty-five foot (25') buffer yard from all other property
lines.
      3.   Water, Trash And Sewage Disposal: Each campground must maintain
water supply, trash and sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in
compliance with all City ordinances.
      4.   Site Plan Review: Campgrounds shall be subject to site plan review
procedures. (1983 Code § 11-1-10C; amd. Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005; Ord. 17-07, 12-
18-2017; Ord. 20-13, 9-21-2020)
9-5-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Uses of land and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the above principal uses, unless otherwise prohibited.
   B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction
work.
   C.   Private swimming pools when enclosed with a nonclimbable fence with a
minimum height of six feet (6'). Said fence height may be reduced to four feet
(4') in height if pool is an integral part of a raised deck at least four feet
(4') in height. (1983 Code § 11-1-10D)
   D.   See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-
2012)
   E.   Parabolic dish antennas as allowed by this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-
10D)
9-5-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to modifications
contained in chapter 4 of this title:
A. Lot Area:                           
   Kennels                          3 acres
   Dwelling                         10 acres
   Agriculture                      10 acres
   Other uses                       3 acre minimum required
B. Lot Width:                         150 feet
C. Front Yard:                        A minimum of 50 feet
D. Side Yard:                          
   Dwelling:                         
    Total side yard                30 feet
    Minimum on 1 side              10 feet
    Corner lot adjacent to street  50 feet
    Kennels                        100 feet minimum side yard
   Other uses                       50 feet on each side unless otherwise
                                       indicated herein
E. Rear Yard:                         50 feet, except kennels which is 100
                                       feet.
F. Maximum Height:                     
   Principal building               50 feet
   Accessory building               50 feet
G. Maximum Number Of Stories:          
   Principal building               Unlimited
   Accessory building               Unlimited
                                       The minimum dimensions of the main body
H. Minimum Width:                     of the principal building shall not be
                                       less than 20 feet.
                                       All footings shall be in compliance with
I. Perimeter Foundation:              the building code in effect as adopted
                                       by the city council.
                                       Spaces for off street parking and
                                       loading shall be provided in accordance
J. Off Street Parking/Loading:        with the provisions of chapter 9 of this
                                       title for all permitted nonagricultural
                                       uses.
                                       Site plans shall be required in
                                       accordance with the provisions of
K. Site Plan:                         chapter 11 of this title for all uses
                                       permitted in this district except
                                       agricultural uses and nonfarm one-
                                       family dwellings.
 
(1983 Code § 11-1-10E; amd. Ord. 04-02, 3-1-2004)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL RULES FOR R-1, R-2, R-2A, AND R-3 DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-6A-1: Intent:
9-6A-2: Permitted Uses:
9-6A-3: Accessory Uses:
9-6A-4: Special Uses:
9-6A-5: Bulk Regulations:
9-6A-6: Additional Requirements To The Bulk Regulations:
9-6A-7: Lot Division Procedures For Duplex And Attached Dwellings:
9-6A-1: INTENT:
This district is intended to provide for residential development, characterized
by detached dwellings on large lots with supporting community facilities and
urban services. Its regulations are intended to minimize traffic congestion and
to assure that density is consistent with the carrying capacity of
infrastructure. (Ord. 20-06, 7-6-2020; amd. Ord. 23-02, 3-6-2023)
9-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses for the R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts are as follows:
Permitted Uses R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3
Permitted Uses                                 R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3
Accessory Dwelling                                 X   X    X
Apartment Dwellings                                         X
Attached Dwellings                                     X    X
Bed And Breakfast Inns                         X   X        X
Boarding Houses                                             X
Childcare Centers                                      X    X
Detached Dwellings                             X   X   X    X
Dormitory Living Facility                                   X
Duplex Dwellings                                   X   X    X
Early Education Centers                                X    X
Family Homes                                   X   X   X    X
Funeral Homes                                      X        X
Golf Courses                                   X   X
Home Occupations                               X   X   X    X
Nursing Homes                                               X
Places Of Worship                              X   X   X    X
Parks, Recreation Areas, And Community Centers X   X   X    X
Private Clubs                                               X
Schools                                        X   X   X    X
 
(Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
The permitted accessory uses for the R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 Districts are as
follows:
 
Accessory Uses                                    R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3
Accessory Buildings                               X   X   X    X
Accessory Uses                                    R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3
Common Facility Buildings                                 X    X
Private Garages                                   X   X   X    X
Private Swimming Pools                            X   X   X    X
Temporary Uses (Construction & Real Estate Sales) X   X   X    X
 
(Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6A-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be acceptable in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-
3 Districts.
 
Special Uses                    R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3
Cemeteries                      X   X
Childcare Centers               X   X
Driving Ranges                  X   X
Early Education Centers         X   X
Local Public Utility facilities X   X   X    X
 
Notes:
   1.   Local Public Utility Facilities - Provided that any installation, other
than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers, shall be:
      a.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls, or any
combination thereof; or
      b.   Placed underground; or
      c.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area.
All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board. (Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6A-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to modification
contained in chapter 4 of this title.
Highest Use R-1 Detached R-2 Detached Dwellings R-2A Attached R-3 Apartment
            Dwellings                           Swellings     Dwellings
Highest Use          R-1 Detached R-2 Detached R-2A Attached R-3 Apartment
                     Dwellings    Dwellings    Swellings     Dwellings
Lot Area                                                   
Detached Dwellings   8,400 SF     7,200 SF     6,000 SF      6,000 SF
Duplex Dwellings                 7,200 SF     6,000 SF      6,000 SF
Attached Dwellings -                         6,800 SF      6,800 SF
3 units
Attached Dwellings -                         6,800 SF      6,800 SF
4 units
Attached Dwellings -                         10,400 SF     10,400 SF
5 units
Attached Dwellings -                         12,200 SF     12,200 SF
6 units
Apartment Dwellings                                       35 Units/Acre
Non- Residential     10,000 SF    10,000 SF    10,000 SF     10,000 SF
Buildings
All Uses Without     20,000 SF    20,000 SF    20,000 SF     20,000 SF
Public Sewer
Lot Width                                                  
Detached Dwellings   70 Feet      60 Feet      60 Feet       60 Feet
Duplex Dwellings                 60 Feet      60 Feet       60 Feet
Attached Dwellings                           30 Feet/Unit  30 Feet/Unit
Apartment Dwellings                                       75 Feet
Non-Residenti al     100 Feet     100 Feet     100 Feet      100 Feet
Buildings
All Uses Without     160 Feet     160 Feet     160 Feet      160 Feet
Public Sewer
Front Yard                                                 
Dwellings            30 Feet      25 Feet      25 Feet       25 Feet
Non-Residenti al     30 Feet      25 Feet      25 Feet       25 Feet
Buildings
Side Yard                                                  
All Dwellings Except 10 Feet      7 Feet       6 Feet        6 Feet
For Apartments
Apartment Dwellings                                       12 Feet
Non-Residenti al                                          12 Feet
Buildings
Corner Lot Side Yard 15 Feet      15 Feet      15 Feet       15 Feet
Rear Yard            35 Feet      30 Feet      30 Feet       30 Feet
Maximum Height                                             
Principal Buildings  35 Feet      35 Feet      40 Feet       45 Feet
Principal Buildings  2.5 Stories  2.5 Stories  3 Stories     3 Stories
Accessory Buildings  16 Feet      16 Feet      16 Feet       16 Feet
Accessory Buildings  1 Story      1 Story      1 Story       1 Story
Building Width       20 Feet      20 Feet      20 feet       20 Feet
 
Notes:
1.   Perimeter Foundation:
      a.   A continuous perimeter foundation, meeting the city building code
standards, shall be required for all principal buildings.
      b.   Pier footings will be allowed to accommodate manufactured homes
provided that the skirting provides the appearance and benefits of a
conventional foundation of poured concrete walls, brick, or concrete block
typical of site-built homes.
   2.   Off Street Parking/Loading: Spaces for off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
   3.   Site Plan: Site plans are required in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 11 for all uses except for detached and duplex dwellings. (Ord. 25-08,
4-7-2025)
9-6A-6: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS TO THE BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   On Corner Lots, the side yard adjacent to the street shall be 15 Feet.
   B.   In cases of lot division of duplex and attached dwellings, the
following shall apply:
      1.   Duplex Dwelling Units:
         a.   Lot Area - 2,500 SF
         b.   Lot Width - 25 Feet
         c.   Side Yard - 0 Feet (Common lot line only)
      2.   Attached Dwelling Units:
         a.   Lot Area for Interior Units - 1,800 SF
         b.   Lot Area for End Units - 2,500 SF
         c.   Lot Width for Interior Units - 18 Feet
         d.   Lot Width for End Units - 25 Feet
         e.   Side Yard - 0 Feet (Common lot line only)
   C.   For accessory dwellings in the R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts, the
following shall apply:
      1.   Only one (1) accessory dwelling is permitted on a lot.
      2.   The accessory dwelling must be located in the rear yard.
      3.   The building must be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from
interior side and rear lot lines.
      4.   The maximum building height is one (1) story and sixteen (16) feet.
      5.   The roof type should resemble the principal dwelling.
      6.   Exterior materials and colors should be similar to the principal
dwelling.
      7.   The floor area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the principal
dwelling.
      8.   The accessory dwelling must contain sleeping, cooking, bathing, and
bathroom facilities.
      9.   One (1) parking space shall be provided for use by the residents of
the accessory dwelling. (Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6A-7: LOT DIVISION PROCEDURES FOR DUPLEX AND ATTACHED DWELLINGS:
Where duplex and attached dwellings are legally constructed, and the plat in
which such dwelling is located is properly recorded, provided the dwelling has
met zoning regulations at the time it was issued a building permit and
subsequently inspected, the lot may thereafter be divided to provide individual
ownership of the duplex and attached dwelling units pending the following
conditions are met:
   A.   A plat of survey is provided to the zoning administrator showing the
as-built location of the duplex or attached dwelling with each duplex or
attached dwelling unit located exclusively on one lot, except for the party
wall that bisects the lot line, and individual legal descriptions for each new
parcel.
   B.   An executed party wall agreement is provided to the zoning
administrator for each duplex or attached dwelling unit.
   C.   The duplex or attached dwelling and each duplex or attached dwelling
unit comply with the bulk regulation requirements of this section.
   D.   Each duplex or attached dwelling unit is serviced by separate
utilities. (Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
ARTICLE B. R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6B-1: Intent
9-6B-2: Principal Permitted Uses
9-6B-3: Special Uses And Development Permits
9-6B-4: Permitted Accessory Uses
9-6B-5: Bulk Regulations
9-6B-6: Lot Division Procedures For Duplex Dwellings
9-6B-1: INTENT:
This district is intended to provide for medium-density residential
development, characterized by detached and duplex dwellings. It provides
regulations to encourage innovative forms of housing development. It adapts to
both established and developing neighborhoods, as well as transitions between
low and high-density residential areas. Its regulations are intended to
minimize traffic congestion and to assure that density is consistent with the
carrying capacity of infrastructure. (Ord. 20-06, 7-6-2020; amd. Ord. 23-02, 3-
6-2023)
9-6B-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Only the uses of structures or land listed in this chapter shall be permitted
in the R-2 district.
Uses permitted in the R-1 district.
Conversion of detached dwellings into duplex dwellings in accordance with bulk
regulations of this chapter and all other applicable regulations.
Funeral home or mortuary.
Duplex dwellings. (1983 Code § 11-1-12B; amd. Ord. 14-07, 8-18-2014; Ord. 23-
02, 3-6-2023)
9-6B-3: SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Special uses and development permits shall be issued under chapter 10 of this
title.
   A.   Local public utility facilities; provided, that any installation, other
than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers, shall be:
      1.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls, or any
combination thereof; or
      2.   Placed underground; or
      3.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area. (1983 Code § 11-1-12C)
All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board. (1983 Code § 11-1-12C; amd. Ord. 05-06,
6-6-2005)
   B.   Cemeteries and mausoleums.
   C.   Driving ranges associated with a golf course. Miniature golf courses
are excluded.
   D.   Childcare centers, nursery schools and day nurseries. (1983 Code § 11-
1-12C)
9-6B-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
   B.   Private garage or carport in conjunction with a dwelling.
   C.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
   D.   Temporary use of a dwelling structure within a new subdivision as a job
office and real estate office for the subject subdivision, which use shall
terminate upon completion or abandonment of the project. (1983 Code § 11-1-12D)
   E.   Private swimming pools meeting the requirements of the international
code. Permanent inground swimming pools when enclosed with a non-climbable
fence with a minimum height of six feet (6').
   F.   See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations.
   G.   Parabolic dish antennas as allowed by this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-
12D; amd. Ord. 09-15, 9-8-2009; Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; Ord. 23-02, 3-6-2023)
9-6B-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the
modifications contained in chapter 4 of this title:
A. Lot Area:                               
   Detached dwelling                    7,200 square feet
   Duplex dwelling                      7,200 square feet
   Duplex dwelling unit (in cases of    2,500 square feet
     lot division)
   Nonresidential permitted uses and    10,000 square feet
     approved special uses
   All permitted uses and approved      20,000 square feet
     special uses without public sewer
B. Lot Width: Lot width is measured at     
   the front yard setback line
   Detached dwelling                    60 feet
   Duplex dwelling:                     60 feet
   Duplex dwelling unit (in cases of    25 feet
     lot division)
   Nonresidential permitted uses and    100 feet
     approved special uses
   All permitted uses and approved      160 feet
     special uses without public sewer
C. Front Yard:                             
                                           25 feet
   Detached or duplex dwelling          (For corner lots 1 of the front
                                           yards may be reduced to 15 feet)
     Nonresidential buildings for
   permitted uses and approved special  35 feet
     uses
D. Side Yard:                              
   Detached or duplex dwelling          7 feet on each side
   Duplex dwelling unit (in cases of    0 feet (common lot line only)
     lot division)
     Nonresidential buildings for
   permitted uses and approved special  35 feet
     uses
E. Rear Yard:                             35 feet
F. Maximum Height:                         
   Principal building                   35 feet
   Accessory building                   12 feet
G. Maximum Number Of Stories:              
   Principal building                   21/2 stories
   Accessory building                   1 story
                                           The minimum dimension of the main
H. Minimum Width:                         body of the principal building shall
                                           not be less than 20 feet.
                                           A continuous perimeter foundation,
                                           meeting the city building code
                                           standards, shall be required for all
I. Perimeter Foundation:                  principal buildings. Pier footings
                                           will be allowed to accommodate
                                           manufactured homes with the
                                           following skirting requirements:
                                           1. Skirting must provide the
                                           appearance and benefits of a
                                       conventional foundation of poured
                                           concrete walls, brick or concrete
                                           block typical of site built homes.
                                           2. Skirting must ensure visual
                                       compatibility with the permanent
                                           foundation systems of surrounding
                                           residential structures.
                                           3. Require certification seal
                                           showing the unit complies with
                                       federal HUD standards. Note: Housing
                                           units constructed before 1976 do not
                                           carry certification seals and may
                                           not be placed on residential lots.
                                           Spaces for off street parking and
J. Off Street Parking/Loading:            loading shall be provided in
                                           accordance with the provisions of
                                           chapter 9 of this title.
                                           Site plans shall be required in
                                           accordance with provisions of
K. Site Plan:                             chapter 11 of this title for all
                                           uses permitted in this district
                                           except one-family and two-family
                                           dwellings.
 
(Ord. 15-12, 8-17-2015; amd. Ord. 23-02, 3-6-2023)
9-6B-6: LOT DIVISION PROCEDURES FOR DUPLEX DWELLINGS:
Where a duplex dwelling is legally constructed, and the plat in which such
dwelling is located is properly recorded, provided the dwelling has met zoning
regulations at the time it was issued a building permit and subsequently
inspected, the lot may thereafter be divided to provide individual ownership of
the duplex dwelling units pending the following conditions are met:
   A.   A plat of survey is provided to the Zoning Administrator showing the
as-built location of the duplex dwelling with each duplex dwelling unit located
exclusively on one lot, except for the party wall that bisects the lot line,
and individual legal descriptions for each new parcel.
   B.   An executed party wall agreement is provided to the Zoning
Administrator for each duplex dwelling unit.
   C.   The duplex dwelling and each duplex dwelling unit comply with the bulk
regulation requirements of this section.
   D.   Each duplex dwelling unit is serviced by separate utilities. (Ord. 23-
02, 3-6-2023)
ARTICLE B. R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6B-1: Intent
9-6B-2: Principal Permitted Uses
9-6B-3: Accessory Uses
9-6B-4: Height Regulations
9-6B-5: Plan Submittal
9-6B-6: Lot Area, Lot Frontage And Yard Requirements
9-6B-7: Parking
9-6B-8: Streets
9-6B-9: Utilities
9-6B-10: State Requirements
9-6B-11: Signs
9-6B-12: Parabolic Dish Antennas
9-6B-1: INTENT:
This district recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can
provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It provides
opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or subdivisions,
along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential
neighborhoods. (Ord. 20-06, 7-6-2020)
9-6B-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Family homes.
Mobile home parks, in accordance with regulations of the state and minimum
requirements contained herein, and including mobile home sales and display
areas. (1983 Code § 11-1-14B; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses may include common facility service buildings which
provide laundry facilities, accessory supplies, vending machines, etc; also
park management buildings, maintenance buildings, community buildings and other
uses of a similar nature. All such buildings shall be located within the
central "park" area, and shall be restricted to the use of the park occupants.
(1983 Code § 11-1-14C)
   B.   One permanent identification sign shall be permitted at any main
entrance to a mobile home park. Such sign shall be regulated by chapter 17 of
this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-14C; amd. Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; Ord. 25-08, 4-7-
2025)
9-6B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No mobile home or accessory building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
(1983 Code § 11-1-14D; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-5: PLAN SUBMITTAL:
Each petition for a change to the R-4 zoning classification shall be
accompanied by a mobile home park plan. Said plan shall show each mobile home
space, the water, electrical and sewer lines serving each mobile home space,
the location of garbage receptacles, water hydrants, service buildings,
driveways, walkways, recreation areas, required yards, existing and proposed
grading, parking facilities, lighting, landscaping and the location of existing
trees, buildings or other significant features. The required plan shall be
considered by the planning and zoning commission and city council, who may
approve or disapprove said plan or require such changes thereto, as are deemed
necessary. (1983 Code § 11-1-14E; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-6: LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Park Area: The minimum area proposed for a mobile home park shall have
a minimum of five (5) acres, of gross development area. The maximum density
allowed for the gross development area shall be seven (7) home units per gross
acre.
   B.   Park Perimeter: All mobile home park perimeter yard requirements shall
be not less than thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Space Adjacent To Street: No part of any mobile home space shall be
closer to any public street upon which the park adjoins than seventy five feet
(75'); however, interior park street may be located within the setback area.
   D.   Mobile Home Lots And Yards: The individual mobile home lot shall
contain not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area with a minimum
depth of one hundred feet (100'). Each lot shall have a front yard not less
than twenty feet (20') in depth measured from the edge of the surfaced private
street to the closest point of the lower face of the mobile home. Side and rear
yards shall be provided and maintained so as to provide a minimum separation at
the nearest point between mobile homes, and other buildings and structures on
adjoining lots, of at least twenty five feet (25'); however, side yards as so
described shall not be less than seven feet (7'), and rear yards as so
described shall not be less than ten feet (10'), for any structure. These
requirements do not reduce perimeter setbacks spelled out in subsection B of
this section.
   E.   Recreational Areas: A minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet
for the first forty (40) lots and one hundred (100) square feet for each
additional lot shall be provided for one or more recreational areas which shall
be easily accessible to all park residents. Not more than one recreational area
for every five (5) acres of mobile home park development shall be allowed. The
required recreational area shall be computed in addition to the minimum park
area specified herein. Required improvements shall be installed prior to
installation of more than fifty percent (50%) of the mobile home units. (1983
Code § 11-1-14F; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-7: PARKING:
A minimum of two (2) off street car spaces shall be installed for each mobile
home lot. All parking area shall be constructed with a concrete or asphalt
concrete surface a minimum of four inches (4") thick. (1983 Code § 11-1-14G;
amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-8: STREETS:
The entrance road connecting the park street with a public street shall have a
minimum road pavement width of thirty one feet (31') measured back-to-back of
curbs. All interior streets shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in
width. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with appropriate
ordinances and specifications of the city. (1983 Code § 11-1-14H; amd. Ord. 25-
08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-9: UTILITIES:
Sewer and water facilities shall be provided for each mobile home park space in
accordance with the requirements of the Iowa state department of health. All
mobile home developments must be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer
system, and the municipal water system. All electrical and telephone lines
shall be placed underground. (1983 Code § 11-1-14I; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-10: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
All state codes shall be met including tie downs and are the responsibility of
the developer/owner of the mobile home park. (1983 Code § 11-1-14J; amd. Ord.
25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-11: SIGNS:
See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; amd.
Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
9-6B-12: PARABOLIC DISH ANTENNAS:
Parabolic dish antennas shall be as allowed by this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-
14M; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-7-2025)
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
GENERAL RULES FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Intent
9-7-2: Permitted Uses
9-7-3: Special Uses
9-7-4: Permitted Accessory Uses
9-7-5: NonResidential Bulk Regulations And Development Rules
9-7-6: Residential Bulk Regulations And Development Rules
9-7-7: Additional Development Rules For Commercial Districts
9-7-1: INTENT:
The C-1 District – Neighborhood Commercial
   The C-1 District is intended to provide for a mix of residential and
compatible commercial uses in a predominantly residential neighborhood setting.
The C-2 District – General Commercial
   The C-2 District is intended to provide general commercial uses along major
streets and highways in the city. The uses permitted are intended to
accommodate the needs of the auto traveling consumer.
The C-3 District – Central Business Frame
   The C-3 District is intended for use in areas adjacent to the Central
Business District in which a mix of compatible, urban-oriented, commercial and
residential development can be accommodated. This District is not intended to
be used in other parts of the city.
The C-4 District – Central Business District
   The C-4 District is intended to accommodate a variety of retail, consumer
service, and office uses within the Central Business District. The C-4 District
is designed to encourage rehabilitation of existing buildings and to ensure
that, when new development occurs, it follows the existing traditional built
patterns within the Central Business District. The C-4 District is not intended
to be used outside of Knoxville’s original business core. (Ord. 24-08, 5-6-
2024)
9-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses for the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 districts are as follows:
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
                                     C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Commercial Uses
Car Washes                               x
Convenience Stores                   x   x   x   x
Entertainment Centers                    x   x   x
Financial Institutions               x   x   x   x
Financial Institutions, Drive-In         x
Funeral Homes                            x   x
Garden Stores and Nurseries              x
Gas Stations                             x
Golf, Miniature Courses                  x
Grocery Stores                           x
Hotels                                   x   x
Medical, Dental or Health Clinics    x   x   x   x
Offices                              x   x   x   x
Parking Lots                             x   x   x
Parking Garages                          x   x
Personal Service Businesses          x   x   x   x
Private Clubs                        x   x   x   x
Public Auction Facilities                x
Restaurants                          x   x   x   x
Restaurants, Drive-Thru                  x
Retail & Consumer Service Businesses x   x   x   x
Taverns                                  x   x   x
Vehicle Sales and Service Centers        x
Veterinary Clinics and Kennels           x
 
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
                                          C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Residential Uses
Apartment Dwellings                       x   x   x
Apartment Units in Mixed Use Developments x   x   x   x
Attached Dwellings                        x   x   x
Detached Dwellings                        x       x
Duplex Dwellings                          x       x
Home Occupations                          x   x   x   x
 
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
                                             C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Public & Quasi Public Uses
Childcare Centers                            x   x   x
Early Education Centers                      x   x   x
Hospitals                                    x   x
Nursing Homes                                x   x
Places of Worship                            x   x   x
Public Buildings or Uses                     x   x   x
Parks, Recreation Areas, & Community Centers x   x   x   x
Schools                                      x   x   x
Theaters                                         x   x   x
 
Notes:
   1.   Vehicle Sales and Service Centers – Provided that all work is done
within an enclosed building, and that no inoperable autos or materials are held
or stored outside a six foot (6') high sight-proof fence.
   2.   Apartment Units in Mixed Use Developments – Not permitted on ground
floor in C-4 district.
Combinations of uses listed above may be accepted by the Zoning Administrator.
Similar or compatible uses to those listed above may be accepted by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 24-08, 5-6-2024)
9-7-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be acceptable in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-
4 Districts:
Special Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Special Uses                                                C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Cemeteries                                                      x
Contractors’ Shops                                            x
Detached and Duplex Dwellings                                   x
Financial Institutions, Drive-in                            x       x
Gas Stations                                                x
Parking Garages                                                         x
Places of Worship                                                       x
Public Buildings or Uses                                                x
Public Utility Facilities, Local                            x   x   x   x
Restaurants, Drive-Thru                                     x
Self-Storage Facilities                                         x
Storage Yards, Screened-In                                      x
Structures up to sixty-five feet (65') in height, unlimited     x       x
number of stories
Notes:
   1.   Public Utility Facilities, Local – Provided that any installation,
other than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers,
shall be:
      a.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls, or any
combination thereof; or
      b.   Placed underground; or
      c.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area.
   All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board.
   2.   Self-Storage Facilities – Subject to the following:
      a.   All areas subject to traffic shall be hard surfaced;
      b.   When a self-storage facility is located adjacent to A-1 or
residential districts, the exterior of the building shall be compatible to the
residential area.
      c.   The maximum area shall be 500 square feet per storage unit.
      d.   The maximum height shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. 24-08, 5-6-2024)
9-7-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The permitted accessory uses for the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 Districts are as
follows:
 
Accessory Uses                                   C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Merchandise Storage                                  x
Private Residential Garages                      x   x   x
Private Swimming Pools                           x   x   x
Temporary Buildings on Construction Sites        x   x   x   x
Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices in New Homes x   x   x   x
 
Notes:
1.   Merchandise Storage – Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal
use, but not to exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area utilized for such
use. 
(Ord. 24-08, 5-6-2024)
9-7-5: NONRESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT RULES:
   A.   The following bulk regulations and rules apply to nonresidential uses
in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 Districts:
Nonresidential Bulk Regulations
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
Nonresidential Bulk Regulations
                   C-1     C-2     C-3     C-4
Minimum Front Yard 20 feet 30 feet None    None
Maximum Front Yard None    None    20 feet 12 feet
Minimum Side Yards 7 feet  5 feet  None    None
Minimum Rear Yard  30 feet 25 feet 20 feet None
Maximum Height     35 feet 45 feet 45 feet 45 feet
Maximum Stories    2 ½    4       4       4
 
Notes:
   1.   The front yard may be reduced to 10 feet to accommodate a canopy
associated with a gas station or a financial institution.
   2.   Where a side yard abuts a residential district, the side yard shall be
a minimum of 15 feet.
   3.   Where a rear yard abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall be
a minimum of 30 feet.
   B.   Additional Requirements in the C-3 and C-4 Districts.
      1.   Buildings in C-4 shall be located adjacent to the front property
line.
      2.   A front yard not to exceed 20 feet is permitted in C-3 to
accommodate landscaping.
      3.   A front yard not to exceed 12 feet is permitted in C-4 to
accommodate a plaza or outdoor café.
      4.   Parking in front yards, where provided, is not permitted.
      5.   Access to parking through the front yard is not permitted, except
for existing detached and duplex dwellings.
      6.   Drive-in windows for banking, restaurants, and other similar uses
are not permitted, unless otherwise specified by special use. (Ord. 24-08, 5-6-
2024)
9-7-6: RESIDENTIAL BULK REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT RULES:
   A.   The following bulk regulations and rules apply to residential uses in
the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 Districts.
Residential Bulk Regulations
Detached and Duplex Dwellings
Residential Bulk Regulations
Detached and Duplex Dwellings
   Lot Area            7,200 square feet
   Lot Width           60 feet
   Front Yard          25 feet
   Side Yards          7 feet
   Rear Yard           30 Feet
   Maximum Height      35 feet
   Maximum Stories     2 1/2 stories
   Minimum Dwelling Wid20 feet
 
Residential Bulk Regulations
Attached Dwellings
Residential Bulk Regulations
Attached Dwellings
   Lot Area             
      3 Units       6,800 square feet
      4 Units       8,600 square feet
      5 Units       10,400 square feet
      6 Units       12,200 square feet
   Lot Width            
      3 Units       90 feet
      4 Units       120 feet
      5 Units       150 feet
      6 Units       180 feet
   Front Yard          25 feet
   Side Yards          7 feet
   Rear Yard           30 feet
   Maximum Height      35 feet
   Maximum Stories     2 1/2 stories
   Minimum Dwelling Wid20 feet
                          
Apartment Dwelling
   Lot Area             
      Up to 4 Units 8,400 square feet
      5 to 18 Units Add 1,500 square feet per unit
      Over 18 Units Add 1,200 square feet per unit
   Lot Width           75 feet
   Front Yard          25 feet
   Side Yards          10 feet
   Rear Yards          30 feet
   Maximum Height      45 feet
   Maximum Stories     3 Stories
   Minimum Dwelling Wid20 feet
 
Residential Bulk Regulations
Dwelling Units
Residential Bulk Regulations
Dwelling Units
   Lot Area                        
      Attached - End Unit      2,500 square feet
      Attached - Interior Unit 1,800 square feet
   Lot Width                       
      Attached - End Unit      25 feet
      Attached - Interior Unit 18 feet
   Side Yards                      
      Attached Units-Common Lot0 feet
Accessory Structures
   Maximum Height                 16 feet
   Maximum Stories                1 story
 
   B.   C-3 Exceptions to the Residential Bulk Regulations
      1.   The minimum front yard for a residential dwelling may be reduced to
10 feet.
      2.   The minimum side yard for a residential dwelling may be reduced to 7
feet.
      3.   The minimum rear yard for a residential dwelling may be reduced to
20 feet. (Ord. 24-08, 5-6-2024)
9-7-7: ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT RULES FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Off Street Parking and Loading. Spaces for off-street parking and
loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9 of
this title.
   B.   Site Plan. Site plans shall be required in accordance with provisions
of Chapter 11 of this title for all uses permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-
4 Districts except for detached and duplex dwellings.
   C.   Signs. Sign regulations are provided for in Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 24-08, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. M-1 SERVICE COMMERCIAL/LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8A-1: Intent
9-8A-2: Principal Permitted Uses
9-8A-3: Special Uses And Development Permits
9-8A-4: Permitted Accessory Uses
9-8A-5: Bulk Regulations
9-8A-1: INTENT:
The M-1 Service Commercial/Limited Industrial District is intended and designed
to provide for increased flexibility in the location of certain limited service
commercial and manufacturing and industrial uses while maintaining protection
for nearby residential districts. It allows selected uses of nonnuisance
character to locate in areas within reasonable proximity of residential uses.
(1983 Code § 11-1-20A)
9-8A-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Only the uses of structures or land listed in this chapter shall be permitted
in the M-1 District; provided, however, that all manufacturing or other
comparable treatment, including storage of any and all materials and equipment,
shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, or approved sight-proof
fencing except for parked motor vehicles and off-street parking and loading as
required by chapter 9 of this title. No dwelling or dwelling unit is permitted.
In addition, all open areas not used for off-street parking and loading shall
be planted with grass, shrubs and trees, properly maintained and kept free from
refuse and debris.
Animal hospitals and clinics.
Auto repair and body shop; provided, that all work is done within an enclosed
building and that no inoperable autos or materials are held or stored outside a
six foot (6') high sight-proof fence.
Bakery.
Building contractors' offices and related facilities, if exterior storage
occurs, it shall be screened by a six foot (6') high sight-proof fence approved
by the commission.
Building material sales (except for ready-mix concrete or similar uses which
emit dust, odor, or smoke).
Carpenter and cabinet shops.
Dog kennels.
Dry cleaning and/or laundry plants.
Frozen food lockers and ice plants.
Greenhouses and nurseries, retail and wholesale.
Incinerators.
Lumber yards.
Machine shops.
Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging or other
comparable treatment of the following:
Bakery goods, candy and food products.
Cameras and other photographic equipment.
Electric and neon signs, outdoor advertising signs.
Medical, dental and drafting instruments.
Musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal handstamps.
Pottery and other ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
Products from the following previously processed materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, rope, cord, twine, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass,
hair, horn, leather, paper, cardboard, plastics, natural and synthetic rubber,
precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shells, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood, yarns, light metal mesh, pipe, rods, strips or wire.
Small precision instruments, such as barometers, clocks, watches and compasses.
Miniwarehouses.
Monument sales.
Offices or office buildings.
Parking areas, including garages.
Plumbing and heating shops.
Printing, publishing and related trades.
Railroads.
Research laboratories and facilities.
Sales and renting of equipment and vehicles used by business, industry, and
agriculture, excluding retail automobile sales.
Sheet metal shops.
Storage of grain in a dustless manner.
Terminals for trucks, buses and rail.
Towed vehicle storage yards, wherein no individual vehicle may be stored for a
period exceeding ninety (90) days, and involving no salvage of automobile
parts. A six foot (6') high sight proof fence shall be provided along all
limits of the property except as limited by this title.
Upholstery shops.
Vehicle and equipment repair, service and body shops; provided, that all work
is done within an enclosed building and that no inoperable vehicles or
equipment or materials are held or stored outside a six foot (6') high sight
proof fence.
Welding and metal shops.
Wholesaling or warehousing of manufactured commodities except live animals,
explosives, or flammable gases.
Yards for storage of contractors' equipment, materials, and supplies, excluding
junkyards and salvage yards; provided, that all material and equipment is
within a six foot (6') high sight proof fence.
Any other use which is determined by the commission to be consistent with the
intent of this chapter, and which is determined to be of the same general
character as the above permitted uses. (1983 Code § 11-1-20B; amd. Ord. 17-07,
12-18-2017)
9-8A-3: SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Special uses and development permits shall be issued under chapter 10 of this
title.
   A.   Local public utility facilities; provided, that any installation, other
than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers, shall be:
      1.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls; or any
combination thereof; or
      2.   Placed underground; or
      3.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area. (1983 Code § 11-1-20C)
All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board. (1983 Code § 11-1-20C; amd. Ord. 05-06,
6-6-2005)
   B.   Adult entertainment facilities.
   C.   Buildings up to sixty five feet (65') in height, unlimited number of
stories. (1983 Code § 11-1-20C)
   D.   Gas stations, including emergency towing and repair services. (Ord. 17-
07, 12-18-2017)
   E.   Restaurants.
   F.   Commercial and private camping areas. Campgrounds shall meet the
following criteria:
      1.   Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date
of this subsection F. shall have a minimum size of 4.5 acres.
      2.   Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a fifty-foot (50') front
yard setback and a twenty-five foot (25') buffer yard from all other property
lines.
      3.   Water, Trash And Sewage Disposal: Each campground must maintain
water supply, trash and sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in
compliance with all City ordinances.
      4.   Site Plan Review: Campgrounds shall be subject to site plan review
procedures. (1983 Code § 11-1-20C; Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017; Ord. 20-13, 9-21-
2020)
9-8A-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Land Or Structure Accessory Use: Accessory uses of land or structures
customarily incidental and subordinate to any of the above principal uses.
   B.   Employee Cafeteria Or Food Concession: Employee cafeteria or other food
concession in conjunction with permitted use. (1983 Code § 11-1-20D)
   C.   Signs: See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations.
   D.   Billboards: See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord.
12-12, 11-5-2012)
   E.   Dish Antennas: Parabolic dish antennas shall be as allowed by this
title. (1983 Code § 11-1-20D)
9-8A-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the
modifications contained in chapter 4 of this title:
A. Lot Area:                    None
                                30 feet except adult entertainment facilities,
B. Front Yard:                  and kennels which are required to be set back
                                100 feet from front property lines.
                                The side yards, each 10 feet wide; or 1 side
                                yard 20 feet wide; provided, however, that
                                where adjacent to an R or C-1 district or
C. Side Yard:                   street right of way line a side yard of 25 feet
                                shall be required. Kennels and adult
                                entertainment are required to be set back 100
                                feet from all side yards.
                                50 feet where adjacent to residential,
D. Rear Yard:                   otherwise 10 feet, except kennels and adult
                                entertainment which are required to be set back
                                100 feet from all rear yards.
E. Maximum Height:              45 feet
F. Maximum Number Of Stories:   None
G. Minimum Width:               None
                                All footings shall be in compliance with the
H. Perimeter Foundation:        building code in effect as adopted by the city
                                council.
                                Spaces for off street parking and loading shall
I. Off Street Parking/Loading:  be provided in accordance with the provisions
                                of chapter 9 of this title.
                                Site plans shall be required in accordance with
J. Site plan:                   provisions of chapter 11 of this title for all
                                uses permitted in this district except one-
                                family dwellings.
                                A minimum of 15 percent of the total lot area
K. Landscaping:                 shall be retained as landscaped open space to
                                include such items as walks, trees, shrubs,
                                fountains or other ornamental features.
 
(1983 Code § 11-1-20E; amd. Ord. 04-02, 3-1-2004)
ARTICLE B. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8B-1: Intent
9-8B-2: Principal Permitted Uses
9-8B-3: Special Uses And Development Permits
9-8B-4: Permitted Accessory Uses
9-8B-5: Bulk Regulations
9-8B-1: INTENT:
The M-2 heavy industrial district is intended and designed to provide areas of
the city for activities and uses of a heavy industrial character and to protect
said areas from encroachment of unlike uses. In addition no residential uses
are allowed. (1983 Code § 11-1-21A)
9-8B-2: PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, or packaging of any commodity
except:
Facilities for animal slaughtering, meat packing, or rendering.
Facilities producing or processing explosives or flammable gases or liquids.
Sulphur plants, rubber reclamation plants, or cement plants.
Printing and publishing facilities over forty thousand (40,000) square feet
gross floor area.
Research laboratories and facilities.
Wholesaling or warehousing of manufactured commodities except live animals,
explosives or flammable gases unless otherwise allowed by this title. (1983
Code § 11-1-21B)
9-8B-3: SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Special uses and development permits shall be issued under chapter 10 of this
title.
   A.   Local public utility facilities; provided, that any installation, other
than poles and towers and equipment attached to the poles and towers, shall be:
      1.   Adequately screened with landscaping, fencing or walls, or any
combination thereof; or
      2.   Placed underground; or
      3.   Enclosed in a structure in such a manner so as to blend with and
complement the character of the surrounding area. (1983 Code § 11-1-21C)
All plans for screening these facilities shall be submitted to the board for
review. No building permit or installation permit shall be issued until these
plans have been approved by the board. (1983 Code § 11-1-21C; amd. Ord. 05-06,
6-6-2005)
   B.   Building of up to sixty five feet (65') in height, unlimited number of
stories.
   C.   Restaurants.
   D.   Gas stations.
   E.   Explosive manufacturing and storage.
   F.   Fat rendering plants.
   G.   Fertilizer manufacturing.
   H.   Gas manufacturing and cylinder recharging.
   I.   Junk, iron or rags, storage or baling and wastepaper yards, where the
premises upon which such activities are conducted are wholly enclosed within a
building, wall or fence not less than six feet (6') in height, completely
obscuring the activity.
   J.   Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of, and
asphalt plants.
   K.   Waste treatment facility.
   L.   Wholesale storage of gasoline and other flammable liquids. (1983 Code §
11-1-21C)
9-8B-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Land Or Structure Accessory Use: Accessory uses of land or structures
customarily incidental and subordinate to any of the above principal uses.
   B.   Employee Cafeteria Or Food Concession Use: Employee cafeteria or other
food concession in conjunction with permitted uses. (1983 Code § 11-1-21D)
   C.   Signs: See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations.
   D.   Billboards: See chapter 17 of this title for sign regulations. (Ord.
12-12, 11-5-2012)
   E.   Parabolic Dish Antennas: Parabolic dish antennas shall be as allowed by
this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-21D)
9-8B-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the
modifications contained in chapter 4 of this title:
A. Lot Area:                    None
B. Front Yard:                  30 feet except kennels which are required to be
                                set back 100 feet from front property line.
                                The side yards, each 10 feet wide; or 1 side
                                yard 20 feet wide; provided, however, that
C. Side Yard:                   where adjacent to an R or C-1 district or
                                street right of way line a side yard of 25 feet
                                shall be required. Kennels are required to be
                                set back 100 feet from all side yards.
                                50 feet where adjacent to residential,
D. Rear Yard:                   otherwise 10 feet, except kennels which are
                                required to be set back 100 feet from all rear
                                yards.
E. Maximum Height:              45 feet
F. Maximum Number Of Stories:   None
G. Minimum Width:               None
                                All footings shall be in compliance with the
H. Perimeter Foundation:        building code in effect as adopted by the city
                                council.
                                Spaces for off street parking and loading shall
I. Off Street Parking/Loading:  be provided in accordance with the provisions
                                of chapter 9 of this title for all permitted
                                uses.
                                Site plans shall be required in accordance with
                                the provisions of chapter 11 of this title of
J. Site Plan:                   all uses permitted in this district except
                                agricultural uses and nonfarm one-family
                                dwellings.
                                A minimum of 15 percent of the total lot area
K. Landscaping:                 shall be retained as landscaped open space to
                                include such items as walks, trees, shrubs,
                                fountains or other ornamental features.
 
(1983 Code § 11-1-21E; amd. Ord. 04-02, 3-1-2004)
CHAPTER 9
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-9-1: Off-Street Loading Spaces Required
9-9-2: Off-Street Parking Area Required
9-9-3: Rules For Computing Off-Street Parking
9-9-4: General Requirements Regarding Parking
9-9-1: OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
In any C or M District, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse,
goods, display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital,
mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt
by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained
on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus
one additional such loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet, or major fraction thereof, of gross floor area so used in excess of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.
   A.   Each loading space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width,
forty feet (40') in length.
   B.   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court
space except as otherwise restricted by this Chapter. (1983 Code § 11-1-22A)
9-9-2: OFF-STREET PARKING AREA REQUIRED:
In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business,
trades, institutional, recreational or dwelling use, and similar uses, space
for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the
following schedule:
   A.   Residential Land Uses:
 
Bed and breakfast inns        2 spaces for dwelling and one space for each room
                              used for guests.
                              2 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 11/2 parking
                              spaces per dwelling unit if developed as an
Apartment dwellings           elderly housing project. Herein an elderly
                              housing project is for those residents over 55
                              years of age.
Mobile and modular homes      2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Boarding houses               2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Detached dwellings            2 parking spaces.
Duplex and attached dwellings 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
 
   B.   Commercial And Institutional Land Uses:
Adult entertainment           1 space per 150 square feet per gross floor area.
Auto and truck sales and      1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
rental
Auto parts store              31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet per gross floor
                              area.
Auto repair garages           31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                              area.
Banks, savings and loans and  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
other lending institutions    area.
Bowling alleys                5 spaces per alley.
Car washes, except self-      Reservoir (lineup) parking equal to 5 times the
service                       capacity of the car wash.
Car washes, self-service      Lineup area equal to accommodate 4 cars per work
                              stall.
Childcare centers, day        2 spaces plus 1 for every employee on maximum
nurseries                     shift; a paved unobstructed pick-up space with
                              adequate stocking for daily pickup of children.
Churches and other places of  1 space per 4 seats in the sanctuary.
worship
Clubs and lodges              1 space per each 4 seats.
Farm and home business        31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                              area.
Funeral homes                 1 spaces per 5 seats.
Furniture stores, major
appliances, floor covering    1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
stores
                              1 space per employee on maximum shift plus 1
Gas station (service station) space; plus 31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                              gross area of space used in auto repair; plus 1
                              space for each vehicle used in the business.
Grocery stores and super
market stores, department     6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
stores under 5,000 square     area.
feet
Grocery stores and super      31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
market stores over 5,000      area.
square feet
Hospitals, nursing homes,     1 space for each 4 beds and 1 space for each
convalescent homes and the    employee on the maximum shift.
like
                              1 space for every sleeping unit, 2 spaces for
Hotels, motels                every 3 employees, plus one space for each
                              vehicle used in the operation of the business.
Medical and dental office     5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                              area.
Office business and           4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
professional                  area.
Restaurant fast food          1 space for every 2 seats plus 2 spaces for every
                              3 employees on largest shift.
Restaurants, taverns, and     1 space for every 3 seats plus 2 spaces for every
night-                        3 employees on largest shift. (1983 Code § 11-1-
clubs for on-site consumption 22B)
Retail stores, shops, etc.,   31/3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
over 2,000 square feet        area.
Retail stores, shops, etc.,   5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
under 2,000 square feet       area. (Ord. 99-13, 10-4-1999)
Schools, public, private all  1 space for every classroom and office, and one
grades                        space for every 4 students over 16 years of age.
Schools, special              1 space for every classroom and office.
Theaters, assembly halls      1 space for each 5 seats.
 
   C.   Industrial/Commercial Land Use:
                                    Total sum of parking spaces shall be
Contractors and construction        determined on the basis of the parking
establishments and yards            spaces required for the uses individually,
                                    i.e., office, warehouse etc.
                                    31/3 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
Plumbing, air conditioning and      gross floor area of sales and office, 2
heating equipment (sales,           spaces for every 3 employees and 1 space
repair and warehousing)             for every vehicle constantly used in
                                    operation of business.
                                    2 spaces for every 3 employees on largest
Junk yards                          shift, plus 1 space for each vehicle used
                                    in operation of the business stored on
                                    site.
Manufacturing, fabrication and      2 spaces for each 3 employees on the
similar plants                      largest shift.
                                    2 spaces for every 3 employees on largest
Printing and publishing plants      shift, plus 1 space for each vehicle used
and offices                         in operation of the business, stored on
                                    site.
                                    2 spaces for every 3 employees on largest
Truck or other terminals            shift, plus 1 space for each vehicle used
                                    in operation of the business, stored on
                                    site.
Veterinary clinics and hospitals    4 spaces for every doctor, plus 1 space for
                                    every employee.
Wholesale establishment and         1 space for each 2 employees on the largest
warehouse including mini warehouses shift plus 1 space for each 2,500 square
                                    feet of gross floor area.
 
   D.   Other Land Uses:
 
Camping                            1 dust-free space (10 x 30) for every camp
                                   site.
Community centers, gymna-          3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
siums, pools, etc.                 floor area.
Golf courses                       50 spaces per 9 holes.
Golf driving range                 2 spaces per every tee.
Hand ball/regular ball courts      3 spaces per court.
Parks, playgrounds, picnic grounds Space equivalent to 1% of the total area,
                                   parking spaces along drives may be counted.
Tennis courts                      3 spaces per court.
 
E.   Exceptions to Parking Area Requirements in the C-3 and C-4 Districts:
 
On-Site      The parking requirement may be reduced or waved entirely by the Zoning
Parking      Administrator for proposed changes of use in existing buildings where, in the
Relaxations  Zoning Administrator’s opinion, the proposed change of use will be beneficial
Involving    to the vitality of the Central Business District and surrounding environs. In
Existing     doing so, the Zoning Administrator may take into consideration the ability of
Buildings    the site to accommodate parking, as well as the availability of on-street
             parking and other public parking areas in the general vicinity.
On-Site      The parking requirement for new developments may be reduced to an amount that
Parking      can be reasonably accommodated on site pursuant to the approval of a site plan
Relaxations  per Chapter 11 – Site Plan Review Procedure – when determined that the proposed
Involving    development will be beneficial to the vitality of the Central Business District
New          and surrounding environs. In doing so, the ability of the site to accommodate
Developments parking, as well as the availability of on-street parking and other public
             parking areas should be taken into consideration.
Possible
Off-Site
Parking      The Zoning Administrator may approve off-site parking requirements for
Requirement  apartment units where in the Zoning Administrator’s opinion such parking is
for          needed to service the units but cannot realistically be provided on-site, in
Apartments   the street, or in other parking areas. In such instances, the Zoning
and          Administrator shall require as a condition of approval assurances that the off-
Apartment    site parking will remain available to the tenants on a long-term basis.
Units in
Mixed Use
Developments
 
In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, requirements for a use which is so mentioned and
to which said use is similar shall apply. (1983 Code § 11-1-22B; amd. Ord. 23-
02, 3-6-2023; Ord. 24-09, 4-15-2024; Ord. 25-09, 4-11-2025)
9-9-3: RULES FOR COMPUTING OFF-STREET PARKING:
In computing the number of off-street parking spaces required, the following
rules govern:
   A.   "Floor area" means the gross floor area of the specific use.
   B.   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required are the
nearest whole number.
   C.   The parking space requirement for a use, not specifically mentioned
herein, is the same as required for a use of similar nature as determined by
the Zoning Administration.
   D.   Whenever a building erected or established after the effective date of
this Title is enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling
units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase of ten
percent (10%) or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces
shall be provided on the basis of enlargement or charge.
   E.   Whenever a building existing prior to the effective date of this Title
is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in the floor area or
in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with
the parking requirements set forth herein.
   F.   In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the
sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
   G.   Parking Space Dimensions: The size of a parking space for one vehicle
shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine
feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19') plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
   H.   Dimensions; Compact Parking Spaces: A standard-size parking stall shall
be at least nine feet wide and nineteen feet long (9' x 19') including a
minimum of one hundred seventy one (171) square feet. Twenty five percent (25%)
of the parking space requirement may consist of compact parking spaces in
parking areas which have more than ten (10) parking stalls. The parking stalls
for compact cars shall be at least eight feet wide and eighteen feet long (8' x
18') including a minimum of one hundred forty four (144) square feet. The
compact parking stalls shall be marked for compact cars only.
   I.   Minimum Off Street Parking Dimensions: The regulations of this section
shall govern the dimensions of off street parking spaces, including those
provided in developments approved in planned districts or by special procedure
prior to the enactment hereof, anything in such planned district or special
procedure approval to the contrary notwithstanding.
Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the requirements for off
street parking in this title shall be implemented in accord with minimum
dimensions in the following table:
   PARKING TABLE
 
A  B    C     D     E     F     G
45 9.0' 19.7' 12.5' 12.7' 51.9' 45.6
60 9.0' 21.0' 17.5' 10.5' 59.5' 55.0
90 9.0' 19.0' 22.0' 9.0'  60.0' ----
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb550e2311696eef4b3f0e6e93f890449faa3be2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3113.png]
 
A    park ing angle
B   stall width
C   19 feet minimum stall to curb
D1   aisle width
E   curb length per car
F   curb to curb
G   center to center width of double row with aisle between
   Note:
      1.      Additional width may be required where the aisle serves as the
principal means of access to on site buildings or structures.
   J.   Handicapped Parking: Handicapped parking shall be provided in
accordance with Americans with Disabilities Act. (1983 Code § 11-1-23)
   K.   Parking Stall Requirements; Overhang Allowed: Where there is front end
overhang over an open space area of at least two feet (2'), the minimum stall
length for a parking space may be reduced two feet (2'). When the front of a
parking stall abuts a sidewalk, the minimum width of the sidewalk shall be six
feet (6') for sidewalks in residential districts, and seven feet (7') in
commercial districts. (Ord. 13-04, 4-15-2013; amd. Ord. 20-16, 10-5-2020)
9-9-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS REGARDING PARKING:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet (5') to any
established street right of way or alley line.
   B.   No part of any noncommercial or multi-family dwelling driveway or
parking space shall be located closer than three feet (3') to any side or rear
property line.
   C.   Any off street parking area shall be surfaced with asphaltic or
concrete pavement at least four inches (4") thick, except for the following:
      1.   Vehicle display lots where ten (10) or less units are displayed.
Vehicle display lots which are not required to be surfaced with asphaltic or
concrete pavement shall be surfaced with six inches (6") of gravel.
      2.   Parking areas in the rear yard for recreational vehicles, travel
trailers, boats, snowmobiles, and other such recreational vehicles may occur on
grass.
      3.   Temporary parking including, but not limited to, such circumstances
as for weekend visitors; persons attending a party or other similar event at
one's residence; special parking for recreational, sporting events, concerts,
conventions or other large gatherings of temporary nature; not to exceed two
(2) weeks of parking; and washing and waxing and minor maintenance of one's car
not to exceed one week. The intent is to allow temporary parking, not permanent
parking, unless paved.
      4.   Temporary parking and maneuvering areas for semitrailers when used
as part of a trucking terminal company. All other areas shall be paved.
   D.   Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area including
any commercial parking lots, shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from adjoining premises in any R district and any public right of way.
   E.   Off street parking areas may be established in any R district that
immediately joins a C or M district, or is directly across an alley from a C or
M district, provided such parking shall be accessory to and for use of one or
more business or industrial establishments located in the adjoining C or M
district; provided, however, that such transitional use shall not extend more
than one hundred feet (100') from the boundary of the less restricted zone.
   F.   A ten foot (10') setback shall be preserved between parking areas and
drives within commercial and industrial districts and adjoining residential
districts. Said setback area shall contain screening consisting of plantings,
wood fencing or masonry fencing, or a combination thereof, six feet (6') high
to a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%). Topographic features may be
incorporated to obtain the six foot (6') height. A chainlink fence with either
wood, metal or plastic inserts does not meet the requirements of this section.
When landscaping is included, the six foot (6') height must be obtained in
three (3) growing seasons.
   G.   When visible from a public street or land zoned for residential use,
the interior of such parking areas shall be developed as follows:
      1.   Not less than five percent (5%) shall be landscaped and continuously
maintained.
      2.   Planting along the perimeter of a parking area, whether required for
screening or general beautification will not be considered as part of the five
percent (5%) interior landscaping. (1983 Code § 11-1-24)
   H.   All new or replaced driveways shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or
portland cement concrete pavement at least four inches (4") in depth. In
addition, whenever the owners construct a new garage or replace an existing
garage, said owners shall be required to surface their driveway with an
asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement at least four inches (4") in
depth. (Ord. 01-07, 7-2-2001)
   I.   No parking area shall be designed in such a manner that exiting a
parking area would require backing onto a street except for single- and two-
family residential developments as provided for in subsection P of this
section, parking in the right of way by revocable permit. (1983 Code § 11-1-24;
amd. Ord. 14-07, 8-18-2014)
   J.   If the number of parking spaces required or provided for a use or a
combination of uses on a lot is greater than eight (8) spaces, none of those
spaces may be located in such a manner that would allow backing into an alley.
   K.   If parking for multi-family, commercial, and industrial uses as
described above is accessed directly off an alley, the alley must be paved; if
not paved, the developer shall pave that portion of the alley abutting said
property; if property is located in mid block, the developer must pave the
alley to the intersecting street. (1983 Code § 11-1-24)
   L.   Paved driveways and any associated off-street parking areas within the
front yard of any single-family or two- family residence shall not occupy
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the area between the building front yard
setback line and public street right-of-way line and shall not provide greater
than one parking space in addition to that provided in the traveled portion of
the driveway. The driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced as required by
subsection C of this section. Other parking in the front yard of a single-
family or two-family residence is prohibited. (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
   M.   Parking or allowing someone else to park in the front yard between a
home and a street, except parking in a driveway, is prohibited. In those
instances where a home is located on a corner lot, the home shall be considered
to have two (2) front yards, one facing each street, and parking or allowing
someone else to park shall be prohibited in both of those front yards. (Ord.
02-01, 2-18-2002)
   N.   All parking requirements shall be maintained in good condition
including landscaping and screening materials after their installation. (1983
Code § 11-1-24)
   O.   A first violation of subsection C or M of this section shall be
punishable by a fine as set forth by the City Council for other parking
violations. Any subsequent violations may be treated as a Municipal infraction
and subject to the fines and penalties as set forth for those violations. In
any proceeding charging violation of these subsections, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that the particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of this chapter and the defendant named in
the information was the registered owner at the time in question. (Ord. 06-08,
9-18-2006)
   P.   Private parking improvements may be permitted for allowed
nonresidential uses within the Residential Zone Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 as
follows:
      1.   Private parking improvements may be constructed within the right-of-
way subject to terms of a revocable right-of-way permit for private parking
improvements in the public right- of-way to be issued by the City Manager after
review by Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council in accordance with
chapter 10 of this title. Considerations in issuing the permit include
provision of adequate unobstructed pedestrian improvements, safety of the
traveling public, adequate drainage provisions, existing or future street
classification, existing or planned street width, existing or projected traffic
volumes, adequate maneuvering room, and other site specific factors. Additional
screening, landscaping or other requirements may be imposed by the City in
consideration of issuing a revocable right-of-way permit for private parking
improvements in the public right-of-way.
      2.   Private uses of the right-of-way shall not unreasonably interfere
with public uses of the right-of-way including public and franchise utility
improvements.
      3.   The intended use of the parking is as occasional use or overflow
parking for allowed nonresidential uses specifically excluding residential
accessory uses such as home occupations.
      4.   The use of the parking is public subject to the terms of local on
street parking restrictions.
      5.   Nothing in this subsection P shall exempt the nonresidential use
from providing the minimum required off street parking per this chapter. All
parking shall conform to all dimensional, surfacing, layout and other
provisions of this Code.
      6.   Parking which backs into the public street may be considered. Ninety
degree (90°) parking may be allowed. Angled parking may be required based on
City Engineer's recommendation. (Ord. 14-07, 8-18-2014)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-10-1: Scope Of Provisions
9-10-2: Statement Of Intent
9-10-3: Height Limitation For Structure
9-10-4: Lot And Yard Requirements
9-10-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements
9-10-6: Sign Regulations
9-10-7: Procedures
9-10-1: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter contains the regulations of the special uses procedure. These
regulations are supplemented and qualified by additional general regulations
appearing elsewhere in this title which are incorporated as part of this
chapter by reference. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
9-10-2: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
It is hereby declared that certain land uses and developments present unique
problems with respect to their proper location and relationship to other land
uses. Therefore, analysis and judgment of the consequences of each development
and use is necessary to preserve and to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare. Such land uses and developments are identified in each
particular zoning district under special use and development permits issued by
the city council after recommendation by planning and zoning commission. (1983
Code § 11-1-25)
9-10-3: HEIGHT LIMITATION FOR STRUCTURE:
Unless otherwise restricted, the total height of any structure shall be limited
by the conditions governing the particular development or use authorized by
special use permit. However, the total height of any structure authorized by
special use permit shall not exceed the least restrictive regulations of the
particular zoning district in which the special development or use is located.
(1983 Code § 11-1-25)
9-10-4: LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Any development or use authorized by special use permit shall abide by the lot
area, lot dimension, development limitation, and yard requirements of the
particular zoning districts in which the special development or use is located.
However, these requirements may be made more restrictive in the conditions
governing the particular development or use authorized by special use permit.
(1983 Code § 11-1-25)
9-10-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum off street parking and loading requirements, including required
setbacks for parking areas, loading spaces, and internal drives for any
development or use authorized by special use permit shall not be reduced below
the minimum requirements as set forth in chapter 9 of this title. However,
these requirements may be made more restrictive in the conditions governing the
particular development or use authorized by special use permit. (1983 Code §
11-1-25)
9-10-6: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Specific sign regulations shall be established in the conditions governing the
particular development or use authorized by special use permit. In no instance
shall they be less restrictive than the sign regulations of the particular
zoning district in which the special use is located. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
9-10-7: PROCEDURES:
The granting of a special use permit may be initiated by a verified application
of one or more of the owners of record or owners under contract of a lot or
tract of land, or their authorized representatives, or by a resolution of
intention by the board of adjustment. Procedures for application, review, and
approval of special use permit shall be as follows:
   A.   Application: Application for a special use permit for a specific tract
of land shall be addressed to the board of adjustment and filed in the office
of the city clerk. The application shall be filed on forms prescribed for that
purpose by the board of adjustment and be accompanied by the following: (1983
Code § 11-1-25; amd. Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
      1.   Filing fee for a special use shall be established by council.
      2.   Legal description of the property.
      3.   Outboundary plat of the property.
      4.   Preliminary development plan, including, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Proposed uses. Approximate location and designated uses of
buildings and other structures as well as parking and open areas shall be
indicated.
         b.   Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including adjacent
streets.
         c.   Preliminary plan for provision of utilities.
         d.   Proposed landscaping and screening. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
   B.   Public Hearing: A public hearing on the application shall be held by
the board of adjustment in accordance with the general provisions of section
9-13-4 of this title. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days
of verification by the zoning administrator that the petition meets the minimum
application requirements.
   C.   Approval Or Denial Of Application: Subsequent to review of the
application by the board of adjustment, the zoning administrator shall file a
report with the board stating all information and ordinances pertaining to each
application for a special use permit and the reasons therefor. The board may
grant those special uses and developments where such developments and uses are
deemed consistent with good planning practice; can be operating in a manner
that is not detrimental to the permitted developments and uses in the district;
can be developed and operated in a manner that is visually compatible with the
permitted uses in the surrounding area; and are deemed essential or desirable
to preserve and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
city. In approving such special uses, the board shall impose such conditions as
it determines necessary. Said conditions shall include, but not be limited to,
the following and be included in the special use permit: (Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
      1.   Permitted uses.
      2.   Height limitation.
      3.   Minimum yard requirements.
      4.   Off street parking and loading requirements.
      5.   Sign regulations.
      6.   Minimum requirements for site development plans.
      7.   Time limitations for commencement of construction. (1983 Code § 11-
1-25)
   D.   Permit Effective, When: Unless a duly filed protest is received by the
city clerk, a special use permit or an amendment thereto shall become effective
after the board of adjustment approves of the application by resolution. In the
event that a special use permit is filed in conjunction with a required change
of zoning, the permit shall not become effective until the date of enactment of
the ordinance authorizing the zoning change. (1983 Code § 11-1-25; amd. Ord.
05-06, 6-6-2005)
   E.   Effect Of Denial: Upon denial by the board of adjustment of an
application for a special use permit, the applicant may appeal said denial
pursuant to section
9-13-7 of this title. (Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
   F.   Protest Of Nearby Property Owners Of Council's Decision Of Approval:
(Rep. by Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
   G.   Site Development Plans: Subsequent to the effective date of the special
use permit, a site development plan shall be submitted for review and approval
to the commission as specified in governing the special use permit. No building
permits or authorization for improvement or development for any use requested
under provisions of this permit procedure shall be issued prior to approval of
such plan. The approved plan shall be retained on file by the city.
   H.   Procedure To Amend The Conditions Of Special User Permit Or Site
Development Plan: In order to amend the conditions of an existing special use
permit or to amend the site development plan approved for a special use permit,
the procedure shall be as follows:
      1.   To amend conditions of a special use permit:
         a.   The property owner or authorized representative shall submit a
written request to amend conditions to the zoning administrator for review. The
administrator shall evaluate the request for consistency in purpose and content
with the nature of the proposal as originally presented. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
         b.   The zoning administrator shall then forward the request and its
report to the board of adjustment. The board shall review the proposed
condition amendments and then grant or deny said proposed amendments. (Ord. 05-
06, 6-6-2005)
      2.   To amend the site development plan:
         a.   The property owner or authorized representative shall submit an
amended site development plan to the zoning administrator for review. The
administrator shall evaluate the request for consistency in purpose and content
with the nature of the proposal as originally presented.
         b.   If the zoning administrator determines that the proposed
amendment to the site development plan is not in conflict with the original
proposal and the preliminary development plan, and meets all conditions of the
special use permit, the administrator may approve said amended plan. The
approved plan shall be retained on file by the city.
         c.   If the zoning administrator determines that the proposed
amendment to the site development plan is not consistent in purpose and content
with the nature of the proposal as originally presented or with the preliminary
development plan, the commission shall review the proposed site plan amendment
and make a final determination.
   I.   Appeal To Commission Of A Decision By Zoning Administrator In Reviewing
Development Plans: The petitioner/developer may appeal to the commission a
decision by the zoning administrator in cases where the administrator is
authorized to review development plans. The petitioner shall have a fifteen
(15) day period in which to file a written appeal and plan with the commission.
The written appeal, stating the reasons for the appeal, shall be submitted to
the administrator. The commission shall make the final determination of the
matter. No exceptions may be granted that are in violation of the particular
permit governing the development plan. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
   J.   Time Limit Of Special User Permits: Special use permits shall be valid
for unlimited period unless a lesser period shall be provided in a particular
permit. Upon the expiration of the time limit specified in a particular permit,
the property owner may request that the special use permit be reviewed by the
board, which may extend it for an unlimited period or for a specified
additional period of years.
   K.   Failure To Commence Construction: Unless otherwise stated in the
conditions of a particular special use permit, substantial work or construction
shall commence within two (2) years of the effective date of the permit, unless
such time period is extended through appeal to and approval by the board. If no
extension of time is received or granted within six (6) months subsequent to
the two (2) year period following the effective date of the special use permit,
the permit shall terminate. (1983 Code § 11-1-25; amd. Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
   L.   Development Of Special Users And Permitted Land Uses On Same Tract Of
Land: Nothing shall prevent the establishment of land uses or developments
authorized by special use permit on the same tract of land with one or more
permitted land uses and developments specified in the regulations of the
governing zoning district. However, the development or use authorized by
special user permit shall abide by the conditions of the permit and the
permitted land use and development shall adhere to the regulations of the
governing zoning district. A permitted land use or development existing at the
time of submittal of a site development plan for a development or use
authorized by special user permit shall be shown on the plan. No permitted use
or development shall at any time cause the violation of any condition imposed
by a special use permit. (1983 Code § 11-1-25)
CHAPTER 11
SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE
SECTION:
9-11-1: Purpose And Intent
9-11-2: General Requirements
9-11-3: Site Plan Review
9-11-4: Site Plan Requirements
9-11-5: Information Required
9-11-6: Required Illustrations
9-11-7: Expiration Of Approval
9-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
To assure that the design and location of high density residential, commercial,
industrial and other areas will be in conformance with the zoning standards of
this title and are properly related to and in harmony with the existing and
future development of the City, including generally accepted principles of
urban design, a detailed site plan shall be submitted showing the proposed use
and development of all sites except of certain agricultural land uses and of
single- and two-family dwellings for approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. (1983 Code § 11-1-26)
9-11-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Preparation Of Plan: Whenever any person, firm, corporation or other
group wishes to develop any tract, lot or parcel of land located in the City in
the following zoning districts: A-1 (except for permitted agricultural use and
single-family dwellings); R-1 (except for single-family dwellings); R-2 (except
for single- and two-family dwellings); R-3 (except for single-family
dwellings), C-1, C-2, C-4, M-1 and M-2; he shall cause to be prepared a site
plan of such development and shall submit ten (10) copies of said site plan to
the Zoning Administrator. The provisions of this chapter shall also be
applicable to the redevelopment, enlargement or extension of more than twenty
five percent (25%) of any uses and structures (except permitted agricultural
land uses and single-family and two-family dwellings) existing at the time of
adoption of this title. The site plan shall contain such information and data
as outlined herein. (1983 Code § 11-1-26B; amd. Ord. 06-03, 4-17-2006; Ord. 18-
16, 12-17-2018)
   B.   Review By Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator shall review
the site plan for compliance with this title and shall refer a copy of the site
plan to the City Engineer, or such other person as shall be designated from
time to time by the City Council, who shall review said site plan as to its
compliance with other ordinances of the City, its effect upon public utilities
and the public street system, and submit his findings as soon as possible to
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   C.   Review By Planning And Zoning Commission: The Zoning Administrator
shall also forward a copy of the site plan to each member of the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, after receiving
the report of the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator, review the site
plan for conformity with the regulations and standards contained herein, and
may confer with the developer on changes deemed advisable in such site plan.
   D.   Approval: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its action
to the City Council within forty five (45) days of the date of the submission
of the said site plan. If the commission does not act within forty five (45)
days, the site plan shall be deemed to be approved by the commission unless the
developer agrees to an extension of time.
   E.   Public Hearing: The commission may, in its discretion, hold a public
hearing on the site plan of the proposed development and prescribe the notice
thereof and to whom such notice shall be given.
   F.   Review By City Council: Site plans required for review and approval by
the City Council will be submitted to and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator
in the same manner as those requiring review and approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   G.   Permit Or Certificate Of Issuance: No building permit or certificate of
zoning compliance for any structure within any district within which a site
plan is required shall be issued until the site plan has been approved as
provided herein.
   H.   Filed With City Clerk: Upon final action by the Planning and Zoning
Commission on any site plan, a copy of said site plan with the action of the
planning and zoning commission noted thereon and signed by the chairperson of
the commission shall be filed with the city clerk.
   I.   Proof Of Compliance: If the zoning administrator finds that any
construction or proposed construction or occupancy of a development on a tract
of land for which a site plan has been approved will not substantially comply
with the site plan as approved, or if he finds that the construction and
development of the tract is not being carried out in accordance with the
development schedule filed with the site plan, he shall suspend all building
permits for the development and order all construction stopped until such time
as the owner of the property, or his successors in interest, shall have
provided him with proof satisfactory to him that the site plan will be complied
with. The zoning administrator shall not issue a certificate of zoning
compliance for any structure within the development while the building permit
for the development has been suspended pursuant to this subsection. Any person
aggrieved by any decision or action of the zoning administrator under this
subsection may appeal such action or decision to the board of adjustment.
   J.   Extension Of Time: If the owner or developer of a tract of land for
which a site plan has been approved determines that an extension of time is
necessary or that a modification of the site plan would provide for a more
appropriate or more practicable development of the site, he may apply for an
amendment of the site plan. The planning and zoning commission may grant an
extension of time or a modification of a previously approved site plan if it
determines that such modification of the site plan would provide for a more
appropriate development of the site. (1983 Code § 11-1-26A)
9-11-3: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In reviewing a proposed site plan the planning and zoning commission shall
consider the location of the building on the site with respect to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic to and from the buildings, traffic between the site and
abutting streets, suitable layout and adequate provisions for off street
parking and loading, with due consideration given to the provision of traffic
islands, pedestrianways and landscaping within the parking area, provision for
necessary screening between adjacent properties and the site, location and
display of business signs so as not to distract or confuse motorists and
location and display of outdoor advertising so as to provide adequate
visibility within the site during hours of night operation but not to have
adverse effects on surrounding properties. Further, the commission will require
traffic control devices if they are deemed necessary. (1983 Code § 11-1-26B)
9-11-4: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
All site plans shall be drawn at a scale not less than one inch equals fifty
feet (1" = 50'). Ten (10) copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the
zoning administrator. The purpose of the site plan is to show all information
needed to enable the zoning administrator, city engineer, planning and zoning
commission and city council when applicable to determine if the proposed
development meets the requirements of this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-26C)
9-11-5: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The site plan required shall include the following information concerning the
proposed development:
   A.   Names of all persons having an interest in the property, legal
description of property, point of compass, scale and date.
   B.   Applicant's name, planned land use and present zoning.
   C.   If applicant is other than the legal owner, the applicant's interest
shall be stated.
   D.   Name and address of person who prepared the site plan. (1983 Code § 11-
1-26D)
9-11-6: REQUIRED ILLUSTRATIONS:
The site plan shall clearly set forth the following information concerning the
proposed development:
   A.   Property boundary lines, dimensions and total area of the proposed
development.
   B.   Contour lines of the proposed development at intervals of not more than
five feet (5'). If substantial topographic change is proposed, the existing
topography of the development and of the surrounding area shall be illustrated
on a separate map, and the proposed finished topography shown on the site plan.
   C.   The availability, location, size and capacity of existing utilities,
and of proposed utilities.
   D.   The proposed location, size, height, shape, use and architectural theme
of all buildings or structures, including signs, in the proposed development.
   E.   The total square footage of building floor area, both individually and
collectively in the proposed development.
   F.   Existing buildings, rights of way, street improvements, railroads,
easements, drainage courses, streams and wooded areas.
   G.   Location, number, dimensions and design of off-street parking in the
proposed development, including:
      1.   Driveways, islands and planters;
      2.   Striping and safety curbs;
      3.   Loading facilities;
      4.   Type and location of lighting; and
      5.   Surface treatment.
   H.   Open spaces, yards, recreational areas, walkways, driveways, outside
lighting, walls, fences, monuments, statues, signs and other man-made features
to be used in the landscape of the proposed development.
   I.   Facilities for the collection and disposal of garbage and trash.
   J.   Location and type of all plants, grass and trees to be used in the
landscape of the proposed development. Landscaping to be used for screening
purposes shall be illustrated in elevation as well as plan, with the
approximate size and name of plants, shrubs or trees to be planted clearly
indicated.
   K.   Location of entrances and exits from the proposed development onto
public streets, and interior drives and proposed sidewalks in the development.
   L.   Proposed drainage facilities and provisions for flood control, if
applicable.
   M.   The location, height and area of all signs (directional signs,
identification signs, or temporary signs) in the proposed development. (1983
Code § 11-1-26E)
9-11-7: EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL:
All site plan approvals shall expire and terminate one hundred eighty (180)
days after the date of Council approval unless a building permit has been
issued for the construction provided for in the site plan. The City Council
may, upon written request by the developer, extend the time for the issuance of
a building permit for sixty (60) days. In the event the building permit for the
construction provided for in a site plan expires or is cancelled, then such
site plan approval shall thereupon terminate. (1983 Code § 11-1-26F)
CHAPTER 12
ADMINISTRATION; PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Administrative Official; Authority
9-12-2: Building Permits Required
9-12-3: Application For Building Permit
9-12-4: Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
9-12-5: Application For Certificate; Conditions For Issuance
9-12-6: Expiration Of Building Permit
9-12-7: Authorized Construction And Use
9-12-8: Termination Of Work
9-12-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY:
An administrative official 1  designated by the City Manager shall administer
and enforce this Title. He may be provided with the assistance of such other
persons as the City Manager may direct. If the administrative official shall
find that any of the provisions of this Title are being violated, he shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He
shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or
structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or
shall take any other action authorized by this Title to ensure compliance with
or to prevent violation of its provisions. (1983 Code § 11-1-27A)
 
Notes
1 1. See "Zoning Administrator" as defined in Section
  9-1-3 of this Title.
9-12-2: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the administrative
official. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this Title and the subdivision regulations, except as may be
approved by the Board of Adjustment. (1983 Code § 11-1-27B)
9-12-3: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT:
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by site plans as
detailed elsewhere in this Title. Site plans for single- and two-family
dwellings shall be submitted in conformance to administrative requirements. In
addition to the site plan, if the building permit is for construction of new
principal buildings, then the application shall also be accompanied by a
certified survey of the lot verifying, establishing and marking the lot corners
on which the structure will be constructed. (1983 Code § 11-1-27C; amd. Ord.
95-7, 11-6-1995)
As an alternate procedure to obtaining a certified survey of the lot, a
property owner may outline the lot lines by locating the property pins on said
property and then attach a string to each property pin. In addition, the owner
and/or contractor would also be required to show the property lines on the
building permit application. (Ord. 99-01, 1-4-1999)
9-12-4: CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Certificate Required: It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed or converted or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall
have been issued therefor by the administrative official stating that the
proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
Title.
   B.   Nonconforming Use Or Structure: No nonconforming structure or use shall
be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued by the administrative official. The
certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically the nonconforming
uses or structures shall have one year to apply for certificates of zoning
compliance. Failure to make such application within one year shall be
presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of
enactment of amendment of this Title. (1983 Code § 11-1-27D)
9-12-5: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Application: Certificates of zoning compliance shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a building permit, and shall be issued
within ten (10) days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is
completed in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
   B.   Issuance: A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by
the administrative official for a period not exceeding six (6) months during
alterations or partial occupancy of the building pending its completion;
provided, that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
   C.   Records: The administrative official shall maintain a record of all
certificates of zoning compliance, and copies shall be furnished upon request
to any person.
   D.   Failure To Obtain: Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance
shall be a violation of this Title and punishable under this Chapter.
   E.   Sidewalk Required: No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued
for the construction of any building or structure in the City, unless a
sidewalk has been constructed as provided for in the building permit for said
building or structure. (1983 Code § 11-1-27E)
9-12-6: EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Notice Of Cancellation: If the work described in any building permit
has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said
permit shall expire; it shall be cancelled by the administrative official, and
written notice thereof, shall be given to the persons affected.
   B.   Expiration Of Permit: If the work described in any building permit has
not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the administrative
official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected,
together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit
shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained.
(1983 Code § 11-1-27F)
9-12-7: AUTHORIZED CONSTRUCTION AND USE:
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance shall be issued on the
basis of plans and applications, approved by the administrative official
authorizing only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such
approved plans and specifications, and no other use, arrangements or
construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized
shall be deemed violation of this Title, and punishable as provided by Section
9-14-4 of this Title. (1983 Code § 11-1-27G)
9-12-8: TERMINATION OF WORK:
If work described in any building permit is terminated for more than six (6)
months and a concerted effort is not exhibited to complete the described work
the owner shall return the site building to the condition prior to issuance of
a building permit. Failure of the owner to comply with the preceding shall be
grounds for the City or its designates to bring the site or building into
compliance with this Chapter. (1983 Code § 11-1-27H)
CHAPTER 13
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
9-13-1: Board Created
9-13-2: Meetings
9-13-3: Discussion And Opinions Restricted
9-13-4: Appeals/Variance Procedure
9-13-5: Fees
9-13-6: Powers And Duties
9-13-7: Administrative Duties In Matters Of Appeal
9-13-8: Special Use Permits
9-13-9: Resignation
9-13-1: BOARD CREATED:
A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5)
members. The term of office of the members of the board and the manner of their
appointment shall be as provided by statute. (1983 Code § 11-1-28A)
9-13-2: MEETINGS:
The meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such
other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the
acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. The
presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. (1983
Code § 11-1-28B)
9-13-3: DISCUSSION AND OPINIONS RESTRICTED:
Board members shall not represent applicant or appellants before the board nor
shall board members discuss pending cases with applicants or appellants or
express opinion on the merits except as part of the official board proceedings.
(1983 Code § 11-1-28C)
9-13-4: APPEALS/VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of
the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by
filing with the administrative officer and with the board, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall forthwith
transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from is taken.
   B.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the administrative official certifies to the board after notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on
application on notice to the administrative officer, and on due cause shown.
   C.   The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on the appeal,
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may
appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. (1983 Code § 11-1-28D)
9-13-5: FEES:
Fees shall be established by the city council. (1983 Code § 11-1-28E)
9-13-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Hear And Decide Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
zoning administrator in enforcement of this title.
   B.   Authorize Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public
interests, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of
provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done. A variance
from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board unless and
until:
      1.   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title;
      2.   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or
by his agent or by attorney.
      3.   The board shall make findings that the requirements of this section
have been met by the applicant for a variance.
      4.   The board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in
the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is
the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land,
building or structure.
      5.   The board shall further make a finding that the granting of the
variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title,
and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the
public welfare.
      6.   In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violation of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title and punishable
under section
9-14-4 of this title.
      7.   Under no circumstances shall the board grant a variance to allow a
use not permissible under the terms of this title in the district involved, or
any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in
said district. (1983 Code § 11-1-29; amd. ORd. 25-10, 4-7-2025)
9-13-7: ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES IN MATTERS OF APPEAL:
It is the intent of this title that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that
such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal
from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the
decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law
and particularly by statute. It is further the intent of this title that the
duties of the city council in connection with this title shall not include
hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may
arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this
chapter. Under this title, the city council shall have only the duties of:
   A.   Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal
of this title, as provided by law;
   B.   Of establishing a schedule of fees and charges. (1983 Code § 11-1-30)
9-13-8: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
The board is hereby granted authority to hear all applications for special use
permits as defined in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 05-06, 6-6-2005)
9-13-9: RESIGNATION:
If a board member has been absent from three (3) or more consecutive regular
meetings, the city clerk shall include this as an item on the agenda for the
next regular council meeting. At that meeting, the council shall set a date for
a hearing and direct the city clerk to give the member notice of the hearing by
personal service or first class mail to the member's last known address. At the
hearing, the board member shall have the right to present information on why
one or more of the absences should be excused. If the council does not excuse
one or more of the member's absences by a majority vote at the conclusion of
the hearing, there shall be a vacancy on the board. (Ord. 12-10, 10-1-2012)
CHAPTER 14
FEES; AMENDMENTS; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-14-1: Schedule Of Fees
9-14-2: Amendment Procedures
9-14-3: Complaints Regarding Violations
9-14-4: Enforcement, Violations And Penalties
9-14-5: Severability Clause
9-14-1: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
   A.   Fees Established By Resolution: The city council by resolution shall
establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for certificates of zoning
compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this title.
   B.   Payment Of Fees Required: No certificate, special exception, variance
or amendment shall be considered unless or until such costs, charges, fees or
expenses have been paid at the time of the application or petition filed
therefor with the city. (1983 Code § 11-1-31)
9-14-2: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES:
The city council may, from time to time on its own action or on petition,
amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established, provided:
   A.   Public Hearing: No amendment, supplement or change of boundaries or
regulations shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation
thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard. Not less than seven (7) nor more than twenty (20) days of notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general
circulation in the city. Such amendment, supplement or change shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of a majority of all members of the city
council. In case, however of a protest against such change signed by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed changes, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof
extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed two hundred feet (200')
therefrom or of those directly opposite thereto, extending the depth of one lot
or not to exceed two hundred feet (200') from the street frontage of such
opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the
council. (1983 Code § 11-1-32)
   B.   Petition For Amendment: Whenever any person, firm or corporation
desires that any amendment or change be made in this title, including the text
and/or map, as to any property in the city, there shall be presented to the
council a petition requesting such change or amendment and clearly describing
the property in the city, and its boundaries as to which the change or
amendment is desired. The zoning administrator will notify the owners of all
real estate lying outside of said tract but within two hundred feet (200') of
the boundaries thereof, (intervening streets and alleys not be included in
computing such 200 feet). It shall be the duty of the council to vote upon such
petition with the city clerk. (Ord. 02-15, 12-16-2002)
   C.   Payment Of Fee: Before any action shall be taken as provided in this
part, the party or parties proposing or recommending a change in the district
regulations or district boundaries shall deposit with the city clerk a fee as
provided in section
9-14-1 of this chapter, to cover the approximate costs of this procedure and
under no conditions shall said sum or any part thereof, be refunded for failure
of said amendment to be enacted into law.
   D.   Petition Denied: Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement or
change of the zoning regulations herein contained or subsequently established
shall have been denied by the city council, then no new petition covering the
same property, or the same property and additional property, shall be filed
with or considered by the city council until one year shall have elapsed from
the date of the filing of the first petition. (1983 Code § 11-1-32)
9-14-3: COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the administrative official. He shall
record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action
thereon as provided by this title. (1983 Code § 11-1-33)
9-14-4: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: All departments, officials and employees of the city who
are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue
no such permit or license for any use, structure or purpose if the same would
not conform to the provisions of this title.
   B.   Criminal Violation And Penalties: Any person, corporation or other
legal entity who violates or resists the enforcement of any provisions of this
title, upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
   C.   Alternative Relief: Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
section does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief, including
an order for abatement or injunctive relief, from the court in the same action
or as a separate action. (1983 Code § 11-1-34)
9-14-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any part or provisions of these regulations or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is judged to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part,
provisions or application directly involved in all controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to persons or
circumstances. The planning and zoning commission hereby declares that it would
have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part,
provisions or application. (1983 Code § 11-1-35)
CHAPTER 15
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
SECTION:
9-15-1: Definitions
9-15-2: General Requirements
9-15-3: Structure Standards
9-15-4: Public Property
9-15-5: Amateur Radio, Private Or Other Noncommercial Antennas
9-15-6: Preexisting Towers And Antennas
9-15-7: Principal Or Accessory Use
9-15-8: Removal Of Abandoned Antennas And Towers
9-15-9: Application To Locate Or Update Communication And Transmission Towers
9-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMUNICATION TOWER: A tower, pole or similar structure which supports a
telecommunications antenna aboveground in a fixed location, guyed or on a
building. Communication towers shall include, but not be limited to, tower
structures including monopole, lattice or other structures designed or intended
to support wires, transmission or receiving antennas, lights or other
electronics, microwave, radio, television, line of sight relay devices or
similar technology.
COMMUNICATION TOWER HEIGHT: The distance from the base of the tower to the top
of the structure, including the antenna. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Communications towers are subject to the following requirements:
   A.   In all locations, towers shall be subject to airport zoning
regulations. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-3: STRUCTURE STANDARDS:
   A.   General: A tower may be constructed if it meets the general site
requirements as herein established, is safe and the surrounding areas will not
be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other
debris, or radio frequency interference.
   B.   Setback: A tower structure shall be no closer to any public right of
way or property line than a distance equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of the
height of the structure, including accessories or antenna mounted atop the
structures. Said distance shall be measured from the street right of way line
and from all property lines of the proposed site to the center of the
structure's base. A tower structure less than the minimum setback distance
specified above may be permitted provided the tower is designed to be a
breakaway tower where the breakaway point would not exceed the setback
limitation. All proposals will be required to include engineer certified
collapse range specifications.
   C.   Access: All tower structures shall be protected from unauthorized
access by a nonclimbable security fence no less than six feet (6') in height.
(Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-4: PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Antennas or towers located on public property owned and controlled by the city
are exempt from the requirement to obtain a special use permit under this
chapter, provided all other site location criteria stipulated herein have been
met and authorization for said antenna or tower has been granted by the city
council. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-5: AMATEUR RADIO, PRIVATE OR OTHER NONCOMMERCIAL ANTENNAS:
This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna,
that is under seventy five feet (75') in height and is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is exclusively for
receive-only antennas. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-6: PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS:
Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date hereof shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
chapter, other than the requirements of the FAA and FCC unless the
communication towers, antennas and mechanical appurtenances are replaced or
upgraded. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as
"preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas". (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-7: PRINCIPAL OR ACCESSORY USE:
Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A
different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of
determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with
district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback
requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antenna or tower
may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use
or structure. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-8: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the
city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If said antenna or tower is not
removed within said ninety (90) days, the city may remove such antenna or tower
at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users on a single tower,
then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
9-15-9: APPLICATION TO LOCATE OR UPDATE COMMUNICATION AND TRANSMISSION TOWERS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to limit the height of
structures allowed within the city and to protect the general health, safety,
welfare, privacy and property value of the citizens of the city.
   B.   Application Process: All applicants who wish to locate or update a
communications antenna or tower on city owned or private property must submit
to the zoning administrator the following documents, if applicable, accompanied
by a fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00):
      1.   Two (2) copies of typical specifications for proposed structures and
antennas, including description of design characteristics and material.
      2.   A site plan drawn to scale with a legal description showing property
lines, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing
structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of
proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan and existing land uses on
adjacent properties.
      3.   A current map, or update for an existing map on file, showing
locations of applicant's antennas, facilities, existing towers which are
reflected in public records, serving any property within the city.
      4.   A report from a structural engineer showing the tower and antenna
capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower and antenna are
designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest
revision, standards.
      5.   Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be
located on the site.
      6.   Written authorization from the site owner for the installation of
the equipment.
      7.   Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been
issued.
      8.   A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within ninety
(90) days after cessation of use.
   C.   Conditions: Applicant must also show evidence that all of the following
conditions which are applicable are met:
      1.   Applicant must provide the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
all owners of other towers or usable antenna support structures within a one-
half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city owned
property, and must also provide: a) written documentation that the applicant
made diligent but unsuccessful efforts for a minimum of forty (40) days prior
to the submission of the application to install or collocate the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures
owned by the city and other persons located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius
of the proposed tower site, or b) written technical evidence from an engineer
that the proposed tower or facilities cannot be installed or collocated on
another person's tower or support structure within a one-half (1/2) mile radius
of the proposed tower and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet
the coverage requirements of the applicant's communications system.
      2.   Applicants must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate
additional antennas equal in number to applicant's present and future
requirements.
      3.   Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise,
fire, building and safety code requirements are met.
      4.   Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that
the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must
file with the zoning administrator a written indemnification of the city and
proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to
two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) in aggregate which
may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the
city, in form approved by the city attorney.
      5.   Land use regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping,
parking, access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other
general zoning district regulations, except setback and height, shall apply to
the use. Setback on all sides shall be a distance equal to twenty percent (20%)
of the height of the structure, including accessories or antenna mounted atop
the structures. The following height and location conditions apply:
         a.   Service Commercial/Limited Industrial (M-1): Freestanding or
guyed tower with height not exceeding one hundred feet (100') is a permitted
principal use; height exceeding one hundred feet (100') requires a special use
permit from the board of adjustment.
         b.   Agricultural (A-1) And Heavy Industrial (M-2): Freestanding or
guyed towers are a permitted principal use. The height is restricted by the FAA
and FCC requirements. (Ord. 05-08, 8-15-2005)
CHAPTER 16
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
9-16-1: Authority And Purpose
9-16-2: Definitions
9-16-3: General Provisions
9-16-4: Performance Standards
9-16-5: Administration
9-16-6: Penalties For Violation
9-16-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Authority: The legislature of the State of Iowa has in chapter 414,
Code of Iowa, delegated the responsibility to cities to enact zoning
regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general
welfare.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Knoxville are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
      2.   These losses, hazards and related adverse effects are caused by: a)
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which
create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flood and b) the cumulative effect of floodplain
construction on flood flows, which causes increases in flood heights and
floodwater velocities.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare by minimizing those flood losses
described in subsection B2 of this section with provisions designed to:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      3.   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      4.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
9-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of the property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (See definition of 100-year flood.)
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see definition of lowest
floor.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community. May also be referred to as "existing
structure".
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter factory built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also include park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more factory built home lots for rent or sale.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwater would reach at a particular site
during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-
year flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The official map prepared as part of (but published
separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: A study initiated, funded and published by the Federal
Insurance Administration for the purposes of evaluating in detail the existence
and severity of flood hazards; providing the City with the necessary
information for adopting a Floodplain Management Program; and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural components
shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effect of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood levels and flow
velocities.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway,
which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or,
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either: 1) an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or 2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
9-16-4B3a of this chapter; and
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the 100-year flood level; and
   D.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria in subsections A, B,
C and D of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest
enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and
excavating) valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
NEW CONSTRUCTION (New Buildings, Factory-Built Home Parks): Those structures or
development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance
of being equalled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will
be equalled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to
keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of
the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
   A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles and replacing siding;
   B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops and similar finish work;
   C.   Basement sealing;
   D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
   E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the "100-year
flood". This land is identified as Zone A on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either
of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair has started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either: 1) any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary or
Safety Code specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions or 2) any alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a "historic structure".
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after February 16,
1988, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 07-06,
10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
9-16-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas
having special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Knoxville.
For the purpose of this chapter, the special flood hazard areas are those areas
designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Marion County and
incorporate areas, City of Knoxville, panels 19125C0300D, 0303D, 0304D, 0308D,
0311D, 0312D, dated February 16, 2018 which are hereby adopted and made a part
of this chapter. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
   B.   Rules For Interpretation Of Flood Hazard Boundaries: The boundaries of
the special flood hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official flood insurance rate map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of a boundary, the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
   C.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   E.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to meet minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated special flood hazard
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the City of Knoxville or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   G.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
9-16-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses shall meet the following standards. Where needed, the Department of
Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute 100-year flood elevation and
floodway data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department
of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such
determination. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
   A.   Generally: All development within the special flood hazard areas shall:
      1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
      4.   Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
   B.   Structures:
      1.   New or substantially improved residential structures shall have the
first floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the
100-year flood level.
      2.   New or substantially improved nonresidential structures shall have
the first floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above
the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a
professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the
floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the 100-year flood; and that the structure below the 100-year flood level
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum) to which any structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
      3.   All new and substantially improved structures:
         a.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
            (4)   All such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access and low damage potential storage. (Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
         b.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         c.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   C.   Factory Built Homes:
      1.   Factory built homes including those placed in existing factory built
home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement.
      2.   Factory built homes including those placed in existing factory built
home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above the
100-year flood level. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
   D.   Subdivisions:
      1.   Subdivisions including factory built home parks and subdivisions
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall provide
adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. Development associated
with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities)
shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
   E.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
      1.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize and eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation.
(Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
      2.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to avoid
impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.
(Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
      3.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year
flood elevation. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
      4.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-
2007)
   F.   Watercourse Alterations Or Relocations:
      1.   All watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to
maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion.
In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department
of Natural Resources. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
   G.   Storage Of Flammable Or Explosive Material: Storage of materials and
equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-
year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or: 1) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to floodwaters or 2) be readily removable from the area within the
time available after flood warning. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007)
   H.   Flood Control Structures:
      1.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc.,
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of
three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
   I.   Accessory Structures To Residential Uses:
      1.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental
to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied.
         a.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in size.
Those portions of the structure located less than one foot (1') above the BFE
must be constructed of flood- resistant materials.
         b.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
         c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         e.   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the
base flood elevation.
         f.   The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of subsection B3a of this section.
      2.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
   J.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection
C of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
         a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and,
         b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      2.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection C of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.
   K.   Pipeline: Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due
to channel degradation and meandering. (Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
9-16-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator:
      1.   The City Manager is hereby designated by the City Council to
administer and enforce this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
      2.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
         a.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         b.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State or local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         c.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor of all new or
substantially improved structures in the special flood hazard areas or the
elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed.
         d.   Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         e.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
   B.   Floodplain Development Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be secured prior to initiation of any floodplain
development (any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations) including the placement of
factory built homes.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Floodplain Administrator and
shall include the following:
         a.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         b.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         c.   Identification of the use or occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.
         d.   For developments involving more than five (5) acres, the
elevation of the 100-year flood.
         e.   Elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
         f.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
         g.   Such other information as the Floodplain Administrator deems
reasonably necessary for the purpose of this chapter.
      3.   Procedure For Acting On Permit Application: The Floodplain
Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to
whether the proposed floodplain development meets the applicable provisions and
standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For
disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific
reasons therefor. In reviewing proposed development, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any available
floodplain information or data from Federal, State or other sources. (Ord. 07-
06, 10-15-2007)
   C.   Subdivision Review: The Floodplain Administrator shall review all
subdivision proposals within the special flood hazard areas to assure that such
proposals are consistent with the purpose and spirit of this chapter and shall
advise the City Council of potential conflicts. Floodplain development in
connection with a subdivision (including installation of public utilities)
shall require a floodplain development permit as provided in subsection B of
this section. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty
(50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for
those areas located within the Floodplain District. (Ord. 07-06, 10-15-2007;
amd. Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
   D.   Variance:
      1.   Authorization: The Board of Appeals may authorize upon request in
specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
         a.   Variances shall only be granted upon: 1) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
         b.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         c.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that: 1) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and 2) such construction
increases risks to life and property.
      2.   Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Board Of Appeals Shall Be
Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the City.
         f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
         g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Floodplain Management Program for the area.
         j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
         l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
         m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
      3.   Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         a.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
         b.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
         c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
         e.   Floodproofing measures. (Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
9-16-6: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for
not more than thirty (30) days. Nothing herein contained prevents the City of
Knoxville from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy violation. (Ord. 17-08, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 17
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-17-1: Purpose
9-17-2: Landscape Features
9-17-3: Definitions
9-17-4: Sign Permit; Requirements
9-17-5: Signs Not Requiring A Permit
9-17-6: Signs Requiring A Permit In A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, And R-4 Districts
9-17-7: Signs Requiring A Permit In C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 And M-2 Districts
9-17-8: Special Sign Requirements
9-17-9: Awnings And Canopies
9-17-10: Prohibited Or Restricted Signs
9-17-11: Nonconforming Signs
9-17-12: Dangerous And Abandoned Signs
9-17-13: Construction And Maintenance Regulations For Signs
9-17-14: Variances Or Exceptions
9-17-15: Violations
9-17-16: Sign Matrices
9-17-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control all exterior signs,
canopies, awnings and other displays in order to preserve, protect and promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of
Knoxville. Further, it is intended to: encourage the reasonable, orderly and
effective display of signs; enhance the physical appearance of the City; reduce
visual clutter; prevent blighting influences; protect property values; provide
minimum standards to safeguard life, health, and property by regulating and
controlling the size, height, design, quality of materials, construction,
location, electrification and maintenance of all signs and sign structures; and
authorize the use of signs which are compatible with their surroundings. (Ord.
12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-2: LANDSCAPE FEATURES:
Landscape features such as plant materials, berms, boulders, fencing and
similar design elements unincorporated or in conjunction with freestanding
signs are encouraged and shall not be counted as allowable sign area. The base
of signs shall be landscaped so as to conceal footings, mountings, brackets,
and related structural elements. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are used in this chapter: (Note: Not all types of
signs defined herein are permitted under this chapter.)
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer correctly advertises a bona fide
business, owner, landlord/tenant, product or activity conducted, or product
available on the premises where the sign is displayed.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by
movement or rotation, or gives the illusion of such change of physical
position.
AREA OF COPY: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of
squares or rectangles which encloses the extreme limits of an advertising
message, announcement, or decoration.
AREA OF SIGN: The area is the perimeter which forms the outside shape, but
excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed
unless they are designed as part of the sign. If the sign consists of more than
one section or module, all areas will be totaled. The area of an irregularly
shaped sign shall be computed using the actual sign face surface.
AWNING: A movable hood or cover which projects from the wall of the building,
which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting
structure. For purposes of this chapter, an "awning sign" is any awning.
Decorative awnings without lettering or imagery are not considered signs.
BANNER: A banner sign is generally constructed of a flexible nonrigid material
(i.e., canvas, cloth, plastic, etc.) upon which goods, events or advertising
has been placed, mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or
more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BILLBOARD: A flat surface, as of a panel, wall or fence on which signs are
posted advertising goods, products, facilities, or services not necessarily on
the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different
location from where the sign is located.
BLANKETING: The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the
placement of another sign.
BUILDING FRONT: The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building
which faces a street, a parking area, a mall, or other circulation area open to
the general public; and having either a main window display of the enterprise
or a public entrance to the building. (In industrial districts a building side
with an entrance open to industrial employees also shall qualify as a building
front.)
BULLETIN BOARD: A sign used for the purpose of notification to the public of an
event or occurrence of public interest, such as a church service, political
rally, civic meeting or other similar event.
CANOPY: Any structure of canvas, other fabric, plastic, metal or wood or other
material, which is permanently attached to any exterior building wall in any
manner, intended to shield any wall, window, door, sidewalk or roadway from
sun, rain or any other element, and which is not retractable such as an awning.
CANOPY SIGN: Any sign attached to or constructed in, on or under a canopy. For
the purpose of this chapter, canopy signs shall be controlled by the rules
governing projecting signs.
COPY AREA: The geometric area in square feet that encloses the actual copy
message of the sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign that directs the movement or placement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic on a lot and does not contain any advertising copy.
DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign designed to give any artificial light
directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light
originating within or on such sign.
DIRECTORY SIGN: Any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the
use of a building is given. This shall include offices and church directories.
Directory signs shall be encouraged or used with advertising of multiple-
occupied commercial and industrial buildings.
DISTANCE OF SIGN PROJECTION: The distance from the exterior wall surface of the
building to the outer extremity of a sign attached to a building.
ELECTRIC SIGN: Any sign containing internal electrical wiring which is
attached, or intended to be attached, to an electrical energy source.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT SIGN: Any sign whose message may be changed by
electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date,
temperature, weather or information concerning civic, charitable or the
advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also
includes traveling or segmented message displays.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, lettering,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision,
advertisement, or other entity. For purposes of this chapter, a "temporary
flag" is any flag which can easily be removed and is typically used for special
events or occasions.
FLAGPOLE: Any structure, pole or device which is erected for purposes of
displaying flags. For purposes of this chapter, small flags which are attached
to a residential dwelling and less than six feet (6') in length do not require
a permit.
FLAT SIGN/FLUSH MOUNTED: See definition of Wall Sign.
FORMULA, SIGN AREA: The area of a sign is determined by the city manager or
his/her designee using actual dimensions, where practical, or approximate
dimensions when irregularity of a sign shape warrants. The area of each sign
type is to be measured by one of the following:
   A.   The sign area shall be the sum of the area of two (2) contiguous
rectangles or squares that enclose the extreme points or edges of all copy,
logos, and symbols of said sign.
   B.   The sign area shall be the area of one rectangle or square that
encloses the extreme edges of the entire sign structure.
FREESTANDING (GROUND AND/OR PYLON SIGN): Any sign which is supported by
structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from
any building.
GRADE: The elevation or level of the sidewalk closest to the sign to which
reference is made. If no sidewalk is present, then grade shall be defined as
the elevation or level of the street at the same point, measured at the
street's centerline.
GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the
ground or an object on the ground but not attached to any part of any building.
Also known as a "freestanding sign".
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the mean centerline street
grade to the highest point of the sign. If sign and sidewalk are not in
essentially parallel planes, then measured vertically at the horizontal
midpoint of the sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which carries only the name of the firm, major
enterprise, institution or principal products offered for sale on the premises
or combination of these.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign, canopy, awning or other display device lighted by or
exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed
toward the sign.
JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which serves a common or collective
identification for two (2) or more businesses or industrial uses on the same
lot. Such sign may contain a directory to said uses as an integral part
thereof.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was already in existence and displayed
on the effective date of this chapter, which met code requirements when
originally installed, but not meeting the requirements and limitations of this
chapter.
MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a building wall at an
entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's
wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against
weather.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to or constructed in a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN: Any structure erected, constructed, or otherwise placed to
commemorate a person, event, organization or group in remembrance of historic
times, cultural heritage, or simply as an example of historic architecture. For
purposes of this chapter, monument signs include features similar to those of
signs, including logos or insignia, seals, text, or other means of
identification.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this
chapter.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign identifying or advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, products or services located on premises where the sign is
installed and maintained.
PAINTED WALL SIGNS: Signs painted directly onto a building wall.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign displaying a candidate for an election, or a current
referendum's or election's subject matter.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign other than a wall sign which projects from a wall or
roof and is supported by a wall of a building. (See definition of Wall Sign.)
PYLON SIGN: Any freestanding sign mounted on a pole or other pylon.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any sign used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property
upon which the sign is placed.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above the roofline or parapet of the building
or structure.
ROOFLINE: The highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses
usable floor area including roof area provided for housing mechanical
equipment.
SANDWICH SIGN: A hinged or unhinged, A-frame, portable sign which is generally
temporary in nature and placed near the roadway.
SIGN: Any object or device or part thereof situated outdoors or indoors which
is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an
object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in whole or in
part, in the business of erection or maintenance of signs, excluding the
business which the sign advertises.
SIGN PERMIT: A building permit issued for the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, moving, improvement, removal, conversion or demolition
of any sign, issued pursuant to this chapter and the building code of the city
of Knoxville.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign which
does not include any portion of the sign message.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign identifying a subdivision wherein only
the name of the subdivision is specified.
SWINGING SIGN: A sign installed on an arm or mast that is not permanently
fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign which is erected or displayed for a limited period of
time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days or which is displayed only
during regular business hours and removed for storage at other times. A sign
permit is not required for temporary signs, and temporary signs shall not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area.
THIRD PARTY SIGN: Any sign which advertises or directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the
lot on which said sign is located.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN: An electrically controlled sign displaying time and
temperature for public service information and may be incorporated into a
business identification sign.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to, erected on or painted on the wall of a
building or structure and projecting not more than twelve inches (12") from
such wall.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign located completely within an enclosed building and
visible from a public way. For purposes of this chapter, a window sign shall
not include any sign permanently attached in the window or directly painted on
the glass. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-4: SIGN PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
Except those signs specified in section
9-17-5 of this chapter, no "sign", "awning", "canopy", or display device as
defined in this chapter shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a
sign permit and without being in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
   A.   Structural Requirements:
      1.   Signs also shall meet all other structural requirements of other
applicable codes and ordinances of the city of Knoxville.
      2.   Signs or sign structures shall not be erected or altered until a
permit has been issued by the city manager or his/her designee. "Altered" shall
be defined as any modification in the size, height, dimensions, location or
mounting of a sign other than routine maintenance.
      3.   Any sign permit granted hereunder may not be assigned or transferred
to any other sign or modified sign face or sign structure.
   B.   Application For A Permit: Any person, firm, corporation or organization
desiring to place, erect, alter or relocate a "sign", as herein defined, except
an exempt sign, shall make application to the city manager or his/her designee
and shall provide in writing the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected. If the applicants are not the
property owners, written proof of consent from the property owner upon which
the sign(s) are to be erected and maintained shall also be required.
      3.   The street address and/or tax parcel number of the land upon which
the sign is to be attached or erected.
      4.   A legible scaled drawing with description and dimensions (height,
colors, shape, etc.) of the sign(s) to be erected or maintained under that
permit and the sign's proposed location on the building or site.
      5.   The basic materials to be used in the construction of the sign.
      6.   A description of all electrical equipment if the sign is to be
lighted or illuminated.
      7.   Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, when required.
      8.   Any other item of information that may be reasonably required by the
city manager or his/her designee for the purpose of application evaluation.
   C.   Permit Issuance/Denial: The following information is related to sign
permit issuance:
      1.   All sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the city manager
or his/her designee who shall grant or deny such applications within ten (10)
business days of receipt of the complete application and payment of fee. If the
sign meets the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances of the
city, a sign permit shall be granted.
      2.   If the sign permit is denied or requires a variance, the sign permit
applicant may appeal to the board of adjustment and request a variance.
      3.   No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign, nor shall any permit
issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign.
      4.   The applicant shall, upon completion of the installation, relocation
or alteration of the sign, notify the city manager or his/her designee who may
inspect the premises to inspect whether the sign complies with the regulations
of this chapter.
   D.   Permit Revocation; Appeal:
      1.   A sign permit may be revoked by the City Manager or his/her designee
in the event the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of these
regulations or any conditions that may have accompanied the permit at the time
of granting.
      2.   The holder of a revoked sign permit may appeal such revocation
action to the Board of Adjustment. A request for an appeals hearing shall be
made in writing to the City Manager or his/her designee within thirty (30) days
of the date of the original permit revocation.
      3.   Upon any permit revocation or failure to prevail before the Board of
Adjustment, the sign(s) subject to such revoked permits shall be removed by the
licensee within thirty (30) days of such revocation.
      4.   Revocation shall not give cause to a right of total or partial
reimbursement of license fees paid.
   E.   Standards For Board Of Adjustment In Reviewing Appeals: The Board of
Adjustment may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, issuance of a sign
permit when such decision will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. No Board of Adjustment
decision shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in
that district or permit standards significantly lower than those required by
this chapter.
   F.   Permit Validity: Any sign permit issued by the City Manager or his/her
designee shall be null and void and automatically revoked in the event that
construction, installation, or manufacture of the sign has not been commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the issuance of such
permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of ninety (90) days any time after the work is commenced, the original
permit shall become null and void. A new permit shall first be obtained to
complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be required.
   G.   Exceptions For Temporary Signs: Additional temporary signs may be
allowed with approval from the City Manager. Those requesting additional
temporary signs must make application to the City Manager prior to using
temporary signs. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-5: SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT:
The following signs may be erected and maintained in all zoning districts,
except where noted, without a permit and without being deducted from gross sign
surface area permitted:
Banners. One temporary banner per building is allowed in all zoning districts.
The banner must be removed after a period of thirty (30) days. Use of temporary
banners which do not require a permit shall not exceed a total of sixty (60)
days in a calendar year.
Bulletin boards. One bulletin board per street frontage, and not over thirty
two (32) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions
located on site.
Civic event temporary signs. Temporary signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square
feet in Residential Districts, or thirty two (32) square feet in the C-1, C-2,
C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 Districts, pertaining to drives or events of civic,
philanthropic, educational, religious, or nonprofit organizations, provided
such signs are posted not more than thirty (30) days before said event and
removed within three (3) days after the event.
Government signs. Government signs for control of traffic and other regulatory
purposes, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of public utilities
indicating danger, and aids to service or safety which are erected by or on the
order of a public officer in the performance of his/her public duty. Included
within this definition are off premises institutional signs.
Governmental notices. Official governmental notices and notices posted by
governmental officers in the performance of their duties; governmental signs to
control traffic or for other regulatory purposes or to identify streets or to
warn of danger.
Interior signs. Signs located within the interior of any building or structure
which are not visible from the public right-of-way.
Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface, or inlaid so as to be part of the
building.
Occupant signs. Signs limited in content to name of occupant, address of
premises, and signs of danger. Occupant signs shall be a maximum of one per
street frontage and no more than three (3) square feet in sign area.
On premises symbols or insignia. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of
recognized historic agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or
historical agencies.
Open/close signs. Illuminated and nonilluminated signs not exceeding ten (10)
square feet in area announcing that a business is open or closed.
Political signs. Political message, public election or referenda signs during
an election campaign. Political signs shall not be placed on public property or
in public right of way.
Real estate and property management signs. One sign per street frontage may be
placed on the offered property and shall not be more than seven (7) square feet
in size for residential property and not more than thirty two (32) square feet
in area for nonresidential property. Lots which exceed twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet may have two (2) signs per street frontage. The sign may only
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which it is located
and contain the name and/or logo of the real estate company, or individuals and
their respective addresses and telephone numbers, posting the sign. Such signs
shall be removed within thirty (30) days after sale, rental or lease of the
property.
Rummage/garage sale signs. Rummage or garage sale signs shall be bound by the
following regulations:
   A.   Rummage or garage sale signs are permitted on private property in a
location which does not create a visibility or traffic hazard (as determined by
the city manager or his/her designee).
   B.   Garage sale signs may not have an area more than six (6) square feet
with a maximum of two (2) faces. Garage sale signs shall identify the location
of the sale and must be located on private property.
   C.   No garage sale sign may be located on utility poles, traffic control
devices, on public property, or the public rights of way.
   D.   No garage sale sign shall be displayed prior to one day before the sale
or after one day following the sale. The use of said sign is limited to seventy
two (72) hours per sale and it shall be the duty of the property owner who
displayed the sign to remove such.
   E.   Persons who display and/or post garage sale signs shall be required to
remove said garage sale signs no later than twenty four (24) hours after the
garage sale.
Signs in display windows. Signs in the display window of a business which
relate to services or products offered therein. The window sign must direct
attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises or to a
product, service or entertainment sold or offered on said premises. Window
signs shall be placed only on the inside of buildings and shall not exceed
thirty five percent (35%) of the glass area of the pane upon which the sign is
displayed.
Signs required by law. Signs required by law, statute or ordinance, constructed
and maintained according to the law, statute or ordinance under which the sign
was erected.
Temporary construction safety signs. Temporary signs erected by public utility
companies or construction companies to warn of dangerous or hazardous
conditions.
Temporary flags. Flags which are temporary and used for a single special event
or occasion which can easily be removed. Temporary flags may not be displayed
longer than ten (10) days.
Temporary signs accessory to subdivision developments or other permitted
improvements. Subject to the following:
   A.   Content: The signs shall be only for the purpose of identification of
homes for sale or rent in the subdivision under construction, of lots for sale,
or for the identification of other nonresidential uses under construction.
   B.   Area, Number And Setback: Such signs shall not exceed two (2) in number
for each subdivision or project nor fifty (50) square feet each in area. They
shall observe the front yard requirement of the principal use.
   C.   Height: No sign shall project higher than eight feet (8') above curb
level.
   D.   Time Limitations: The sign or signs shall be removed by the property
owner when the projects being advertised are sold, completed or no longer under
construction.
Traffic and service signs on private premises. Traffic and parking signs and
devices privately owned and on private premises, and containing messages such
as "Exit Only", "Restricted For - ", and the like, the sole purpose of which is
to direct and control traffic on the premises and which does not exceed ten
feet (10') in height nor contain more than twelve (12) square feet per face.
Signs designating entrances, exits, service areas, parking areas, restrooms and
other such signs relating to functional operation of the building or premises
shall be permitted without permit under this exception. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012;
amd. Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
9-17-6: SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT IN A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, AND R-4 DISTRICTS:
In addition to those permitted signs not requiring a permit pursuant to section
9-17-5 of this chapter, the following nonflashing, nonilluminated signs (except
as otherwise provided) are permitted under the conditions specified in the
following districts: A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 established by the City of
Knoxville's Zoning Code: (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; amd. Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
   A.   Bed And Breakfast Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Content: The sign shall bear only the name, address and other
pertinent information regarding the bed and breakfast establishment.
      2.   Area And Number: There shall not be more than one sign per lot
street frontage. No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
      3.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public right-of-way.
      4.   Height: No sign shall project higher than six feet (6') above the
street level.
   B.   Directory Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Content: The sign shall bear only the name, address and other
pertinent information regarding the establishments located on the property.
      2.   Area And Number: There shall not be more than one sign per lot
street frontage. No sign shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
      3.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public right-of-way.
   C.   Flagpoles: Subject to the following:
      1.   Area And Number: All permanent flagpoles require a sign permit. No
flag shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area. The flagpole shall be
located equidistant from the property line no less than the height of the
flagpole.
   D.   Freestanding Or Ground Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Ground signs shall comply with all setback requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located. Ground signs shall not exceed twenty
four (24) square feet. One ground sign is permitted per site.
   E.   Permanent Subdivision Identification Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Content: The signs shall bear only the name of the subdivision or
development.
      2.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than two (2) signs located
at each entrance to a subdivision. No sign shall exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in area. Such identification signs shall only be erected after review and
approval by the City Manager or his/her designee.
      3.   Height: No sign shall project higher than twelve feet (12') above
curb level.
      4.   Location: The location of any such sign shall be at the discretion
of the City Manager or his/her designee based upon the character of the area,
the type and purpose of the sign.
   F.   Nonflashing, Illuminated Church Bulletins: Subject to the following:
      1.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one sign per lot,
except that on a corner lot, two (2) signs (one facing each street) shall be
permitted. No sign shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area nor be
closer than five feet (5') from any lot line.
      2.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public right-of-way.
      3.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or fifteen feet
(15') above the curb level, whichever is lower.
   G.   Home Occupation/Professional Home Office: Subject to the following:
      1.   Content: The sign shall bear only the name, address, hours and other
pertinent information regarding the on site home occupation or professional
home office maintained in compliance with the city's zoning code.
      2.   Area And Number: There shall not be more than one sign per lot. No
sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area.
      3.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public right of way.
      4.   Height: No sign shall project higher than six feet (6') above the
street level. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-7: SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT IN C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 AND M-2 DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall require a permit to be issued by the city of
Knoxville. Signs may be permitted in specific zoning categories, subject to the
following restrictions:
   A.   Height And Setback Requirements: In commercial or industrial zoning
districts where setbacks are required for building construction, no part of any
sign shall extend over the property line, public right of way or public
easement.
   B.   Number Of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Total Number: No more than one sign per side of any sign type shall
be located at any business, except that premises occupied by a shopping center
may, as an alternative, have one detached directory sign plus one wall sign for
each place of business located in said shopping center.
      2.   Corner Lots: Businesses with streets fronting both sides shall be
allowed one type of sign for each street frontage.
   C.   Types Of Signs:
      1.   Access Identification: Access identification.
      2.   Billboard Sign: Billboards shall be allowed in only the C-2, M-1 and
M-2 zoning districts, provided they meet the following requirements: They must
meet all setback requirements for the zoning district; may not exceed twenty
feet (20') in height, nor shall they exceed one hundred forty four (144) square
feet in total display. The area may be on one side or divided into two (2)
areas so as not to exceed one hundred forty four (144) square feet; not more
than one billboard shall be located on a single lot; no billboard shall be
closer than five hundred feet (500') from another billboard when measured
parallel to the street; and the billboards shall be the only use on a lot.
      3.   Building Directory: Building directory.
      4.   Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted when placed against the
exterior walls of buildings and shall not extend more than twenty four inches
(24") outside of a building's wall surface, nor extend above the roofline.
Total sign area (including multiple business/tenant signs on a single property)
shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each linear foot of the building
parallel with the main street frontage. Rear or side entrance signs are subject
to the same size restrictions as that found at the principal (front/main)
entrance to the building. Signs on other building facades (i.e., nonentrance
side facades) are limited to one-half (1/2) square foot per linear foot of such
facade. All signs attached or affixed to a building shall not exceed twenty
feet (20') in height above the mean centerline street grade.
      5.   Freestanding/Ground Signs: Freestanding/ground signs and their
supporting structure shall comply with all setback requirements for signs as
set forth in this chapter. Ground signs shall not exceed in gross area for any
one premises: fifty (50) square feet on each side in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or C-
4 district; or one hundred sixty (160) square feet on each side in an M-1 or M-
2 industrial district. Such signs shall not exceed at their highest point
twenty feet (20') in height above mean centerline street grade. One ground sign
is permitted on a street frontage provided there is no pylon sign on that side.
      6.   Pylon Signs: Pylon signs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in
height in C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 districts, nor exceed thirty feet (30') in
height in an M-1 or M-2 industrial district. Height is measured above the mean
centerline of street grade. The sign shall be completely within the property
upon which it is located. One pylon sign per street frontage is permitted. Size
is limited to one hundred (100) square feet for one side, or two hundred (200)
square feet for all sides. Any pylon sign shall have a minimum landscaped area
of sixteen (16) square feet around the base of the pole.
      7.   Shopping Center/Industrial Park Directory Signs: In a shopping
center or industrial park, one freestanding identification/directory sign for
each street upon which the development fronts may be permitted showing the name
of said center or park and represented business or industries. Directory signs
for shopping centers or industrial parks are permitted as an alternative to
ground signs or projecting signs for individual stores in the shopping center
or business in the industrial park. The top of a directory sign shall not
exceed thirty two feet (32') in height above the mean centerline street grade
and the bottom of the sign shall not be less than ten feet (10') above the
sidewalk and not more than sixteen feet (16') above a driveway or alley. Double
supporting pylons shall not be greater than ten feet (10') apart. That portion
of the directory sign which advertises the shopping center or industrial park
name shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet for one side and a total of
two hundred (200) square feet for all sides. That portion of the directory sign
which advertises the individual store/business name shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet for one side and a total of thirty two (32) square feet for
all sides. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-8: SPECIAL SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
The following special sign requirements shall apply as outlined below:
   A.   Animated, Illuminated And Other Signs: Such signs shall be allowed to
be animated or illuminated in such a way that promotes the business or
commercial goods which exist on the property. Such signs must meet sign
requirements for the district within which they are located.
   B.   Portable Signs/Message Boards: Such signs shall be limited in use to
seven (7) days at a time following approval by the city manager or his/her
designee, provided, however, that approval for placement of a portable sign/
message board which presents a vision obstruction shall not be granted; such
signs shall not be used more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. The maximum
size of a portable sign/message board shall be twenty four (24) square feet on
each face, back to back. Portable signs/message boards shall not be located in
any public right of way and shall be securely fastened to prevent any hazardous
condition.
   C.   Sandwich Signs: In instances where the property owner or business
tenant in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or C-4 district wishes to erect a sandwich board,
there is a limit of one sandwich board per business tenant and a sign permit is
not required. Such signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and eight
(8) square feet per side display area. Sandwich signs may not be placed so as
to present a hazard as determined by the city manager or his/her designee.
   D.   Swinging Signs: A sign where the copy area is attached to a sign
structure in a way that can be set in motion with pressure, and where the sign
structure is attached in a perpendicular fashion to a building at a height no
less than eight feet (8') above ground height, and no greater than eight (8)
square feet in copy area. A swinging sign may be considered in lieu of
permitted wall signage.
   E.   Over The Street Banners: Over the street banners may be permitted in
any district with approval from the planning and zoning commission.
   F.   Neon Signs: Exterior neon or gas illumination signs require a sign
permit. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-9: AWNINGS AND CANOPIES:
   A.   Permitted Awnings: No awnings shall be erected or maintained, except
such awnings as comply with the following requirements, and then only if the
permit required hereunder is first obtained and the same conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which the same are to be located:
      1.   Support: Awnings shall be securely attached to and supported by the
building and shall be without posts or columns beyond the setback line.
      2.   Height: All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the
lowest portion thereof shall be not less than eight feet (8') above the level
of the public sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
      3.   Advertising: No advertising shall be placed on any awning, except
that the name and logo of the establishment within the building to which the
awning is attached may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space
not exceeding eight inches (8") in height on the front and side edges.
   B.   Permitted Canopies: No canopies shall be erected or maintained, except
such canopies as comply with the following requirements, and then only if the
permit required hereunder is first obtained and the same conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which the same are to be located:
      1.   Support: The structural support of all canopies shall be properly
designed and be approved by the city manager or his/her designee as in
compliance with the building code of the city of Knoxville. All frames and
supports shall be designed to withstand a wind pressure as provided in the
city's building code. All canopies shall be attached to a building, and no
supports shall exist beyond the setback line between the canopy and the
sidewalk or ground below.
      2.   Height: All canopies shall be constructed and erected so that the
lowest portion thereof shall not be less than eight feet (8') above the level
of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
      3.   Canopy Extension From Curb Line: No entrance canopy shall extend
beyond a point eight feet (8') from the face of a wall or building.
      4.   Advertising: No advertising shall be placed on any canopy, except
that the name and logo of the establishment may be painted or placed in a space
not exceeding twenty four inches (24") in average height on the front and side
edges. Such name may be so painted or placed irrespective of any prohibition
otherwise applicable hereunder, providing, however, that if such canopy shall
contain more or other than the name of the establishment in letters more than
eight inches (8") high on the front and side edges, it shall be considered as a
sign and be subject to all the provisions hereof. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-10: PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED SIGNS:
   A.   Traffic Interference: Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate
the shape, size, form or color of railroad or traffic signs or devices. Signs,
canopies and awnings shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of
railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices or the safe flow of traffic. No
sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to
or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign, awning or canopy shall
be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
   B.   Moving Or Flashing Signs: No sign shall be erected which has any
flashing, rotating or brilliant intermittent parts or lights, bare reflecting
type bulbs, or utilizes a spot or beacon light to illuminate a sign, except
those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature,
weather or similar information. No signs, billboards or other advertising media
which creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic or a
nuisance to adjoining residential property shall be permitted in any district.
   C.   Signs On Public Rights Of Way: Signs shall not be permitted on public
rights of way, except for municipal traffic control, parking and directional
signs and as otherwise specified in this chapter. Signs may not extend over
public rights of way, with the exception of over the street banners which
require approval from the planning and zoning commission.
   D.   Billboards: Billboards are only allowed within the C-2, M-1 and M-
2 zoning districts as outlined in this chapter. Billboards located upon
property annexed to the city and existing as of the effective date of this
chapter are permitted to remain unless the owner structurally alters such
billboard in any manner. If damaged, or if structural alteration is made/
required, such billboard shall be permanently removed.
   E.   Painted Wall And Other Prohibited Signs: Painted wall signs are painted
directly onto the surface of the building; painted wall signs without approval
from the planning and zoning commission are prohibited in the city of
Knoxville. No person shall paste or otherwise fasten any paper or other
material, paint, stencil or write any number, sign, name or any disfiguring
mark within any street right of way, on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street,
post, fire hydrant, pole or tree, any other sign, building, fence or other
structure, nor shall any of said objects be defaced in any manner.
   F.   Obscene, Explicit Or Offensive Sign Subjects: Signs which bear or
contain statements, words, pictures, or symbols of obscene, pornographic or
immoral subjects are prohibited. The city manager or his/her designee who
approves sign permits shall determine whether or not a sign is immoral. Should
a permit application be denied, the permit applicant may appeal the decision to
the board of adjustment.
   G.   Roof Signs: Roof signs are prohibited in the city of Knoxville.
   H.   Advertising Vehicle Sign Configuration: No persons shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right of way or on private properties so as to
be seen from a public right of way, which has attached thereto or located
thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purposes of providing
advertisement of products or directing people to a business activity located on
the same or nearby property or any other premises. Business vehicles containing
typical business signage and which are actively used on a daily basis for
business purposes are exempt from this prohibition.
   I.   Floodlighted And Illuminated Signs: Signs may be floodlighted or
illuminated, subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Signs which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or
rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled ways of a
public right of way and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause
glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which
otherwise interfere with any driver's operations of a motor vehicle, are
prohibited.
      2.   Signs which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays
of light from being directed at any residential property, and which are of such
intensity or brilliance as to cause a public nuisance, are prohibited.
      3.   No sign shall be so floodlighted or illuminated that it interferes
with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device, or
signal. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-11: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Nonconforming Sign Criteria: Signs existing as of the effective date of
this chapter which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter are
nonconforming signs and shall be subject to the provisions of this section:
      1.   Nonconforming Signs May Be Maintained: No nonconforming on premises
sign shall be altered or moved to a new location without being brought into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Refer to subsection B of
this section.) Compliance is the responsibility of the property owner.
      2.   New Signs Not Permitted: Business signs on the premises of a
nonconforming use or building may be continued per this chapter, but new signs
for such uses shall not be allowed, nor shall expand in number, area, height,
or illumination. New signs, not to exceed the maximum allowable aggregate sign
area, may be erected only upon the complete removal of all other signs existing
at the time of adoption of this chapter.
      3.   Removal Upon Business Termination: Nonconforming signs shall be
removed when the principal structure located on the premises undergoes a change
of use. Closing businesses must remove their signs within thirty (30) days of
closing.
      4.   Change In Sign User: Whenever there is a change in the sign user
(excluding off premises signs) or owner of the property on which the sign is
located, the new sign user or new property owner shall forthwith notify the
city of Knoxville regarding the change. No new sign permit is required unless
there is modification of the sign face or sign structure.
   B.   Alteration Of Signs:
      1.   Alteration Defined: For the purpose of this chapter, alteration of a
sign is considered to be any change to the exterior appearance of any part of
the sign, its frame, its supporting structure, or its lighting including:
changing the message (except for marquee or off premises advertising signs),
symbols, color, material, height or location.
      2.   Maintenance Exception: Altering a sign does not include maintaining
the existing appearance of the sign; replacing the sign face or the supporting
structure with identical materials, colors, and messages; changing the message
of a marquee sign; or changing the face of an off premises advertising sign.
   C.   Loss Of Legal Nonconforming Status: In addition to the standards in
subsections A and B of this section, a sign may also lose its nonconforming
status if one or more of the following occurs:
      1.   If said sign is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake,
vandalism, war, riot or act of God; or structurally altered in any way, except
for normal maintenance and repair; the sign may be reconstructed and used as
before if it is reconstructed within three (3) months after such calamity,
unless the damage to the sign is fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement
value, in which case, the constructed sign shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter;
      2.   The sign is relocated;
      3.   The sign fails to conform to the city requirements regarding
maintenance and repair, abandonment or dangerous or defective signs;
      4.   On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be
immediately brought in compliance with this chapter with a new permit secured
therefor or shall be removed.
   D.   Legal Nonconforming Sign Maintenance And Repair: Nothing in this
chapter shall relieve the owner or use of a legal nonconforming sign or the
owner of the property in which the sign is located from the provisions of this
chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs. However, legal
nonconforming signs shall not be reinstalled, reconstructed or have their
useful life extended. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-12: DANGEROUS AND ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   Removal Of Dangerous Signs: All signs shall be removed by the owner or
tenant of the premises upon which the sign is located if in the judgment of the
city manager or his/her designee, such sign is so old, dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first.
If the owner or tenant fails to remove it, the city manager or his/her designee
may remove the sign at cost of the owner, following adequate written notice.
The owner may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Abandoned Signs: Except as otherwise herein provided, all sign messages
shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which an off
premises sign is located when the business it advertised is no longer conducted
where advertised. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the city
manager or his/her designee shall give the owner sixty (60) days' written
notice to remove said sign and thereafter upon the owner's or lessee's failure
to comply may remove such sign, any costs for which shall be charged to the
owner of the property or may be assessed as a special assessment against the
property, and/or the city manager or his/her designee may take any other
appropriate legal action necessary to attain compliance.
   C.   Dangerous Or Abandoned Sign Infrastructure: Except as otherwise herein
provided, all sign infrastructure including posts, columns, supports or
otherwise, shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which
an on premises sign is located when the business advertised is no longer
conducted and the abandoned infrastructure could be potentially dangerous to
public health. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the city
manager or his/her designee shall give the owner sixty (60) days' written
notice to remove said sign and thereafter upon the owner's or lessee's failure
to comply may remove such sign, any costs for which shall be charged to the
owner of the property or may be assessed as a special assessment against the
property, and/or the city manager or his/her designee may take any other
appropriate legal action necessary to attain compliance.
   D.   Violations: All signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter after the date of adoption are hereby declared
public nuisances within the meaning of the city of Knoxville zoning title. In
addition to the penalty provisions for violations of this chapter, the city
manager or his/her designee may bring an action to abate the nuisance in the
manner set forth in city ordinance. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-13: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS:
All construction and maintenance signs shall be properly secured, supported and
braced and shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept
clean and well painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to
window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports
shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe
and satisfactory to the city manager or his/her designee.
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Construction Standards: All signs, except flat signs and those signs
weighing less than ten (10) pounds, shall be designed, fastened and constructed
to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square
foot of area and shall be constructed, attached, fastened or anchored to
adequately support the dead load and any anticipated live loads (i.e., ice,
snow) of the sign.
      2.   Projection: Signs including supports shall not interfere with
surrounding properties or traffic.
      3.   Prohibited Mounting: No signs shall be painted on, attached to or
affixed to any trees, rocks, or other similar organic or inorganic natural
matter, including utility poles or apparatus.
      4.   Maintenance: All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be
properly maintained and have an appearance that is neat and clean. All signs
shall be kept in good structural condition, well painted, and clean at all
times and the immediate premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and
inoffensive condition and kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances,
rubbish and weeds.
      5.   Annexed Areas: All signs in newly annexed areas shall comply with
this chapter within three (3) years of annexation. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-14: VARIANCES OR EXCEPTIONS:
Variances or exceptions to these sign regulations may be granted by the board
of adjustment following a recommendation from the city manager or his/her
designee, pursuant to the procedures of the city of Knoxville's zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-15: VIOLATIONS:
The following regard violations of this chapter:
   A.   Construction Without Permit: Any person, firm or corporation who
begins, erects, improperly alters, or completes the erection or construction of
any sign, awning or canopy controlled by this chapter prior to the granting of
a sign permit shall pay a penalty double the amount of the permit otherwise
required.
   B.   Compliance Notice:
      1.   If the city manager or his/her designee finds any sign, awning or
canopy regulated herein unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public, or has
been improperly erected, altered or maintained, it shall give written notice to
the sign owner and to the property owner.
      2.   If such sign, awning or canopy owner fails to remove or alter the
sign, awning or canopy so as to comply with the standards herein set forth
within five (5) days after such notice, the city manager or his/her designee
may cause such sign, awning or canopy to be removed or altered at the expense
of the owner of the sign, awning or canopy or the owner of the property upon
which it is located so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Violations; Penalties: Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty which shall be as
follows:
      1.   Any person found guilty of violating any part of this chapter who
has previously been notified of being in violation, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to forfeiture as prescribed by subsection 9-17-4D of this chapter.
      2.   Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city
from also maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation
of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
9-17-16: SIGN MATRICES:
   SIGN MATRIX: A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, AND R-4
 
None - No permit required
S    - Staff approval/permit required
C    - Governing Body approval/permit required
 
Type Of Sign Permit/  Maximum Minimum Lot Maximum   Maximum Sign Other
             Approval Number  Frontage    Sign Area Height       Requirements
               Permit/  Maximum     Minimum  Maximum    Maximum  Other
Type Of Sign   Approval Number      Lot      Sign Area  Sign     Requirements
                                    Frontage            Height
Access                  1/vehicle                                See "signs
identification None     entrance    -        10 sq. ft. 3 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                        8 ft.
Awning         S        1/frontage  -        -          above    -
                                                        sidewalk
                                                                 See "signs
Banners        None     1/building  -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Bed and        S        -           -        16 sq. ft. 6 ft.    -
breakfast
                                                                 See "signs
Bulletin board None     1/frontage  -        20 sq. ft. -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                        8 ft.
Canopy         S        1/frontage  -        -          above    -
                                                        sidewalk
Civic event                                                      See "signs
temporary      None     1/frontage  -        4 sq. ft.  10 ft.   not needing
signs                                                            a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Contractor     None     1/lot       -        6 sq. ft.  4 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Directional    None     -           -        8 sq. ft.  4 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Directory      S        1/site      -        24 sq. ft. -        -
Flags          S        -           -        24 sq. ft. 25 ft.   See "sign
                                                                 regulations"
Freestanding/  S        1/site      -        24 sq. ft. -        -
ground
Garage/rummage                                                   See "signs
sale           None     1/site      -        6 sq. ft.  4 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Government     None     1/site      -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Home                                                             See "signs
occupation     None     1/site      -        6 sq. ft.  6 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Interior       None     -           -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Memorial       None     -           -        6 sq. ft   -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Monument       S        1/frontage  150 ft.  12 sq. ft. 5 ft.    -
                                                                 See "signs
Nameplate      None     -           -        1 sq. ft.  -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Occupant       None     1/frontage  0        3 sq. ft.  -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Open/close     None     1/lot       -        10 sq. ft. 10 ft.   not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See
                                                                 "prohibited
Painted wall   C        -           -        -          -        or
                                                                 restricted
                                                                 signs"
                        1/issue or                               See "signs
Political      None     candidate/  -        -          -        not needing
                        frontage                                 a permit"
Public/                                                          See "signs
government     None     -           -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Real estate    None     1/lot       -        7 sq. ft.  4 ft.    not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Schools,
public and     S        1/frontage  200 ft.  50 sq. ft. 20 ft.   -
private
Signs in                                                         See "signs
display        None     1/frontage  -        -          -        not needing
windows                                                          a permit"
Signs required                                                   See "signs
by law         None     -           -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Subdivision    S        2/          -        32 sq. ft. 12 ft.   -
identification          subdivision
Temporary                                                        See "signs
construction   None     1/frontage  -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
                                                                 See "signs
Temporary flag None     -           -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
Warning and                                                      See "signs
regulatory     None     -           -        -          -        not needing
                                                                 a permit"
 
(Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012; amd. Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
   SIGN MATRIX: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 AND M-2
 
None - No permit required
S    - Staff approval/permit required
C    - Governing Body approval/permit required
 
Type Of Sign Permit/  Maximum Minimum Lot Maximum   Maximum     Other
             Approval Number  Frontage    Sign Area Sign Height Requirements
                     Permit/  Maximum    Minimum  Maximum  Maximum  Other
Type Of Sign         Approval Number     Lot      Sign     Sign     Requirements
                                         Frontage Area     Height
Access               S        1/vehicle  -        10 sq.   3 ft.    -
identification                entrance            ft.
                                                                    See "signs not
Banner               None     1/site     -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                                    See "signs
                                                                    requiring a
Billboard            S        1/lot      -        144 sq.  20 ft.   permit: C-1,
                                                  ft.               C-2, C-3, C-4,
                                                                    M-1 and M-
                                                                    2 Districts"
                                                                    See "signs
                                                                    requiring a
Building directory   S        1/project  -        100 sq.  20 ft.   permit: C-1,
                                                  ft.               C-2, C-3, C-4,
                                                                    M-1 and M-
                                                                    2 Districts"
                                                  32 sq.            See "signs not
Bulletin board       None     1/site     -        ft.      10 ft.   needing a
                                                                    permit"
Civic event                                       32 sq.            See "signs not
temporary signs      None     1/frontage -        ft.      10 ft.   needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                  8 sq.             See "signs not
Directional          None     -          -        ft.      4 ft.    needing a
                                                                    permit"
Flags                S        -          -        60 sq.   40 ft.   See "sign
                                                  ft.               regulations"
Freestanding/ground  S        -          -        50 sq.   20 ft.   -
                                                  ft.
Identification       S        1/building -        60 sq.   -        Maximum letter
                                                  ft.               height 2 ft.
                                                                    See "signs not
Interior             None     -          -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
Landmark, statue,                                                   See "sign
mural, or religious  C        -          -        -        -        regulations"
symbol
                                                                    In lieu of
                                                  45 sq.            monument
Landscape            S        1/site     150 ft.  ft.      8 ft.    signs; see
                                                                    "sign
                                                                    regulations"
Marquee              S        1/frontage -        -        -        -
                                                  6 sq.             See "signs not
Memorial             None     -          -        ft.      -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                                    In lieu of
                                                  50 sq.            landscape
Monument             S        1/frontage 150 ft.  ft.      -        signs; see
                                                                    "sign
                                                                    regulations"
                                                  10 sq.            See "signs not
Open/close           None     1/lot      -        ft.      10 ft.   needing a
                                                                    permit"
Painted wall         C        1/frontage -        -        -        -
                              1/issue or          6 sq.             See "signs not
Political issue      None     candidate/ -        ft.      4 ft.    needing a
                              frontage                              permit"
Project
identification:
                                                                    Landscaping
                                                                    required, see
   >20 acres      S        1/frontage 500 ft.  200 sq.  12 ft.   "temporary and
                                                  ft.               project
                                                                    identification
                                                                    signs"
                                                                    Landscaping
                                                                    required, see
   5 acres but 20 S        1/frontage 200 ft.  100 sq.  10 ft.   "temporary and
acres                                             ft.               project
                                                                    identification
                                                                    signs"
                                                                    See "temporary
   <5 acres       S        1/frontage n/a      64 sq.   10 ft.   and project
                                                  ft.               identification
                                                                    signs"
Projecting (canopy,                                        8 ft.
awning)              S        -          -        -        above    -
                                                           sidewalk
                                                                    See "signs not
Public/government    None     -          -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                  32 sq.            See "signs not
Real estate          None     1/frontage 150 ft.  ft.      10 ft.   needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                  8 sq.             See "special
Sandwich             S        1/frontage -        ft.      4 ft.    sign
                                                                    requirements"
Signs in display                                  35% of            See "signs not
windows              None     1/frontage -        glass    -        needing a
                                                  area              permit"
Signs required by                                                   See "signs not
law                  None     -          -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                  8 sq.    8 ft.    See "special
Swinging sign        S        1/frontage -        ft.      above    sign
                                                           sidewalk requirements"
Temporary                                                           See "signs not
construction         None     1/frontage -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                                    See "signs not
Temporary flag       None     -          -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
                                                  2 sq.
                                                  ft./
Wall                 S        -          -        linear   -        See "sign
                                                  ft. of            regulations"
                                                  building
                                                  frontage
Warning and                                                         See "signs not
regulatory           None     -          -        -        -        needing a
                                                                    permit"
 
(Ord. 12-12, 11-5-2012)
CHAPTER 18
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18-1: Intent
9-18-2: Procedures
9-18-3: Standards
9-18-1: INTENT:
The PUD District is intended to provide for the development or redevelopment of
land under the control and in accordance with an approved Master Plan. The
development guidelines and standards in which land uses, transportation
facilities, building densities, arrangements, and types are set out in a
unified Master Plan in order to provide greater flexibility of land use,
development densities, and building locations than other zoning districts may
allow.
The PUD District is intended to maximize benefits from the use of open spaces,
preserve natural areas and existing tree cover, protect steep slopes, maximize
aesthetics, encourage certain architectural standards for buildings, and permit
mixed uses and diversity of bulk regulations without endangering the general
health, safety, welfare, and land value of surrounding and internal properties.
A PUD may consist of a single use or a mix of residential, commercial, and
limited industrial uses, provided such PUD is compatible with the Future Land
Use Map and Comprehensive Plan of the City. It is not the intent of the PUD
District to be utilized to reduce or provide relief from an existing zoning
regulation or requirement. (Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
9-18-2: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: The owner or owners of a parcel of land within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City may submit to the Zoning Administrator an application
accompanied by a PUD Master Plan requesting a rezoning to PUD District. The
application form, Master Plan (including number of copies), proposed
development rules and regulations, design guidelines, and other submittal
details and requirements shall be as determined by the Zoning Administrator as
necessary to review the request. The required application fee shall be as
determined by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Review Process: The PUD Application shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator for completeness. Applications deemed incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant with a list of the missing or incomplete items.
Applications deemed complete shall be distributed by the Zoning Administrator
to other City departments and agencies as necessary for review and comment as
to its compliance with all zoning regulations and other pertinent City codes,
regulations, standards, and policies.
Subsequent to review by the Zoning Administrator and other City departments and
agencies, the Zoning Administrator shall submit to all members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission a copy of the PUD Application along with a written
recommendation as to the request's conformity with the rules and regulations of
the City and may include a recommendation for approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the application.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall subsequently hold a public hearing for
a rezoning as prescribed by their rules of procedures and the Zoning Ordinance
and review the PUD Application for conformity with the zoning regulations and
standards and may confer with the applicant on changes to their request as may
be deemed advisable. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the
following as part of their deliberation:
      1.   Compatibility with the Future Land Use Map and the Comprehensive
Plan.
      2.   Land uses, building sizes and densities, and number of dwelling
units.
      3.   Building types, functions, architecture, and building placement and
setbacks.
      4.   Provisions for open space, landscaping, buffers, pedestrian
circulation, and stormwater management.
      5.   Preservation and protection of natural features, drainageways, steep
slopes, and existing tree cover.
      6.   Provisions for adequate public infrastructure including sanitary
sewer and water service, stormwater run-off, public parks, and public safety
services.
      7.   Traffic circulation and congestions including access to and from the
site.
      8.   General relationship to and impact on the surrounding area and
neighboring properties.
After the close of the public hearing and completion of its deliberation, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may adopt a recommendation for approval or
denial of the PUD Master Plan and associated development rules, regulations,
and guidelines as submitted. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also
request the developer agree to certain conditions or agree to make certain
modifications, alterations, adjustments, or amendments to the proposed Master
Plan and associated rules, regulations, and guidelines in order to secure a
recommendation of approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City
Council within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a PUD Application deemed
complete by the Zoning Administrator. If the Planning and Zoning Commission
does not act within the sixty (60) days as prescribed above, the PUD
Application shall be deemed to have received a recommendation of approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission unless the applicant agrees to an extension
of time.
Within sixty (60) days of receiving a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing for a rezoning
as prescribed by their rules of procedures and the Zoning Ordinance and review
the PUD Application for conformity with the zoning regulations and standards.
During this hearing, the City Council may confer with the applicant on changes
to their request as may be deemed advisable in order to secure the approval by
the City Council. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or
modifications as agreed to by the applicant, or deny the application. If the
City Council fails to act within the herein prescribed 60-day period, the PUD
Application shall be deemed to have been denied, unless both the applicant and
the City Council agree to an extension of time.
Whenever any PUD Application has been denied by the City Council, no new
application covering the same property, or the same property and additional
property, shall be filed with or considered by the City Council until one year
has elapsed from the date of the filing of the first application.
   C.   Recording Of The Master Plan And Associated Regulations And Guidelines:
The ordinance providing for the rezoning of the property to the PUD Zoning
District and the associated Master Plan, regulations, and guidelines as
approved by the City Council shall be recorded at the Office of the Marion
County Recorder and shall be binding on the property owners, their heirs,
successors, or assigns. No phase of the PUD shall be started, and no building
permits shall be issued until all documents have been recorded.
   D.   Modifications: Any application by the property owner or owners for
modification to an approved PUD shall first be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Said proposed modification along with a report from the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall then be forwarded to the City Council with
appropriate recommendations. The City Council shall then take such appropriate
action on the proposed modification and their decision shall be final.
No modification may be considered that is more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in density or change of uses of the site without a public hearing by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as required for a rezoning.
A public hearing may be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City
Council on any requested modification. All modifications and adjustments shall
be recorded at the Office of the Marion County Recorder.
   E.   Platting And Development: Prior to development within the PUD,
applications for preliminary and final plats, site plans, and building permits
that are in conformance with the provisions of the PUD shall be submitted for
review in accordance with the City's regulations. At the applicant's own risk,
Preliminary plats, final plats, and sites plans may be submitted and reviewed
concurrently with the PUD Application process. (Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
9-18-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   Master Plan Requirements: As part of a proposed PUD Application for
rezoning, the property owner or developer shall prepare a Master Plan for the
proposed PUD that shall be a scaled drawing depicting the generalized overall
plan for development of the proposed PUD area and the following information:
      1.   Dimensions, legal descriptions, acreage, existing zoning, land use,
and ownership of the area of the proposed PUD; and existing zoning, land use
and ownership of contiguous properties within two hundred fifty feet (250').
      2.   PUD boundary, development phasing plan, and all existing and
proposed property lines, street right-of-way lines, easements, and proposed PUD
building and parking lot setbacks.
      3.   Delineation of each "phase" proposed with their land uses and bulk
regulations identified.
      4.   Existing topography and conceptual stormwater management and
drainage.
      5.   Existing and proposed streets, driveways, parking areas and other
paved areas and anticipated parking requirements.
      6.   Existing and proposed locations of pedestrian walkways, trails,
parks, recreation areas, open space, buffers, parking areas, schools, and
anticipated traffic generation.
      7.   Proposed lot locations for all uses, and conceptual building
locations and functions for all multiple-family residential and non-residential
uses.
      8.   Existing and proposed buildings, uses, square footages, and number
of dwelling units and density calculations.
      9.   Area and number of dwelling units, and anticipated floor area of
non-residential buildings by "phase".
      10.   Existing tree masses, water channels, drainage ways, flood hazard
areas, and other topographic or environmentally important characteristics.
      11.   Proposed privately-owned common areas and public ownership areas,
including open space, parkland, and school sites.
      12.   Locations of existing or proposed Municipal utilities to serve the
PUD and adjoining properties, including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water.
      13.   Other required stormwater management facilities and requirements.
      14.   Dimensions of all street right-of-way and paving widths, including
all proposed easements.
      15.   Staging schedule of development, including anticipated year each
phase of development is to be implemented.
      16.   Landscape areas proposed as part of PUD, to include location of
shrubs, trees and earth berms.
      17.   Delineation of the traffic impacts that would result from the
project and how they can be mitigated.
      18.   Details for any requirements for parkland dedication and compliance
with the City trails master plan.
      19.   Conceptual building elevations including exterior building
materials and colors.
      20.   Freestanding signage locations and concept plans.
      21.   Other details or information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator.
      22.   The Zoning Administrator may waive any of these required elements
if determined unnecessary to ensure compliance with this section.
   B.   Density: A PUD shall not be in excess of the density set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map of the City.
   C.   Regulations And Guidelines For The PUD: In conjunction with the
submittal of a PUD Application and PUD Master Plan illustrating the location of
each development "phase", there shall be prepared regulations and guidelines
for the development of the PUD, and such matters shall be part of the
consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and
incorporated within the ordinance providing for the rezoning of the property to
a PUD.
The regulations and guidelines shall set forth the permitted land use, bulk
regulations, transfer of development rights within the area of the PUD, height
requirements, open space and landscaping requirements, architectural standards,
sign regulations, buffer requirements, off-street parking and loading
requirements, and other performance standards as required by the City for each
phase designated within the PUD Master Plan. (Ord. 19-08, 7-1-2019)
CHAPTER 19
BUILDING MATERIALS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES
SECTION:
9-19-1: Applicable Land Use Types
9-19-2: Applicable Zoning Districts
9-19-3: Applicable Buildings
9-19-4: Applicable Building Facades
9-19-5: Acceptable Wall Materials
9-19-6: Prohibited Wall Materials
9-19-1: APPLICABLE LAND USE TYPES:
All land use types except residential containing less than three dwelling units
and located within an applicable zoning district. (Ord. 20-04, 7-6-2020)
9-19-2: APPLICABLE ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   C-1 Residential-Commercial District.
   B.   C-2 General Commercial District.
   C.   C-3 Planned Commercial Development District.
   D.   C-4 Central Business District.
   E.   M-1 Service Commercial / Limited Industrial District. (Ord. 20-04, 7-6-
2020)
9-19-3: APPLICABLE BUILDINGS:
All principal use buildings and any accessory use building. (Ord. 20-04, 7-6-
2020)
9-19-4: APPLICABLE BUILDING FACADES:
Any building facade which predominately faces a street. Buildings with multiple
streets or skewed placement shall apply these guidelines to all facades which
predominately face a street. (Ord. 20-04, 7-6-2020)
9-19-5: ACCEPTABLE WALL MATERIALS:
All exterior wall materials exposed to view on a street-facing facade shall
consist of one or more of the following:
   A.   Brick.
   B.   Stone, natural or manufactured.
   C.   Block or Concrete Masonry Units, Textured/Non-Smooth Finish.
   D.   Tile, Glazed Porcelain.
   E.   Concrete.
   F.   Glass Panels or Block.
   G.   Structural Wood or Metal.
   H.   Siding, Natural Wood, Engineered Wood, Fiber Cement or Masonry Planks/
Panels.
   I.   Stucco, Synthetic Stucco or Exterior Insulation and Finish System
(EIFS).
   J.   Architectural / Decorative Metal Panels with Concealed Fasteners. (Ord.
20-04, 7-6-2020)
9-19-6: PROHIBITED WALL MATERIALS:
No exterior wall materials exposed to view on a street-facing facade shall
consist of one or more of the following:
   A.   Vinyl and Metal Siding.
   B.   Corrugated Metal, Fiberglass or Vinyl Panels. Prefinished Metal, Vinyl
and Fiberglass may be used on Canopies, Fascia, Soffit, Trim and Upper Accents.
(Ord. 20-04, 7-6-2020)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
PREAMBLE; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Preamble
10-1-2: Title
10-1-3: Jurisdiction
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-1: PREAMBLE:
The provisions of this title shall prescribe the minimum requirements for the
design and development of new subdivisions and resubdivisions of land; provide
for the preliminary and final approval of such subdivisions and provide for the
enforcement of these regulations:
   A.   The city council has adopted a comprehensive plan as a guide to the
future development of the city; and
   B.   In accordance with said comprehensive plan the city council has adopted
a zoning ordinance, title 9 of this code, to assist in controlling the future
development of the city by regulating the uses of land, the size of lots, the
height and bulk of buildings, the size of yards and open spaces around
buildings, the density of population and the locations and uses of buildings
and structures for residences, commerce, industry and other purposes; and
   C.   It is essential that the subdivision of land be coordinated with title
9 of this code for the purpose of guiding the future development of the city as
outlined in the comprehensive plan; and
   D.   The city council deems it necessary in order to secure coordination of
subdivisions of land and extensions of streets; to promote proper standards for
development of land, utilities and streets; to promote public health, safety
and general welfare; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation,
water supply, sewage treatment, storm drainage, parks and recreation facilities
and other public improvements and services in areas of new development
throughout the city, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. (1983 Code §
11-2-1A)
10-1-2: TITLE:
This title may be known and cited as the KNOXVILLE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE. (1983
Code § 11-2-1B)
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
This title governs the review of subdivision plats and/or plats of survey for
divisions of all land within the corporate limits of the city of Knoxville,
Iowa, and within two (2) miles adjacent to said corporate limits. The authority
to review subdivision plats or plats of survey within two (2) miles of the
corporate limits of the city of Knoxville, Iowa, is established pursuant to
sections 354.8 and 354.9, subsections 1 and 2, of the 2005 code of Iowa and all
amendments thereto. (Ord. 06-01, 3-6-2006)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is
mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; "should" means that which is
recommended, but not required.
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street twenty feet (20') or less in
width affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, highways or ways, except alleys; or by streets, highways or ways
except alleys and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.
BUILDING LINE: A line on a plat between which line and a street no structure or
building shall be erected.
COLLECTOR STREETS: Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major
system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission.
COUNCIL: The city council.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short, minor street, having one end open to motor traffic, the
other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use for a specific purpose, of a
strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or
persons and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect any
permanent structures, but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with the rights of the
grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees which
interfere with the use of such easements.
ENGINEER: A registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering, as
defined by the registration act of the state of Iowa.
ESCROW AGREEMENT: An agreement between the subdivider and the city whereby a
percentage of the sale price of each lot in the subdivision, when sold, shall
be deposited in escrow as a guarantee for the installation of the required
improvements, the percentage to be determined by the city engineer or city
council.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan in its final form, which is submitted for final
approval and which will be recorded.
FRONTAGE STREET: A street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or highway; and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
IMPROVEMENT: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway,
tree, lawn, off street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for
which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or which may affect an improvement for which city responsibility is
established.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A corporate surety bond, cash deposit or escrow agreement
made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements
which are required by this title, said cost being estimated by the city
engineer or city council, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally
sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements shall be kept in good
repair from the time of acceptance by the city of said improvements for a
period of four (4) years for streets, and two (2) years for sewer and water
lines.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A street used primarily for fast, large volume traffic.
MINOR STREET: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond, cash deposit or escrow agreement made out to
the city in an amount not less than the full cost of the improvements which are
required by this title, said cost being estimated by the city engineer or city
council, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to
secure to the city that said improvements will be constructed in accordance
with this title.
PLAT OF SURVEY: The graphical representation of a survey of one or more parcels
of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel within,
in the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor 1 .
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A map or plan showing all the facts needed to enable the
commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land is satisfactory
from the standpoint of public interest.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if
such change affects any street layout on such map or any area reserved for
public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plat legally recorded
prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street right of way available for vehicular
traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
STREET RIGHT OF WAY: All property dedicated or intended for public or private
use for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefor, and
whether designed as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle or however otherwise
designated.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate,
trust or any other group including any agent thereof or combination acting as a
unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a "subdivision"
as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels for sale or development, or, if a new street is involved, any division
of a parcel of land; provided, that the following transactions shall be exempt
from the subdivision process: the sale or exchange of small parcels of land to
and between adjoining property owners where such sale or exchange does not
create additional lots or violate the zoning ordinances of the city. The term
"subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Major Subdivision: Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
Minor Subdivision: Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots
fronting on an existing improved public street and not requiring the extension
or improvement of any public utility. (1983 Code § 11-2-2; amd. Ord. 87-3, 7-6-
1987; Ord. 06-01, 3-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 354.2(15).
CHAPTER 2
PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Sequence Of Subdivision Process
10-2-2: Preliminary Platting Procedure
10-2-3: Final Platting Procedure
10-2-4: Information Required
10-2-1: SEQUENCE OF SUBDIVISION PROCESS:
   A.   Minor Subdivision:
      1.   Conceptual meeting with City staff. (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
      2.   Final plat. (Ord. 87-3, 7-6-1987)
   B.   Major Subdivision:
      1.   Conceptual meeting with City staff. (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
      2.   Preliminary plat.
      3.   Final plat. (Ord. 87-3, 7-6-1987)
   C.   Plats Of Survey:
      1.   Conceptual meeting with City staff; (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
      2.   Plat of survey; (Ord. 06-01, 3-6-2006)
      3.   Approval of plat of survey procedures required. (Ord. 06-01, 3-6-
2006; amd. Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
      4.   Following approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his
or her designee, the applicant may proceed with the recordation of the plat of
survey. (Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
10-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLATTING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preparation; Filing: The owner or developer of any tract of land to be
subdivided shall cause a preliminary plat to be prepared of the subdivision
containing the information specified herein and shall file seven (7) copies of
the plat with the City Clerk.
   B.   Plat Submitted To Utilities: The Clerk shall immediately refer three
(3) copies of the preliminary plat to the Planning Commission and the developer
shall submit one copy of the plat to each: the electric utility, the gas
utility, the Water Board and telephone company, requesting their review of the
plat regarding utility locations and easements and to submit their findings to
the commission within thirty (30) days thereof. The developer shall submit a
receipt showing delivery from each utility company to the commission.
   C.   Consideration By Plan Commission: The commission shall consider the
findings and recommendations of the utility companies and engineer and examine
the plat as to its compliance with this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan of
the City. The commission shall, as soon as possible, but not more than thirty
(30) days, consider said report, negotiate with the subdivider on changes
deemed advisable and the kind and extent of the improvements to be made by him,
and pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If the
City Planning Commission does not act within thirty (30) days, the preliminary
plat shall be deemed approved; provided, however, that the subdivider may agree
to an extension of time for a period not to exceed an additional sixty (60)
days. It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of
approval, modification or disapproval. The commission may hold a public hearing
before acting on a preliminary plat, after publishing notice as provided in
Iowa Code, section 362.3.
      1.   In the event that substantial changes or modifications are made by
the City Planning Commission or disapproval of the plat, it shall give its
reasons therefor and it may request and cause the revised preliminary plat to
be resubmitted in the same manner as the original plat.
      2.   If approved, the City Planning Commission shall express its approval
as "conditional approval" and state the conditions of such approval, if any.
      3.   The recommendation of the commission shall be filed with the Clerk.
The City Council shall within thirty (30) days of the filing of the
recommendations of the commission, by resolution, grant approval or reject the
preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is rejected, the council will advise
the owner or developer of any changes which are desired or should have
consideration before approval will be given. The council shall forward one copy
of the preliminary plat and the city's resolution to the owner or developer.
      4.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the city council shall not
constitute final acceptance of the addition or subdivision by the city but an
authorization to proceed with preparation of the final plat.
      5.   The subdivider shall have a period of one hundred eighty (180) days
from the date of approval in which to submit a final plat or approval of the
preliminary plat shall expire and the preliminary plat shall be resubmitted for
approval prior to preparation of a final plat; said new plat shall be subject
to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations in force at the time
of resubmittal.
      6.   When platted lots are resubdivided and all necessary improvements
have already been installed, the Council may waive any unnecessary
requirements. (Ord. 87-3, 7-6-1987)
10-2-3: FINAL PLATTING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Conform To Preliminary Plat: Procedures for final plats shall be same
as set out for preliminary plats in Section
10-2-2 above except that a reproducible ink tracing of the plat shall also be
submitted. The final plat shall comply in all respects with the preliminary
plat as approved. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and
develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
   B.   Preparation And Filing: The subdividers shall prepare and file seven
(7) copies of the final plat and other required documents with the City Clerk
as hereafter set forth, and upon his failure to do so within the time
specified, the "approval" of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless
an extension of time is applied for and granted by the City Planning
Commission. Upon receipt of the final plat and other required documents, the
City Clerk shall transmit three (3) copies of the final plat to the City
Planning Commission for its recommendations and approval.
   C.   Action By The City Council: Upon receipt of the certification by the
City Planning Commission, the City Council shall, within thirty (30) days of
the receipt of the recommendation of the City Planning Commission, either
approve or disapprove the final plat.
      1.   In the event that said plat is disapproved by the City Council, such
disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out wherein said
proposed plat is objectionable.
      2.   In the event that said plat is found to be acceptable and in
accordance with this Chapter, the City Council shall accept the same.
      3.   The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat
shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final
plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder of Marion County, Iowa, and shall file
satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the City Clerk before
the City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect. (Ord. 87-
3, 7-6-1987)
10-2-4: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly
drawn at a scale of one inch to sixty feet (1" = 60') or larger and plainly
marked "preliminary plat" and show the following:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision and if different, the title
which the subdivision is to be recorded under.
      2.   The name and address of the owner and of the developer and the name,
address and profession of the person preparing the plat.
      3.   The date, scale and north point, and a key map showing the general
location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development.
      4.   The legal description of the area being platted.
      5.   The boundary line (accurate in scale), the dimensions and location
of the property to be platted and the location of section lines. Contours at
intervals of not more than five feet (5') shall be required.
      6.   The names and location of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
record owners and location and names of owners of adjoining parcels of
unplatted land.
      7.   The location of property lines, streets and alleys, railroads, drain
tiles, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses and other
existing features affecting the plat.
      8.   The zoning classification and proposed use for the area being
platted.
      9.   The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots,
including square foot area of nonrectangular lots and indication of the
proposed use of any and all lots.
      10.   The layout of all existing and proposed building lines and
easements.
      11.   The location, width and dimensions of all streets, alleys, school
sites, parks and playgrounds proposed to be dedicated for public use, in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and requirements of these regulations.
      12.   Proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
      13.   Written and signed statements of the appropriate officials of the
availability of gas, electricity and water to the proposed subdivision.
      14.   Any restrictions proposed to be included in the owner's declaration
of plat.
      15.   A sketch plat of all contiguous holdings of the owner with an
indication of the property which is proposed to be subdivided, drawn to a scale
of not more than two hundred feet per inch (200' = 1 "). Said sketch plat shall
show the subdivision area, together with its proposed street system, and an
indication of the probable future street and utility systems of the remaining
portion of the tract.
Any plat not containing all information specified above shall not be considered
by the Commission.
   B.   Final Plat: The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink to
a scale of one inch to sixty feet (1" = 60') or larger and one or more sheets
whose maximum dimensions are thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36" x
24"). Copies shall be presented to all utilities and receipts presented to the
Commission. If more than two (2) sheets are required, an index sheet of the
same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. The final plat
shall be presented in seven (7) copies and shall show:
      1.   The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
      2.   The name or names of the owners and subdividers.
      3.   The date, scale and north point.
      4.   The legal description of the area being platted.
      5.   Accurate distances and bearings of all boundary lines of the
subdivision, including all sections, U.S. Survey and Congressional township
lines.
      6.   Center lines of all proposed and adjoining streets and alleys with
their right of way and pavement widths, and names of such streets.
      7.   Lines of all lots with a simple method of numbering to identify all
lots and blocks.
      8.   All building lines and all easements provided for public service
together with their dimensions and any limitations of the easements.
      9.   Any and all dimensions necessary for accurate location of the
boundaries of the site to be developed and of all streets, alleys, lots,
building line setbacks, easements and dedicated areas. These dimensions shall
be given to the nearest one hundredth of a foot.
      10.   All radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles and
lengths of curves for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
      11.   Certification by a registered land surveyor that the final plat as
shown is a correct representation of the survey as made.
      12.   All survey monuments and bench marks, together with their
description.
      13.   The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of all property which
is offered for dedication or is to be reserved for acquisition for public use,
or is to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners
in the subdivision.
      14.   Private restrictive covenants and their period of existence;
      15.   The following plans, profiles and cross-sections for review by the
City Engineer, drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch to ten feet (1" to 10')
or less and a vertical scale of one inch to ten feet (1" to 10') or less, and
specifications for the construction of the improvements for the subdivision as
required in Chapter 3 of this Title. All elevations shall be referred to mean
sea level.
         a.   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center
lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads,
the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within one
hundred feet (100') of the intersection, shall be shown. Approximate radii of
all curves, lengths of tangents and central angles on all of said existing
streets.
         b.   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross
section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage
easement, servitudes, rights of way, manholes and catch basin; the location,
size and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm
water drains and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed
utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, or other underground
utilities or structures, the cross sections shall be taken and platted at
intervals of not more than fifty feet (50') along the center line and shall
extend out to the sides to that point where the proposed grade intersects the
existing grade. In no case shall these cross sections be extended less than the
full width of the right of way.
         c.   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of
any existing facilities, including, but not limited to, existing streets,
sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams and other
pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, at the point of
connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision.
         d.   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plat with a contour
interval of five feet (5'), referred to sea level datum. All datum provided
shall be latest applicable U.S. geodetic survey datum and should be so noted on
the plat.
         e.   All specifications and references required by the local
government's construction standards and specifications, including a general
drainage plan for the entire subdivision. (1983 Code § 11-2-4; amd. Ord. 87-3,
7-6-1987; 1996 Code)
      16.   The following certificates and documents:
         a.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a
dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for
streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if
the dedication is approved by the governing body. The proprietor may also
convey dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are
designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other
public use, if the dedication is approved by the governing body, by quit claim
deed.
         b.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any,
that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in section
354.12 of the state of Iowa code, may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the
mortgage or lien holder. When a mortgage or lien holder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the governing body or dedicated to the public.
         c.   An opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract of
title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of
proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land
being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing
the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances
for the purpose of this section.
         d.   A certified resolution by each governing body as required by
section 354.8 of the state of Iowa code either approving the subdivision or
waiving the right to review.
         e.   A certificate of the treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with section 354.12 of the state of Iowa code.
         f.   A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land
and become covenants in the deeds of lots.
         g.   The encumbrance bond, if any.
         h.   Approval of the final plat by the city council shall be null and
void if verification of recording is not provided to the zoning administrator
within thirty (30) days after the date of approval if the area to be platted is
within the city limits or ninety (90) days after the date of approval if the
area to be platted is outside the city limits. An extension of these time
limits may be granted by the City Council if application is made in writing
prior to their expiration. (Ord. 01-10, 9-17-2001)
   C.   Plats Of Survey: The plat of survey shall be clearly and legibly drawn
at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger and plainly
marked "plat of survey" and show the following:
      1.   All requirements as set out in Iowa Code section 355.7(2005). (Ord.
06-01, 3-6-2006)
Any plat of survey not containing all information specified above shall not be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his or her designee.
(Ord. 17-07, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Completion Of Improvements
10-3-2: Temporary Improvement
10-3-3: Acceptance Of Dedication Offers
10-3-4: Inspection Of Improvements
10-3-5: Maintenance Of Improvements
10-3-6: Issuance Of Permits And Certificates
10-3-7: Minimum Standards
10-3-1: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Council Authority; Bonding: The City Council may at its discretion
require the subdivider to make and install any and all improvements required by
this Title prior to the approval and recording of any final plat, or in lieu
thereof may require the subdivider to post performance bonds for said
improvements. Bonding for the minimum pavement, monument, water mains and
hydrants, storm sewer and sanitary sewer improvements shall ensure to the City
that said improvements will be completed within one year after final approval
and recording of the plat. Bonding for sidewalk improvement shall ensure to the
City that all sidewalks will be completed within three (3) years after the
final approval and recording of the plat. The amount of the bond shall not be
less than the estimated cost of the improvements, and shall be approved by the
City Council. If the improvements are not completed within the specified time,
the City may use the bond or any portion thereof to complete same.
   B.   Cash Deposit: When a subdivision includes frontage on an existing
dedicated public street that has no established street grade, the Council may
require the subdivider to deposit with the City monies, in lieu of completion
of required sidewalk improvements on said existing public street, in an amount
equal to the cost of said required sidewalk improvements. Said monies shall be
held by the City and used as a credit against the assessed cost of said
sidewalk improvements if installed by the City at a later date. In the event
the cash deposit held for a given project is not used within fifteen (15)
years, the monies shall revert to the then property owners of record. (1983
Code § 11-2-5A)
10-3-2: TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT:
The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements
required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council and shall
maintain same for the period specified by the Commission and Council. Prior to
construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file
with the City a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond
shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed,
maintained and removed. (1983 Code § 11-2-5B)
10-3-3: ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION OFFERS:
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements
and parks shall be by resolution of the City Council. The approval by the City
Council of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the
acceptance by the City of any street, easement or park shown on said plat. The
City Council may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to
this effect. (1983 Code § 11-2-5C)
10-3-4: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall provide for inspection of required improvements during
construction and ensure their satisfactory completion, such inspection to be
carried by a qualified engineer who will certify that the improvements meet
established City requirements. Subdivision improvements shall not be accepted
by the Council unless such certification has been made. If the engineer finds
upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed
in accordance with the approved construction standards and specifications, the
applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements according to
such standards and specifications. (1983 Code § 11-2-5D)
10-3-5: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for
snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of said
improvements by the City. If there are any occupancy permits on a street not
dedicated to the City, the City may on twelve (12) hours' notice plow the
street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to applicant. A maintenance
bond shall be furnished to the City. (1983 Code § 11-2-5E)
10-3-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Street Improvements: The extent of street improvement shall be adequate
for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire
equipment, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits.
   B.   Completion And Dedication: No building permit shall be issued for the
final ten percent (10%) of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent (10%) be
less than five (5) for the final five (5) lots of a subdivision, until all
public improvements required by the City Council for the plat have been fully
completed and dedicated to the City. (1983 Code § 11-2-5G)
10-3-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
All improvements shall be designed and constructed to at least meet the minimum
standards established by Chapter 4 of this Title. (1983 Code § 11-2-5H)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Monuments
10-4-2: Blocks
10-4-3: Lot Design
10-4-4: Streets, General Requirements
10-4-5: Streets, Design Standards
10-4-6: Drainage And Storm Sewers
10-4-7: Water Facilities
10-4-8: Sanitary Sewer Facilities
10-4-9: Utilities
10-4-10: Easements
10-4-11: Sidewalks
10-4-12: Debris And Waste
10-4-13: Soil Preservation And Grading
10-4-14: Preservation Of Natural Features And Amenities
10-4-1: MONUMENTS:
   A.   The corners of all lots shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes
at least thirty inches (30") long and seven-eighths inch (7/8") in diameter or
by round or square iron bars at least thirty inches (30") long.
   B.   All such monuments shall be set flush with the ground and planted in
such a manner that they will not be removed by frost and approved by a
registered land surveyor prior to enforcement of the final plat. (1983 Code §
11-2-6A)
10-4-2: BLOCKS:
   A.   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots
of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width may be
permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
   B.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed one thousand three hundred
twenty feet (1,320'), nor be less than four hundred feet (400') in length.
   C.   In long blocks the reservation of an easement through the block to
accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or pedestrian traffic may be
required.
   D.   Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet (10') wide, may be
required through the center of blocks more than eight hundred feet (800') long
where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities.
Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be
determined suitable by the Plan and Zoning Commission for prospective use.
(1983 Code § 11-2-6B)
10-4-3: LOT DESIGN:
   A.   Arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, Title 9 of this Code, and health regulations and in providing
driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street.
   B.   Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of
Title 9 of this Code. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area
for the zoning district, the Commission may require that such lots be arranged
so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they
would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with Title 9
of this Code and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at
right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a
variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of
corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing
the minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties
reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for the off- street parking and loading facilities required
for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in Title 9 of
this Code.
   C.   Double Frontage Lots And Access To Lots:
      1.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
      2.   Access From Arterial And Collector Streets: Lots should not, in
general, derive access exclusively from a collector or arterial street. Where
driveway access from such street may be necessary for several adjoining lots,
the Plan and Zoning Commission may require that such lots be served by a
combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazard on such street.
Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid
requiring vehicles to back into traffic on collector or arterial streets. (1983
Code § 11-2-6C)
10-4-4: STREETS, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Grading Plan: Roads shall be graded to conform to the construction
standards and specifications recommended by the City Engineer and approved by
the City Council prior to final plat endorsement.
   B.   Topography And Arrangement:
      1.   Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local roads
should be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building
sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep
grades and curves should be avoided. (See design standards of these
regulations, Section
10-4-5 of this Chapter.)
      2.   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and rights of way established according to
width standards set forth by the Comprehensive Plan.
      3.   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and
shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
      4.   Minor or local streets should be laid out to discourage use by
through traffic and to permit efficient drainage and utility systems. The use
of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, and loop streets shall be encouraged where
such use will result in a more desirable layout.
      5.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas and
walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the
various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
   C.   Arrangement Of Streets: The arrangement of streets shall provide for
the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right of
way shall be extended to the property line. The Commission may require that a
temporary T- or L-shaped turnabout be provided on any temporary dead-end
street, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal
street right of way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued.
The Plan and Zoning Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end
streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.
   D.   Cul-De-Sacs: Where a cul-de-sac is permitted, its terminus shall
normally not be nearer to the boundary of the subdivision that the minimum lot
depth requirement of the zoning district in which it is located. The Plan and
Zoning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement at the
closed end of the cul-de-sac to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic, and/or utilities. Minimum turn-around radii and maximum length shall
be limited as provided by subsection 10-4-4E below.
   E.   Proposed Streets:
      1.   Extension Of Streets: Proposed streets shall be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or
other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Plan and Zoning
Commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of
the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous
future development or adjacent tracts.
      2.   New Perimeter Streets: Street systems shall be laid out so as to
avoid perimeter half-streets. The Plan and Zoning Commission may authorize a
new perimeter street where the subdivider dedicates the entire required street
right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries and bears the cost for
improving such street in accordance with approved standards, provided, that
part of the cost of said perimeter street may at the discretion of the City
Council be assessed against the adjacent property owner.
   F.   Widening And Realignment Of Existing Roads:
      1.   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the
Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening a road that
would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the developer shall
dedicate at his expense such areas as are required for widening or realignment
of such roads to meet minimum requirements.
      2.   Such streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his
own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations for
a local street; provided, that any improvement which the City requires that
exceeds minimum requirements for a local street will be made at City expense.
Land reserved for any road purposes shall not be counted in satisfying yard or
area requirements of Title 9 of this Code.
   G.   Alleys: Alleys may be required in business and industrial subdivisions
for adequate access to block interiors and to off-street loading and parking
spaces, but shall as a rule not be permitted in residential subdivisions.
   H.   Access To Arterial Streets: Where a subdivision borders on or contains
an existing or proposed arterial street, the Plan and Zoning Commission may
require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means:
      1.   The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the arterial and front
onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the arterial
street, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear
property line of such lots.
      2.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the
rear lines of their terminal lots backing on the major arterial.
      3.   A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial
street by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable
points).
   I.   Railroads And Limited Access Highways: Railroad rights of way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
      1.   In residential districts a buffer strip at least twenty five feet
(25') in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right of way or limited
access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be
designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of
structures hereon is prohibited".
      2.   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
      3.   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from the railroad right of
way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum
distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate
approach gradients.
   J.   Bridges: Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by
the City Council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant
without reimbursement from the City. The sharing expense for the construction
of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the City
Council will be fixed by special agreement between the City Council and the
subdivider. Said cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro rata as the
percentage of his land developed and so served.
   K.   Street Names: Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and
in spelling from other street names in the City so as not to cause confusion. A
road which is or is planned as a continuation of an existing road shall bear
the same name.
   L.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs are to be placed at all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision. The type and location of said
signs shall be recommended by the City Manager and approved by the City
Council.
   M.   Street Lights: Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards recommended by the City
Engineer or City Manager and approved by the City Council. (1983 Code § 11-2-
6D)
10-4-5: STREETS, DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Rights Of Way: Street rights of way shall have a minimum width as shown
in the Comprehensive Plan for the type of street involved.
   B.   Surfacing And Improvements: All roadways to be dedicated to the City
shall be surfaced with Portland cement concrete with integral curb and gutter.
Minimum pavement width shall be twenty seven feet (27') for local streets and
as provided by the Comprehensive Plan and approved by the City Council for
collector and arterial streets. Said improvements and surfacing shall be in
accordance with design specifications and standards recommended by the City
Engineer or City Manager and approved by the City Council prior to final plat
endorsement, and shall be installed at the subdivider's expense after sewer and
water utilities have been installed by the subdivider; provided, that the cost
of any pavement width in excess of twenty seven feet (27'), as may be required
for collector or arterial streets, may, at the Council's discretion, be borne
by the City. Adequate provisions shall be made for culverts, drains and
bridges.
   C.   Grades: Maximum grade for local residential streets shall be eight
percent (8%), and maximum grade for local commercial-industrial streets shall
be six percent (6%). Maximum grade for any collector or arterial street shall
be six percent (6%). All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of such length and configuration as may be recommended by the City
Engineer and approved by the City Council.
   D.   Radius Of Curves: Minimum radius of curves shall be one hundred feet
(100') on the center line for any residential local or collector street, and
two hundred feet (200') on any commercial-industrial local or collector street.
Minimum radius for any arterial street shall be three hundred feet (300') on
the center line, except that the Council may require a larger radius upon
recommendation from the City Engineer.
   E.   Length Of Tangents: Minimum length of tangents between reverse curves
shall be one hundred feet (100') for any local residential street and one
hundred fifty feet (150') for any residential collector street. Minimum length
of said tangent for any local or collector commercial-industrial street shall
be two hundred feet (200'), and minimum tangent for any arterial shall be three
hundred feet (300').
   F.   Cul-De-Sacs: Permanent cul-de-sacs may be permitted if such arrangement
will improve the subdivision design, but shall in no case exceed six hundred
feet (600') in length or serve more than fourteen (14) dwelling units. Minimum
pavement width shall be twenty seven feet (27'). A circular turnaround shall be
provided having a minimum right of way radius of fifty five feet (55') and a
minimum pavement curb radius of forty five feet (45').
   G.   Cross-Slopes: The cross-slope on all streets, including intersections
shall not exceed four percent (4%).
   H.   Intersections:
      1.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of
less than seventy five degrees (75°) shall not be acceptable. An oblique street
should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at
right angles for at least one hundred feet (100') therefrom. Not more than two
(2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by
the City Council.
      2.   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
should, whenever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') shall not be permitted, except where specifically
approved by the City Council. Where any major street is intersected by any
other street, the alignment of said intersecting street shall generally be
continuous.
      3.   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets
shall be at least twenty feet (20'); and minimum curb radius at an intersection
involving a collector or arterial street shall be at least twenty five feet
(25'); provided, that at any intersection where a curb radius has been
previously established, such radius shall be used as standard. Alley
intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the
corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe
vehicular movement.
      4.   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having a grade and length as may be recommended
by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
      5.   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including
trees) in connection with the grading of the public right of way to provide an
adequate sign distance as provided by Title 9 of this Code. (1983 Code § 11-2-
6E)
10-4-6: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
   A.   General Requirements: The City Council shall not approve any
subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for drainage of storm
or flood water runoff. The storm water drainage system will be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required shall be
designed according to the method recommended by a certified engineer and
approved by the City Council, and a copy of design computations shall be
submitted along with plans. Inlets should be arranged so that surface water is
not generally carried across any intersection. When calculations indicate that
curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for
flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that
point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot
and block. Storm drainage collectors should be handled in a manner which is
efficient and economic for all parties involved subject to the approval of the
City Council.
   B.   Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A culvert of other drainage
facility should in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff
from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. A qualified engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
as established by land uses projected in the comprehensive plan, and as
permitted by the zoning regulations applicable to such land uses.
   C.   Dedication Of Drainage Easements:
      1.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right of way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of
such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. Where
possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel
with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      2.   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of drainage facilities within the road rights of way, the Council
may require that perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen feet (15')
in width be provided across property outside the road lines to provide
satisfactory access from the road to such drainage facilities, and may also
require that easements be provided to carry drainage from the road to said
drainage facilities outside the road right of way. All drainage easements shall
be indicated on the plat.
      3.   The City Council may require dedication to the City, either in fee
or by drainage or conservation easement, of land on both sides of existing
watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the Plan and Zoning Commission
or City Engineer, if such dedication is deemed necessary to assure preservation
of said watercourses, drainageways, channels or streams.
      4.   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in
determining the number of lots to be utilized for planned unit development nor
for computing the area requirement of any lot. (1983 Code § 11-2-6F)
10-4-7: WATER FACILITIES:
   A.   Public Water:
      1.   Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install
adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) in accordance to the plans
and specifications adopted by the City Council and Water Board. All water mains
shall be at least six inches (6") in diameter and shall be properly valved and
looped where feasible to ensure adequate water pressure.
      2.   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all
water supply improvements and all development proposed to be served shall be
shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be
included in the performance bond to be furnished by the subdivider.
   B.   Individual Wells And Central Water Systems:
      1.   In low-density zoning districts, at the discretion of the City
Council, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be
used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate
supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision.
Water samples shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and
individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate
health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the City Council
prior to approval of the final plat.
      2.   If the City Council requires that a connection to a public water
main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds
may be required to ensure compliance.
   C.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions
except those with approved individual wells. Fire hydrants shall be located as
approved by the City Council after recommendation from the Water Board and the
Knoxville Fire Department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground
utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all
other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a
street shown on the subdivision plat. (1983 Code § 11-2-6G)
10-4-8: SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES:
Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided by the subdivider for each lot in
accordance with the general regulations listed below and with design
specifications and plans approved by the City Council prior to final plat
endorsement. The Council may seek recommendation from the City Engineer in
determining design criteria for said facilities.
   A.   Public Sanitary Sewer: Where a public sanitary sewerage system is
reasonably accessible the subdivider shall connect with same and provide sewers
accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Design criteria for slope, size,
manhole locations, manhole and pipe elevations, materials, construction
techniques and other considerations shall be approved by the City Council.
      1.   Design: Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate
tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning
regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer
capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity
of sewerage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for
infiltration and other extraneous flow.
      2.   Maximum Size: The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the
diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
      3.   Minimum Size: No public sewer shall be less than eight inches (8")
in diameter.
      4.   Location: Sewers shall generally be located within street or alley
rights of way unless topography dictates otherwise. Where sewers are located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes.
      5.   Drainage Into Potable Water Prohibited: Adequate provisions shall be
made to prevent any sewage from entering any source of potable water. The
Council may require a minimum horizontal distance of ten feet (10') to be
maintained between parallel water and sewer lines or for sewer line to be
installed at least two feet (2') below any water main or other precautions.
      6.   Connection To Sanitary Sewer System: In accordance with chapter 13
of the State Plumbing Code storm sewerage, foundations drains, roof drains and
similar installations shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system
unless expressly permitted by the City Council.
   B.   Individual Sewerage Systems:
      1.   If public sanitary sewer facilities are not available when the
subdivision is platted and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum
lot areas shall conform to the requirements of Title 9 of this Code, and
percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the Board of
Health and the results submitted with design specifications for the individual
disposal system, including the size of the tile fields or other secondary
treatment device, at the time the preliminary plat is submitted for review by
the Plan and Zoning Commission. Said systems shall be approved by the
Commission and Council. Cesspools shall not be permitted.
      2.   Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible
but will become available within a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) years
as determined by the City Engineer and City Council, the Council may require
that the subdivider install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains within the
subdivision to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection
with the public sewer shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid to the house
from the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to
connect from the individual disposal system to said sewer system when the
public sewer becomes available. Such sewer shall be capped until ready for use
and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system,
where such exist and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer mains.
Provisions shall be made in the performance bond or escrow agreement for
installation and dedication of said system.
   C.   Connection To Public Sewer System: If a public sewer is accessible and
a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the
owner thereof may be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of
disposing water, and it may be deemed unlawful for any such owner or occupant
upon any such property to operate and maintain an individual sewage disposal
system. (1983 Code § 11-2-6H)
10-4-9: UTILITIES:
The City Council may require all utility facilities, including, but not limited
to, gas, electrical lines of nominal voltage not in excess of fifteen thousand
(15,000) volts, telephone and CATV cables, to be located under ground
throughout the subdivision. Wherever existing utilities are located above
ground, except where existing on public roads and rights of way, the Council
may require that they be removed and placed under ground. All utility
facilities existing and proposed and their easement throughout the subdivision
shall be shown on the plat. The subdivider shall be responsible for making the
necessary arrangements with the utility companies for installation of such
facilities. Said utility lines shall be installed in a manner so as not to
interfere with other underground utilities. Incidental appurtenances, such as
transformers and their enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and
meter boxes may be placed aboveground but shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. In their determination whether or not to
require underground utilities, the Council and Commission may consider that
soil, topographical or other conditions make such installations within the
subdivision unreasonable or impractical. (1983 Code § 11-2-6I)
10-4-10: EASEMENTS:
Easements for utilities (private and public) may be required along rear or side
lot lines where deemed necessary. Total width of such easements shall be at
least ten feet (10'). (1983 Code § 11-2-6J)
10-4-11: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Subdivider's Expense: Sidewalks shall be installed at the subdivider's
expense along both sides of any street being dedicated for public use and on
any frontage of an existing dedicated street except where the existing street
has no established grade, in which case the provision of Section
10-3-1 of this Title shall apply. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4')
wide and shall be constructed in accordance with design specifications of the
City Engineer or City Manager.
   B.   Pedestrian Accesses: The Plan and Zoning Commission or City Council may
require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools,
parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements or
dedicated rights of way at least fifteen feet (15') in width for provision of
sidewalks. Such easements or rights of way shall be indicated on the plat.
(1983 Code § 11-2-6K)
10-4-12: DEBRIS AND WASTE:
No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of an occupancy
permit, and removal of same shall be required prior to issuance of any
occupancy permit in a subdivision. Nor shall any be left or deposited in any
area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or
dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. (1983 Code § 11-2-6L)
10-4-13: SOIL PRESERVATION AND GRADING:
   A.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot until the final
grading of said lot has been completed in such manner as will provide positive
surface drainage away from all foundations and will prevent the ponding of
water on the lot; nor until provisions have been made to establish a permanent
ground cover on all exposed soil surfaces. Lots shall be arranged and drainage
designed so as to avoid undue concentration of storm drainage water from each
lot to adjacent lots.
   B.   Also, provided that the City Council may seek to reduce soil losses and
undue sedimentation of drainage ways or facilities during subdivision
construction by requiring provisions to be made to prevent soil losses due to
erosion of soil exposed by construction and grading practices; such provisions
as may be required include, but are not limited to, establishment of a mulch or
a temporary ground cover on exposed soil surfaces after rough grading has been
completed, and maintenance of temporary sedimentation basins on the site while
grading and other earth moving is being conducted. (1983 Code § 11-2-6M)
10-4-14: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES:
Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the
community as a whole, such as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, should be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
Trees to be retained should be welled and protected against change of grade.
(1983 Code § 11-2-6N)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-5-1: Reservation Of Open Space For Recreational, School And Other Public
Uses
10-5-2: Suitability To The Land
10-5-3: Vacation Of Plats
10-5-4: Interpretation Of Standards
10-5-5: Fees
10-5-6: Variances
10-5-7: Enforcement
10-5-8: Existing Subdivisions Or Developments
10-5-9: Separability Clause
10-5-10: Changes And Amendments
10-5-11: Violations And Penalties
10-5-1: RESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE FOR RECREATIONAL, SCHOOL AND OTHER PUBLIC
USES:
   A.   Reserve Area: Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public
use is shown by the comprehensive plan to be located in the area to be
subdivided, the City Council may require the subdivider to reserve such areas
for purchase by the appropriate agency. Park and other recreational sites shall
be reserved for purchase within two (2) years of the recording date of the
subdivision. School sites shall be reserved for four (4) years, giving the
Knoxville School District the option of purchase.
   B.   Purchase Price: The purchase price in all cases shall be the appraised
raw land value prior to subdivision plus one- half (1/2) of the cost of all
improvements located in any street contiguous to the site. Such improvements
shall be installed at the subdivider's expense.
   C.   Sale Of Site: Should any park or school site reserved in accordance
with this Section not be purchased within the time limits specified above, the
subdivider may sell said site for an alternative purpose as shown on the
approved subdivision plat. (1983 Code § 11-2-7)
10-5-2: SUITABILITY TO THE LAND:
Land which the Plan and Zoning Commission or City Council finds to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage,
adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements or other features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of
the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding
areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are
formulated by the subdivider and approved by the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions.
Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger. (1983
Code § 11-2-8)
10-5-3: VACATION OF PLATS:
   A.   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   B.   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and Council in like manner as plats of subdivision. The Council may reject any
such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its
public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
   C.   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved and
recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly
recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
   D.   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein
provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of
such writing. (1983 Code § 11-2-9)
10-5-4: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare. These regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive shall control. (1983 Code § 11-
2-10)
10-5-5: FEES:
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees and charges by resolution
for the filing of preliminary and final plats to cover the processing and
reviewing of the plats. At the time of filing any preliminary plat or final
plat with the City for consideration, the subdivider or his agent shall pay the
established fee. (Ord. 85-9, 12-16-1985, eff. 1-1-1986)
10-5-6: VARIANCES:
   A.   General: Where the City Council, upon approval by the Planning
Commission, finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may
result from strict compliance with these regulations and the purposes of these
regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternate proposal, it may
approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variance shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations;
and further provided, the City Council shall not approve variances unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that:
      1.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property to which it is
located.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, topography
or other unique conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner will result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;
      4.   The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of Title 9
of this Code or Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Conditions: In approving any variance, the City Council may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   C.   Procedures: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Planning Commission and City Council. The petition
shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied
upon by the petitioner.
   D.   Granting Of Variance: Where the Planning Commission has not recommended
approval of the requested variance, the City Council may grant the variance,
provided it meets the other requirements of this Section, and further provided
that the variance only be granted by affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of
the members of the City Council. (Ord. 87-3, 7-6-1987)
10-5-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Official: It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator
to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the City Council
any violations or lack of compliance herewith.
   B.   Subdivision Approval: No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in
the County Recorder's office or have any validity until it has been approved in
the manner prescribed herein.
   C.   Public Improvements: The City Council shall not permit any public
improvements over which it has control to be made from City funds, or any City
money to be expended for improvements or maintenance on any street in any area
which has been subdivided after the date of adoption of this Title unless such
subdivision and improvements have been approved in accordance with the
provisions contained herein and public improvements dedicated to the City as
required by these regulations.
   D.   Transfer Or Sale Of Lots: No owner or agent of the owner, of any lot or
parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any
such lot or parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the
City Council, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed
with the County Recorder.
   E.   Evading Compliance: The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land,
by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or
lease with the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All
such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements
contained in these regulations.
   F.   Compliance Required: No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided
or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. (1983 Code § 11-2-
13)
10-5-8: EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS OR DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Exceptions: The requirements of this Title shall not be applicable to:
      1.   Existing subdivisions or developments which are presently
constructed.
      2.   Development for which building permits have been issued.
      3.   Valid "preliminary plats" as defined by this Title.
   B.   Building Permit Expiration: If such building permits or plats expire
prior to completion of the subdivision or development for which it was issued
or approved, renewal or reissuance of the building permit or extension of time
for the preliminary plat shall not be deemed to bring such subdivision or
development within the terms of this Title. (1983 Code § 11-2-15)
10-5-9: SEPARABILITY CLAUSE:
If any part or provision of these regulations or applicant thereof to any
person or circumstances is judged to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part,
provisions or application directly involved in all controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other
persons or circumstances. The Plan and Zoning Commission hereby declares that
it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such
part, provision or application. (1983 Code § 11-2-16)
10-5-10: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
Any regulation or provision of this Title may be changed and amended from time
to time by the City Council; provided, however, that such changes and
amendments shall not become effective until after study and report by the Plan
and Zoning Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public
notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. (1983 Code § 11-2-
17)
10-5-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
   B.   Separate Offense: The owner or tenant of any building, structure,
premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
   C.   Remedy Not Exclusive: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (1983 Code § 11-2-14)
